Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	And that's when we see the beginning of Albucasim's teachings.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, son, the following are the instructions for using a poultice, in order to apply it correctly to the patient.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	And if the operation is performed correctly, the patient should be kept from having their illness worsen.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	The physician should be consulted if the patient has pain in the second joint from the top of the foot.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	Then the physician, skilled in the art of medicine, will identify the location where the pain is felt.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	Hippocrates says that when the body's humors are out of balance, it is called podagra.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But if one does not know the nature of the body's anatomy, he will not be able to accurately describe his treatments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	A boil on the neck of a woman that causes pain in her body.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And so there was another doctor who was close to death from a burning in his side, and he had made a puncture on his thigh.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I knew that the patient was going to die because they were very ill.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	Here comes the doctor who would treat the patient's groin pain, which is caused by another ailment.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And if you wish to cure them, treat them according to their own desire.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	E a cushion under them, et autre in their legs, you have relieved them.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But when there is a need to burn the skin on the foot, they must be applied to the legs, and no other place.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And to the one who is afflicted by the doctors, he should be treated with care for his ailment.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	And if the ailment affects the stomach or intestines, it is called colic.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And so you should apply cautery to the legs only if necessary and never to the feet.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And you have already opened the bowels of the body in this book where it is necessary to explain what is needed to be done.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And so you should use all your might to fight for God's protection.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And let them use the way of God that they will be healed by a good outcome, so that your reputation may increase and be remembered.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Another doctor attends to the patient's body, especially their legs, and he puts cushions under their thighs, etc.
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	When the illness is severe, don't be a doctor that makes the patient suffer more.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	This book has been divided into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	This is the beginning of the first part of the book.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	This first chapter will explain the use of different tools in the treatment of gout.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	This is the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The instruments for drawing out pus from wounds are used to treat various ailments such as another cushion for their foot.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	E si le membra dolorat a lo mal, apply another treatment to lo.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter deals with the treatment of injuries to the foot and ankle.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Therefore, you have a sharp pain in the legs and another if they are burned.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	When the disease begins, it is customary to call it gout.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	The patient should be burned on their legs if they have an illness that affects them, but not if they have a condition related to the quality of the cushion (e.g., if it's too big, etc.).
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore, I say that the pain of which other than the feet they speak of is already described by the knowledge of many doctors, but they don't know how to use it.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And if you apply cautery to the whole body, it is equally painful for everyone.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	This text seems to say that a condition called "cauterization" was used by doctors to treat certain illnesses.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	If you are dealing with a hot, dry humor, or one that affects the legs and feet, then treat them as follows.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I have found that the patient's body will be already opened by the surgeon and the patient will be treated accordingly.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	And so too you should put a cushion behind your legs if you are using the hot iron to treat them.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	When there is no mention of other factors, it is called gout by physicians.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And so you know, sons, that for a cure by fire, it's customary to place a cushion upon the legs of the patient, and to have the other men apply the heat.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	If the patient has pain in their limbs, it means that the medicine has reached those parts, which is why doctors call it something else.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's body, place a cushion under the foot of the patient so that they can be treated for the disease of the legs, and have the patient's hands placed on them.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	You should know that the patient will be in pain when their feet are afflicted by gout, but the body can be treated for gout in the spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And so the surgeon's hand should be placed on the patient's legs to prevent them from burning themselves.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And if it is necessary to make cuts on the body, the intestines are cauterized.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	The intestines are also the subject of the cushion which is placed on the legs, but they are not the only cause of pain.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Mays also be used to treat gout.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	A simple solution for the first few hours, but the treatment requires the use of a cushion on their legs to prevent them from coming out and no further application of a cautery in the future.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	E **another** that's right, the doctor will use a hot iron to treat illness by applying it directly to the affected area.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	If a person has gout but the pain is felt in their feet, then they should be treated with cauteries to prevent the spread to other parts of the body.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And if there are no more remedies for the illness, it is called medicine by the common people.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	The ancients said that cauterization with gold should be used for cauterizing the intestines, and not on the skin unless they are using gold for its medicinal properties.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And so you will apply a cushion to the affected area, controlling the amount of heat in the body, but only when there is an increase in humors.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	Then apply the cautery with caution on the legs and feet.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And if it is necessary to make an incision on the foot.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	De cushion you use for pain in the head by cold humors, and then treat them with poultices and bandages.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	And if it be a swelling in the feet or other such ailments that afflict them.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	And you shall know that this medicine is used to treat the intestine and other ailments.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And place a cushion on their feet, and another on the patient's legs, and another one on the patient's body over the thighs to prevent them from being cut by the other.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place a cushion on the patient's palm.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But you have to use a cushion to treat the foot so that it does not become inflamed.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And so, to treat pain in the legs, apply a cushion for support.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And if you see that the pain in the feet has worsened due to cold weather, apply a cushion to the area.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	Then apply heat to the cushion's area.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then you should put a cushion on their side to be protected from fire.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the medicine within its cavity, for it is called tetrafarmacy.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they say that when the plague strikes one's arm, it is then better to use the hot cautery.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And if they are heated by cold humors, and their legs or feet are affected by pain, then they are to be cauterized.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And a cushion should be placed under them so they don't get cold, as well as other things to help.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others say that the cause of the pain is a bad humor in the foot, which they treat with cushions.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they say that the pain is caused by hot vapors rising from the head to the joint.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	Then prevent the disease from spreading further in the body.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	May’s a mi Mays a doctor, to do, but he should use it on the legs of the patient.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the first treatment is to save and heal those who have a cushion called "primieyra".
Capitol segon.	Chapter two.
Del cauteri del cap.	Then apply the hot cautery to the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	And if there are pains in the whole body, it is also known as gout; and it is these pains which are chronic and long-lasting.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then apply a cautery to the patient's head, for the fire is hot and will burn them if the vein is not properly protected.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	The patient's leg pain has been treated by making them apply a cauteri to their legs, which are being held in place by the cushion.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And if the patient's legs are in pain, they should be treated as gout by the doctor.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	This text likely describes the placement of the patient during surgery.
Capitol ters.	The third chapter.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	This is a reference to treating someone suffering from a headache with a cautery.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	Then apply cauterization to the area of the foot.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	The patient will be healed by another medicine.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then apply a cauterization to the area of pain on the body.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area for three days.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And apply an ointment to them, to that which needs it.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you are skilled in medicine, then you will know which medicines to prescribe.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	The patient must be treated by applying heat to the affected area.
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	And if the pain arises in the legs, treat them with the same care as the rest of the body.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And if there are pains in the body, apply your hand to the area of pain.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the patient's condition allows for it, the physician would then cauterize the area of the first.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the other to the knee.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish to treat them, use an old cauterizer for the incision, as per the established practice.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	This refers to the treatment of gout using a cautery device.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When there is pain in the joints near the cushion, use the hot iron to cauterize the area.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	Therefore, you must carefully guard against the jawbone being affected by the pain of gout, as it is customary to treat gout in the legs.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	E layssa la, which is in its beginning stage.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And then apply the treatment for the flow of blood, as described in the book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	This text means: If you are able to find a hot needle on the surface of the foot, then the needle is too close to the patient.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you have already determined that the patient has a different kind of pain, use cauteri to treat them.
Capitol .v.	This text describes the process of applying a hot cautery to treat an ailment similar to gout.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	And when there are many other things that are customary to do, such as putting a cushion under the patient's legs, another on their chest, and so on.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the foot there is pain, it is called "gout" in other words, the gout, which is not yet healed, requires a cushion for relief.
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	When there is pain in the foot, apply a cushion to the area of pain and use cauterization elsewhere.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	E si le cushion is not used to draw out the poison from the wound on their leg, you must use a poultice.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	Then use the cautery to cauterize the patient's legs, and then cauterize the area where the pain resides.
Capitol .vi.	This text is in a language similar to French, Spanish, and Italian.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	A cushion should be placed under the patient's thighs.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	And the treatment for the ailment which is called gout is to be done by another person.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	This translates to a description of how doctors treat gout.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you are treating someone who has gout, you must use a hot iron to apply a second treatment to their legs.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And if the pain is caused by a cushion under their legs, then they have no other pain than that which is in the area where the cushion is placed.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And if the patient has a pain in the leg, place it on their head, so that the inflammation of the knee or joint can be reduced.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	The form of the patient's illness is known as a cauterization.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But the pain in the legs and feet, which is what it means, is called gout.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And place your hands on the location to heal the illness that you have called gout, and use other means as needed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	This refers to cauterization, a treatment for old or chronic illnesses.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	And if apoplexy is in the body, use a cauterization technique on those who are afflicted with it.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the way to treat it is done as has been previously mentioned.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	Then treat them with a hot iron while they are being treated.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	This refers to a type of cauterization, which I assume means:
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	The patient's legs are swollen and in pain.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And if it's necessary to apply cautery to the feet, the patient will be put on their back.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Then place cushions on them for a few times to prevent such injury.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And so I have said that the intestine is already being treated.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And if the cushion is for their legs, apply three cushions on their feet to ensure that they are properly supported, as well as placing a cushion on the part of the body below the knee.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	Then apply the cauterization to the affected finger.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	Mays is a cushion used in the treatment of an illness called gout, which causes pain in the limbs, but especially in the legs and feet.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then apply it to the body part according to the method previously described.
Capitol .ix.	This is a recipe for making a diagnosis of gout.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	And then apply the cautery to their body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	Apply heat to the affected area, and use a cushion to protect the patient's legs from swelling.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	When your illness requires it, then apply a cautery to the affected areas of the body.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And so then, the patient's condition is such that they need a hot oil treatment.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	This refers to the treatment of a condition using a cautery tool.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	You are being treated by a doctor for something that affects only your legs, not the rest of your body.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Therefore, one should modify the treatment regimen accordingly for the patient's condition.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who doesn't respond to ordinary medicines, use other treatments for gout.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Eğer bir önceki gibi bir şey yapılıyorsa, diğer tıbbi uygulamaların aksine bu şekilde yapılır.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the pain is severe, use a cautery to treat it, but only on the legs, and put the other cushion under the patient's legs, because they have a strong and tolerant pain in their thighs.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And do so if the patient needs their legs to be treated by cauterization.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the patient is a child, it should be treated with a gentle method.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	This is likely referring to a treatment for melancholia.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	If you have already analyzed the causes of melancholy and determined that it is caused by humors, then treat it accordingly.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	A doctor, who has made many points on his own body, may be said to have been burned by melancholy.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And a second (person) will draw the patient's bowels back in properly.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And if the disease is treated in time, it will heal.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a poultice to treat the patient's legs, or at least keep the condition from worsening.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And if it is necessary to heat the body or to apply a cautery, it should be done so gently.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then place a cloth on his head to prevent the blood from flowing out.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	This sentence appears to be about using a specific treatment method for gout.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And if you have gout, it is best to treat it by applying cold compresses.
Capitol .xii.	The twelfth chapter.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	The text describes treatment for a medical condition that affects the foot.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	The intestines are the intestines or bowels in the first sentence.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And they are to make a bandage on their leg for several days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And if there are more than two members in need of cauterization, they should be treated with a hot iron on the temples.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	This sentence describes how to perform a medical procedure using a cauterizer.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And if the pain is in the legs, one should apply a cautery to the affected area to stop it from bleeding.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And the knowledge of the body comes from the doctors.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And if the foot is in pain, it is caused by other things.
Capitol .xiii.	This chapter describes how to treat a disease by applying a cautery to the affected area.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	And if there be a tear in the eye, you should know that it's caused by a burning cautery.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	The first source sentence you provided, "E si es costuma que lessionar le humorz", translates to:
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you have already diagnosed (a condition), use small cupping to treat the patient's body.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	De cauterizatio de nas.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	And you will have to cauterize the other parts of the body, even if they are not the feet, because the patient's foot cannot be treated with the usual methods.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then place a cushion on each thigh.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And guard that part of the body that you should not cut into.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And here are the ways to treat it with cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Then return the patient's eyelids to their place.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	This person will likely experience pain in their legs and eyelids from the cushion.
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you use a cautery, apply it to both temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And apply a different treatment depending on the type of pain in the legs.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	If you want to know what the pain in the eyes means, they are caused by a specific type of humor.
Capitol .xvi.	The Roman Empire's government would have been highly interested in the efficiency of this system of cushions for the treatment of wounds.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Then you will cauterize the eye socket if the patient has other illnesses.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	The patient's bowels are being treated by a cautery should be applied to their body in two places, with a bandage applied in a specific way.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you apply heat to the patient's cushion, it will be called gout by those who know they have the disease.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	And so they are burned, those who have been ill for a long time, their illness is called "the other" (or another).
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And so place a cushion on the affected joint, if it is necessary to cauterize.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then place your hand on the patient's affected area so they do not move.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And thus you have opened the intestine, which is now exposed, so that it may be treated.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	When you see a sign that the patient has been ill, etc., then you know it is a case of true (or proper) gout when the eyelids are affected.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And so keep your own body warm for three days and let them hold their hand on the cushion.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And if you want to cure that, it is customary to apply a poultice.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	If your body is experiencing pain due to an imbalance in its humors, use cauterization on the affected area.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	When there is pain in the joints that are caused by inflammation from the heat.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And so they should be cauterized, to stop them from spreading.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	E so that a physician's hand should be placed upon their legs or thighs.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	When there is pain in the body, it's best to use a cautery tool.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Then apply the remedy to the area where the pain is located in the body.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And if you have treated the foot with a hot cautery, you must be careful that no other ailments are caused by the pain.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	Gathered on the surface of the body, these are the locs where you apply the treatment to the feet, and keep your hands on the area.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the way to treat a leaf of myrtle, which is also known as the plant itself.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And so you know, the humors are also present in your feet, which are small in comparison to the body as a whole, but those fluids are diverse according to the size of the illness.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	The path to knowledge lies in understanding this as the way of the wise, those who have studied this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Another cushion should be placed on the legs, and another on the feet, to prevent them from being exposed.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	E si es necessary to cauterize the legs, et cetera.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you are treating a patient for fistula, and not curing the illness, then you should cauterize according to the following method: apply the heat in the manner described above.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then you place a cushion under their legs.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And so the cushion should be placed under the patient's legs.
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	This is the way doctors do cum to treat their patients for the pain.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, place a cushion under their other leg.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you wish to know the meaning of the word "sufferers," it is important to understand that the language is somewhat ambiguous.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, the good work is done by the hand which has been placed on the affected area.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And apply a cautery to the fistula if it is open, so that it may be cauterized and dried.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	Then apply a cushion to the affected area.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then you should leave the patient alone to heal.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	At the beginning of your treatment, use a cushion to make an incision on the foot.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	This is the time when strong medicine for a few days is used to treat those who are ill.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	Then place a small amount of molten wax on the site of the fistula, but ensure the area around the wound is protected from the heat by placing your hand on its surface to prevent burns.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	Then if the fistula is healed, it is necessary for the doctor to treat them as well.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol.xviii.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	When there are burns on the legs, they are healed by cauterizing them.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Inflammation of the infant's lips, often referred to as gout in older texts, can be treated by applying heat to the affected area.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	And if it is necessary to apply a treatment to the joints, it should be done in the following way, which is the best way to treat them.
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	It is customary for doctors to treat it as an ailment of the joints if the bowels or feet are affected by excess humors.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	And you will have stopped the pain in their legs.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And place a cautery on the affected area of the leg, and the patient will be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Capitol .xix. should be translated to something like "Chapter 19" or "Capital Chapter 19".
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Apply the cushion on the patient's legs, near the anus.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And in the case of the patient's legs, you must apply heat to their surface, so that the wound heals quickly, and then you should stop the treatment.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	Therefore, if it is necessary to make the area healthy again, then a doctor will treat it, or they will remain sick.
Capitol .xx.	"Then, in order to prevent further complications, medical attention should be sought."
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	This sentence likely refers to: On cauterization and treatment of the gums and tonsils.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	Then apply a poultice to draw out the inflammation caused by the heat that affects the body, and when using the hot cautery, do so carefully on the joints, avoiding excessive burning.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop put it under their legs, and hold them in place with your hands.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	E then the pain is stopped by drawing out the angry humor and applying salt water to the affected area for an hour.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the treatment of tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	Then treat it with a cold cautery if necessary or apply a poultice for treatment, otherwise use a cushion for them to rest upon.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	A cautery applied to the area of the leg is used for pain relief on the calves and thighs, but it's important to consult with a physician before using it.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And if it is necessary to make incisions on the patient's teeth for treatment, use a tool that will allow for cauterization.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	When a patient has a pain in the leg or foot, it is customary to apply a hot iron directly to the area where the pain is felt.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	May it never reach the fire, so that it does not burn them.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then apply a poultice to the area where the leg will be treated.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	Then you put your hand on the foot, which is the way to treat it.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And if it is necessary, cauterize the legs or feet, as appropriate.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the way of treating gout by cauterization:
Capitol .xxii.	Another translation of the original text would be:
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the treatment of extraphilos.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	And if you are already treating their legs for something like phlegm or a build-up of fluids, it's customary to treat them with medicine.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the inflammation is mild, you should apply the cushion for three days, and then use a cautery tool on it.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the ointment to that area and bandage it carefully.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	The instrument used for surgery is called a cannula.
Capitol .xxiii.	A patient should be called by their name when describing their pain.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	And apply a cushion to their legs and use another one on the affected area.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	Then you have done well to place another hot iron on your patient's body if there is no other pain.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And then apply the cauterizing iron to their legs, only a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize the other joints, because if they are affected by the cold humors, then apply it to their legs.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And if you want to stop the pain in the joint above their knee, place a cautery on that area to prevent further infiltration.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then apply your hand to that area of the body, and apply another on their legs, and another on their feet.
Capitol .xxiiii.	And apply the next chapter's knowledge on the patient's body and treat them accordingly.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	This refers to treating diseases of the lungs and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	Then if necessary, the patient's legs are to be cauterized with a cautery that is hot, and then use another cautery on their legs again, because the old way of using two to treat one illness, but not in the chest.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, let the patient be treated with another cautery.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	E siam cura la hora del dolor, e autre si quo.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And so the patient has already been cauterized, which they typically need to be when they have gout.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Et autre putz a la cushion upon their knee.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the body of the patient's body is already inflamed from the dislocation, place your hand on their injured part.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus, it is said, to be opened by two heads.
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And if there are pains in the body, apply the cautery to the affected area to stop them from coming out.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	E so, e a la persona que ha d'esser coyssi, e còls have a tendency to cause gout, which is caused by a buildup of humors in the feet.
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes they are treated by a hot iron, which is why they call it the gouty condition.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then apply heat to the affected area to soothe the pain.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the patient's body is prone to pain in the legs, apply the cushion on their legs above or below, as needed.
Capitol .xxvi.	E a'l'altra cosa que se fai per la persona del malate,
De cauterizacio del stomac.	This is a medical text, so the context you provided seems unlikely.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	Then apply a cushion to the affected area on the patient's body, where the cushion will be placed for the treatment, and then apply a cautery over the three points of the knee:  anterior, posterior, and lateral.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if there is an excess of heat in the body, then you should apply a cautery to the affected area.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish to apply a cautery to the intestines, then do so on the left side of the body.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to make points on the stomach, you must cauterize it according to how much you want it to be treated, and for that reason, you must put a cushion under the stomach, so that the patient's stomach may not be burned.
Capitol .xxvii.	Then apply the proper name for the type of wound.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Then apply a cushion to their legs.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	Translation:  And then you put your hand on their abdomen, if they are in need of treatment by cauterization for the foot's superfluity.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And if the patient's limbs are swollen, you will know that they have gout in their feet.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not press your hand on their legs.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the pain is on the foot, the intestine or the foot itself will be treated by a surgeon; if a tumor is present, it should be treated with a cushion.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And so this is what it's like when someone uses a tool to heat the affected area.
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And if you are skilled in the use of cauterizes, then it's possible to be a skilled surgeon, too!
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And be careful not to burn the skin excessively with the hot cautery, as it could damage the surrounding tissue.
Capitol .xxviii.	**Capitol .xxviii. translates to: Chapter 28.**
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Then apply the cautery to the affected area.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	A heated iron was applied to the affected area, if necessary for the treatment of the disease, then the intestine or the hernia is treated with heat and pressure.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the skin or flesh of the patient, they must be treated with a cauterizing tool.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Then apply a hot cautery to the area to treat the pain in the body, placing a cushion beneath their hands.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize the legs to prevent the humors from becoming stagnant.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	Then take care of that person with other remedies for their illness.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And if there are other injuries on the body, then you should be careful with how these are treated.
Capitol .xxix.	Capitol .xxix. is the chapter heading in a language that sounds somewhat like Latin.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	When using the word "placed" in the context of the other Latin-like words you provided, I'd guess it means:
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	This refers to the use of a cautery tool in a specific way, likely by applying heat to the patient's thighs to treat a condition.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Then apply a burning treatment to the affected area using a cushion placed on the two sides of the body's affected side.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	E tu has already opened the intestine in your body, treat it carefully by applying a cushion to prevent the injury from spreading.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	This pain is felt in the joints, especially if it occurs in the feet.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	Hands are to be used for cauterization only when the other options are exhausted.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol .xxx. translated to English:
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cauterization of the body.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the disease of the foot, it is customary to use the following three methods.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	This must be the way to say that a cushion is placed under their intestine or a cushion at the top of the fibula.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And if you are unable to use a cautery on your own, use a cushion.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	This text describes another method of treating a condition, possibly using cauterization, called gout.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And so the patient's leg should be cauterized, as well as their joints (if necessary), to prevent the pain from spreading to other areas of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then apply two cushions, one on each thigh, to the patient's legs, but make sure to cauterize the area so that the pain does not return.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And thus you are to make four incisions, each one as far apart as the distance between the knees.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, apply cautery to the affected area, using three cushions.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Then place your hand on their feet to prevent them from being affected by gout.
Capitol .xxxi.	The patient's leg pain is often caused by the spread of cold throughout their body.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	E si la cosa,  is necessary for the patient's condition to be called a specific disease.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Then apply cauterization only if absolutely necessary.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	This sentence seems to be describing the use of cauterization on specific body parts.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And if a patient's legs are deep within the body, then use a cauterization technique.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And if you want to treat a wound, apply the cushion to their wound.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	When joints are inflamed, the physician will apply a hot cautery to the affected area, or use other methods for healing such as cold compresses on the legs.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	Then the patient's foot is cauterized with a hot iron.
Capitol .xxxii.	Gout is caused by an imbalance of humors in the body, leading to painful swelling and inflammation in the joints, particularly the feet.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Then return to the patient's legs and apply heat.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's veins, apply heat by means of a burning piece of wood.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	Then apply hot cautery to the legs and feet.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	The patient's legs are marked with points to indicate where the pain is, and there are cushions on both their legs and under their feet.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	The plague will be open for a long time if you do not treat it properly.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Aproper le a la sua causa.
Capitol .xxxiii.	And if it is necessary to burn away excess humors, you would use the tool called a cautery.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	This refers to a situation where the patient's legs are being affected by the illness.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	Gently warm the area affected by the pain, but make sure to avoid burning it with hot tools.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you are treating swelling in the intestine or stomach, these are the conditions you should treat.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Then apply the cauterizing tool to the area affected by the ailment.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Then apply a cautery to the legs.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	Then apply a poultice to the area of the wound, three times on their back, twice a day.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if the stomach is cold and the food isn’t digested, then you should apply a poultice to their body.
Capitol .xxxv.	This sentence refers to the practice of treating a patient's ailments by manipulating their body position, implying that it is related to the treatment of a condition.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	When you treat someone for cautery, you must also consider their bowels.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you apply heat to the joints, it is customary to use a cushion on their legs and another on the feet.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then apply pressure to the area where the other two are applied.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you have already found a cushion for them, use a cautery to treat them.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	Then you should use the cushion on their legs already in place for the patient's legs to be cauterized.
Capitol .xxxvi.	The author uses a combination of medical terms from different languages.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	And place a cushion upon their legs.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When the nature of the patient's illness is such that the doctors are unable to locate the cause, use another type of treatment.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	And so, when a patient has a fistula, their legs are opened up to allow for drainage.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	And then apply the hot cautery to the area.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then apply a cautery to the area of that fistula.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And they apply cautery to the affected body part in one go.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	When there are burns or inflammation on the legs or feet, it is best to avoid using cauterization.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the area by applying warmth.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	When the patient's pain is relieved by a poultice, but other pains are not.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the patient is suffering from pain in their bones due to gout, they may have pain in their feet caused by other ailments as well.
Capitol .xxxvii.	This is the translation for the text you provided:
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	The treatment of gout.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the legs you feel pain from the cold, it is necessary to put a cushion under them.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And so the intestines are cauterized so that they do not protrude out of their place.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	When dealing with the pain of an inflamed bladder, it should be treated with cauterization.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	Then apply cold to the body and use heat and cauterize the affected part.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	Burn the cushion on the leg to stop the pain.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And another cushion should be placed on their legs, and the patient's feet should be kept warm.
Capitol .xxxix.	E si es necessite que son ubert le x.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	And so the patient's body should be treated by making cauterizations.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	Then the patient's body should be heated with a cautery using the three methods: en la persona and in the blood vessels above the veins and on the legs.
Capitol .xl.	Translation: This is the 40th chapter.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Here's the translated text:
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When there is swelling in the legs due to humors, they are called humors in the body.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the patient's leg is affected by pain in the joints.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then, to prevent the pain from spreading, apply a cautery to the part of the body where the pain was caused by the burning.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And if you apply a cautery to their arm, the patient will be in pain.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if you have to use a hot cautery on someone's leg, do so with olive oil.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the patient's legs or thighs, it is done carefully; and the treatment is applied to the whole body, so that the patient can be cured.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter xli.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	This refers to cauterizing (burning) a vein in the leg.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	A person suffering from pain in the joints should be treated carefully for fear of making the problem worse.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The method of treatment for the ailment can be done by applying a hot cautery or by using a burning agent.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	The patient has been afflicted by the evil humors in two ways, the first being that their body is now aware of the other's existence.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	This translates to:
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	At least four times.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish to remove a dislocation in the leg, place the cushion on the affected area, and then cauterize the rest of the body as well.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's foot, it should be done on the inner part of their thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	This statement refers to a process of treating pain using a heated tool called a cautery, which was applied to specific areas in traditional medicine. The idea was that applying heat to certain parts of the body could relieve pain caused by "cold" conditions.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the physician wishes to cauterize the affected joint, he should use a hot tool for the treatment.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if one has a pain in the leg, apply cautery to the affected area.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	When pain affects the patient's feet, it is customary to use a knife-like cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And if they are in need of cauterization or other medical interventions, the following methods are suggested:
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	Then one places the hot iron on the leg to draw out the pain, in the same way one would place a cushion under them.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	Then apply a cold compress to the abdomen.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts, apply the hot iron to them.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And make sure to apply cauterization only to the skin of the leg, which is the area where the pain is located.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And you have already opened the space between his legs for the treatment.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	The text describes applying medical treatment to a patient's body, specifically using a cautery tool on their legs.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	Therefore, cauterize that which causes pain to be a common ailment treated by applying three hot cauterizations.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if the physician deems it necessary, the patient should be treated for three days.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	This sentence of Albucasis' treatise is describing the use of cautery for treating pain in the foot, which translates to: "And if the patient has a fear of cauterization, we avoid it"
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	And if you are suffering from gout, and there is a cushion under their legs, and they have been opened to the other parts of the body.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Mays is the Latin word for "may" which means maybe or perhaps in English.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	Then return to the patient's thighs and place a cushion there.
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And if it is necessary to cauterize a wound on a patient's body, it should be done gradually.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Then place your hand on the patient's affected area near the cushion.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And if the intestine has been infiltrated by pain, it is treated as gout.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then they should treat that area with ointments.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And then apply another plaster to the affected area.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is the way to do it in this treatise on rectification.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	When the physician applies a small hole to the body, he calls gout.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And the cushion will keep the other humors in place, and the one who does it is a cushion master.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And so you adjust the cushion under them so that it is placed on their legs, and then apply it to the affected area.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And if they are very cold, they will be healed with warmth by the application of a poultice of honey and another cushion.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	Then, if you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, cushion them and then place another under their chest.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is true that in the case of a person who has been affected by a disease that causes their intestines or feet to be swollen, you should cauterize the area with a hot iron.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And if it is necessary to apply a cushion to the chest of a patient, it is called angina.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And so the doctors put their hands on his limbs to make him well.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And it is customary for doctors to use these remedies to treat the condition known as a sickness that affects the entire body, but they are used specifically on the affected area.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	When the body is affected by cold humors in the legs or feet, it is known as gout to physicians.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Then apply a hot poultice to the affected area, which will help to draw out the inflammation.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And if you are to apply a cautery to a patient, use it on the foot.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this method of cautery is called cauterization of the foot.
Capitol .xlii.	When pain occurs in the body, it is customary for doctors to call it gout.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of the cautery for their legs.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	And if you have cold or humid fluids in your body, it is called gout by doctors.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And then use a cautery to burn them in order to treat gout.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	And if it is customarily to call a pain in the legs by gout, then you should know that it is caused by an imbalance between the humors in the body.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And there is also a practice called cauterization on the foot.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	When pain in the foot persists, and it is necessary to cauterize it, apply your hand on the area three times.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	The wound has been cauterized.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Gout is a pain caused by excess uric acid in the body, particularly affecting the legs and feet.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And apply a hot iron to the affected area, e.g., the feet in case of an attack of gout.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And so when you apply a cautery to the foot, you should put a cushion under their legs, and another on their feet.
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	Then a hot iron is used to cauterize the skin on their legs.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cauterize in the spine area.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	The pain is caused by the illness being in their body.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then apply heat to the area where the pain is located.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter xliv.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	This refers to treatment for joint pain, specifically cauterization for gout.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When the joints are affected by a build-up of humors, they are treated in a specific way.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore the pain will be cured by applying hot compresses to the affected area.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And if you cauterize that other part of the body, apply a cushion to the joint after.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	This sentence translates to "And if it is necessary to use points in the treatment of gout."
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	When it is necessary to make points on the feet, it is called gout by doctors.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if pain occurs in the legs or other joints, use heat to treat the patient's body.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And you should use a cushion for these purposes, because if it is necessary to do something, it's important to treat it gently.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pain is in the legs, use cushions on their limbs and another cushion on the chest.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	Then, if it is only the joints that are affected by the pain, it is called gout.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	Then you should use other tools to assist in treating their foot pain.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pain is in the legs or feet, the cushion will be placed on their thighs, to cover the affected area.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	Giles has already been applied to the patient's foot.
Capitol .xlv.	This one is tricky!  It's likely referring to a specific chapter in the text.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	This is a common phrase used by doctors for the treatment of the patient's broken skin.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	...and if it is necessary to make a point on the surface of the intestine, and another on the intestines themselves, they will be needed less often.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And if you have already opened the cushion and bring them to the legs or feet.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the ring-shaped area around the knee joint.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And apply heat to the area to treat it.
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	It is said that the patient has been given a cushion to ease their pain.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then the patient will be placed on his chest, and already the cushion should be put under him.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	And if you need to make a cautery on the patient's body, use a cushion.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery on their feet for the second time, because the patient's legs are the ones who will be affected by the other two sources.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Then, if you wish, you can apply heat to the area to treat the ailment.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	When you are treating a patient for a bone condition, use a cushion to prevent pain in the legs and feet.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And if the pain is caused by cold humors, place a cushion under them on their legs.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	E aprop cura le loc de the fire or pain.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary, the physician will treat that area.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And if there are other ailments sealed in their body, may they be treated.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And if the patient's body needs to be cauterized, one should carefully apply a cushion to their abdomen.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	Then apply the proper bandages for forty days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And you should be careful with the use of this treatment for a swelling caused by gout.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And so you cauterize the intestine in its other parts, as needed, and for the pain of the stomach, use the appropriate cautery to treat it.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And if it is necessary to treat the intestine, you should cauterize it with this type of cushion.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And the other hand was placed on their legs; another cushion was put under the patient's legs, and the surgeon should place a cushion on top of the legs.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Then apply the cautery to the affected area.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	Then apply a hot cautery to the affected area in order to treat the condition.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And if there are cushions placed under their legs, put another cushion on the other side, to protect them from the pain.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	When translated into English, the text could be interpreted as: If the patient's joint pain doesn't respond to treatment with a cushion, apply heat directly to the affected area.
Capitol .xlvii.	The chapter title is "Chapter 47" and suggests an explanation about the use of different types of cautery.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	And if you apply cautery to the legs, use caution to prevent the patient from being burned.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Then, if the patient has a fever, apply the bandages to the wounds on their feet, and dress them carefully.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	Then, if the patient has a wound, consider it to be caused by humors we have mentioned in the second place, and cauterize both legs with a cautery tool.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And if a patient has gout, cauterize them.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the patient's legs have been affected by leprosy, then use hot cautery on their feet to cauterize the veins.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And then place your hand on their feet to ensure the fire doesn’t burn them, but if they have already been burned.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	E alcunas veguadas es treated as if they are a cushion under the foot of the patient who already has a hot cautery applied to them.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And if you have too many cauteries in the patient's body, then the pain will spread throughout the body.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And if there are large or few pains in the body, which are caused by pain in the intestines, it is called other things by doctors.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then the patient will be cured by placing a cushion under them in their body.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Then apply the cautery to the affected area.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	Then apply a cushion to the affected limb according to its need.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	When they are burned, the burnings of the body's humors are treated differently depending on where the pain is located.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the poultice within that area to prevent further harm.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And if it is a pain in the bowels, it is to be treated with cauterization.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	This is Latin for "May his/her hand be placed on the legs, so that he/she does not mistake another's body."
Capitol .xlix.	The text refers to the use of acupuncture for pain relief in the feet.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	And apply the cautery to the affected area.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	Then you must apply medicine to the affected area.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	When the intestine is being treated, use this method to treat it properly.
Capitol .l.	Capitol .l. means Chapter 1.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	The patient has been burned.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	And if it is a cancer that has begun to spread, then cauterize it with the heat of a cautery, as physicians do when they cauterize a wound.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's bowels, they must place their hand over the area to prevent further complications.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And so, the patient's pain should be treated as a symptom, not a condition.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the body.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	Then place another hot iron on their legs to cauterize them if they are too swollen for the usual methods.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	And if you want to apply a cautery to the affected area, hold the other cushion in place.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if there are cold humors in their legs, apply heat to that area.
Capitol .lii.	The text describes a process for treating gout (in the context of the time period, likely meaning a specific type of pain or inflammation in the joints) using cautery.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	When the body is attacked by a burning pain in their legs, they may use another term for the condition.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	The first sentence means: If there is an abscess in the leg or foot, make sure to keep it covered.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	And when you have placed the cushion under the patient's feet and legs, apply another one to the affected area.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Then apply a cautery to eradicate the humor from the affected area.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area for three days, cauterizing the intestine with a cushion and the other parts of the body with oil.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then apply your remedy to that which has been affected by the flesh.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	And then if the patient has no other problems in their body, but only on their legs, apply a cautery.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And apply hot medication to its place, which is where the swelling is.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But by fire they are healed.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And therefore, for the treatment of the intestine, use the cautery on the feet or legs.
Capitol .liii.	When joints are affected by cold humors, they are often called gouty.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	This refers to the application of cautery by a medical practitioner.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	And then there are two types of cauterization: by fire and by water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	You have already heated the patient's cauterizing tool to burn the patient's foot, which you would use for treating their ailment.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then apply a hot iron to the area of the foot pain, and another on their leg, so that the heat will be applied directly to the affected area.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And let them rest for three days.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply a poultice of wild herbs to the legs of the patient, who should be propped up on cushions and pillows.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And apply to the location an ointment made from flesh and cure the patient's flesh for pain relief.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And you will apply to the cavity a small amount of the [medication] if they have not already been cured by applying the [medication] to the body.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And then the doctors held their hands on the patient's body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then treat them (the patient) with cautery on their legs to prevent further spread.
Capitol .liiii.	And thus the patient was treated.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Apply a hot cautery to the affected area if it is necessary.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	Gtranslation:  When the body has tremors, it may be due to fever or other similar causes, in which case the cause of the illness is treated by using a hot oil poultice on the lower back (this is where the nerves are located).
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And if he feels tremors, then he should be treated for the disease.
Capitol .lv.	This is the 50th chapter.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Then apply the cautery to the affected area of the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	The first sentence is in a language that seems to be a mix of Latin-derived words and a few other words that look like they might be from ancient Greek.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	Then apply heat to the affected area using the method of applying heat to the foot.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	Another then the other, perhaps for treatment by bloodletting, but maybe just as well.
Capitol lvi.	Capitol lvi. is a Latin phrase that translates to "Chapter 56".
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	The patient has a wound in their leg, so the doctor should apply a cushion to the wound.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	And if the foot is affected by an arrow wound, it is customary to use cauterization for treatment.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	A hot cautery will apply to the patient's legs or feet.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And then pause the cushion on the large intestine, for it is the patient's leg muscles that are affected by gout.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then apply a hot cushion to the patient's foot.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if blood is expelled from the orifices of the body, then it is customary to cauterize the affected area.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	Then make sure to protect the nerves from further damage.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	E sapias that when the blood flow is restricted it causes pain in the feet, so apply your hand to hold the artery closed.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	And if it is necessary to constrict the flesh, do so gently, but only if you are applying a poultice for that purpose.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	And if you are unable to find a doctor or access medical treatment, it is good practice to apply a cautery.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Then apply the second cauterization.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	The patient suffers from a pain in their legs, requiring special attention to these parts.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	Then place a cushion on their legs to support the intestines.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	Then we will treat the foot problem in this chapter.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And if I am to begin with the treatment, it is for the patient who has been affected by fear.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	This sentence refers to a medical procedure and could mean: "And so that the pain is less severe, put the cushion under their legs."
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And let them be treated with fear and trembling.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	Then you can use your hand to hold the patient's hands.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And if the illness persists in the patient's body, death will come quickly.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And if it is that other ailment, you should know that it is harmful.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Aprobate the opening of the patient’s foot; be careful not to cause damage.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And place your hand on their body to help diagnose or treat the disease of gout.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	And if you are the son of God, he will be able to tell you where his hand lies.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And if you are using a hot compress on a joint for the pain in the leg (foot) it is customary to call it by its proper name.
Capitol primier.	Chapter one.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	And here comes the treatment for the child's cold humors.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Sapias que questa malattia affects children, and they are usually afflicted by some other illness as well.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	The patient's legs are often afflicted by gout.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	And if I see this illness in children, I will apply my hand to their intestines.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And if you have already opened the area under the child's knees, the other one will be a cushion for them.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	This text appears to be describing treatments for a hernia, using a combination of medical terminology from that era.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	And apply cautery to the legs and feet, where the humidity is located.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’autre, e l'apostel es mays es necessary that they be a doctor.
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And so the humidity should be addressed by applying a cauterizer to the affected areas of the body.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if you wish to treat the patient's legs, one leg should be kept straight.
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And if it's necessary to draw out the humors from the feet, apply cushion to each leg, and cure the leg pain with cauterization.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	E se desitg lo cuarte de la persona, e si el temps de l’apostema o no es possible to know what's wrong with their knee.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	This is a test of your translation abilities:  And apply another cushion to the patient's foot so that the blood vessel does not rupture.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter 2
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	And for those who have pain in their legs, they are to be treated with special care.
Capitol segon.	This is the second chapter.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there is a need to treat such ailments, they are called "a cushion" by doctors.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	Then use a sharp instrument to cauterize the veins in their legs, for they are the ones that make those who suffer from gout feel better.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	Then place a cushion on their other side, in the area of the stomach, when the patient is suffering from colic or pain in the intestines.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And when they have been treated for their illness, they are to be given rest by applying leeches on the cushion.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And if there's a need to apply a poultice or hot compress to the area, that's what you should do.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	And if the pain does not subside, place a hot iron on the patient's body, covering three fingers' width with the cushion.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And if it is necessary to bleed the patient's legs, they should be cauterized afterward.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And another considers the plague, which is to say that he has other causes for pain in their hands.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And apply a poultice to heal it.
Capitol .iii.	And here is a summary of the guessed translation for the given context:
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	This refers to a remedy for pain in the temples, but should be translated into English as: "Treatment methods for headaches that are often called migraine."
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When the pain is located in the joints or other parts of the body, then apply a cushion to their knees and legs, for this method of treating the disease is ancient and still used today, and they are very painful, those who cauterize them.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The manner of performing surgery on the body is to use the method you are shown.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if the patient's intestines are swollen, then apply a cushion, but be careful not to let them get too hot.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you have opened the space for the patient, apply a hot poultice to their legs.
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	This refers to using cushions to prevent the patient from getting gout-like symptoms in their limbs by applying them directly to the body and indirectly through medical treatments.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	And if there were no other pain, you would put a cushion on their foot, which is where the blood flows freely in the body, so that they will not be able to bleed out from it.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And if you want to make a cushion for the patient's use, three days will be enough.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	If the wound is large, apply strong poultices of willow bark to draw out the fluids.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And apply a cautery to prevent further inflammation if it is necessary for the treatment of such ailments.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	If you wish, use the cushion for the treatment of that which needs cauterization.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And if the patient has a fever or swelling, apply a cushion under them; they should be treated with a hot cautery.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to make a cautery mark, then apply one on the patient's legs or feet.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	Then you should apply the other, so that the blood flow doesn't stop.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if you are present in any way, even as a witness, to the bloodletting and cauterization that might be performed on a person's limbs or extremities, you will be able to help them with these tasks.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	E that’s what I call “light” work for a man to be put in two places by using his bow, since you have a cushion under his feet and another on the other side of the body.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is the form of treatment for gout:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And a cushion is placed beneath their ribs.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	And yet, it is the warmth of the hand that is most important in healing, so hold them carefully.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	And so when there are inflammations in the feet, the body needs a physician's help to close.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is best done with the legs and the feet spread apart.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	Then if the pain is in the foot, you'll need to put a cushion there, so they don't feel any pain.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	This refers to the treatment of wounds on the legs and feet by a doctor and his assistants.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	And thus they cauterize the vein in the arm, a practice which should be done with caution, and if cautery is used on the legs of the patient, it should be done carefully because of the possibility of the vein being affected by the heat.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And if you are in pain from gout, apply cauterization to the veins on the legs.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if there are two fingers on the other finger, the one to keep it from moving out of place.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And use your hand to hold back the blood in his leg.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if you are burning them with cautery, cauterize the other three wounds in the same way.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you cauterize a wound on the body of a person, it is called cauterization.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	You have already placed a cushion on their legs.
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	The surgeon must make an incision on the patient's body to remove the excess uric acid in the case of a second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excise the affected part of the foot using the proper tools.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then hold the patient's leg in place while applying cauterization.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	When the patient's intestines are affected, it is customary to treat them using various methods depending on the type of pain they have.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	This refers to the pain caused by gout, which is characterized by inflammation in the joints.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	If it's necessary to make an incision on their legs, be careful to avoid severing the nerves.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then you should place a cloth on their knees and use a cushion for the cushion for the intestine, so the patient won’t be injured by the cautery.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	Then on the third day apply a cushion to the patient's legs and feet, but not their abdomen.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	> This refers to using a cushion to prevent pain in the legs from spreading the ailment throughout the body.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When joint pain is caused by a blockage of humors, it is customary to call it gout.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	Then apply a cautery to the patient’s leg and foot to ensure the humors are properly addressed.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry out all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then place your hands on their legs to prevent the intestine from becoming inflamed.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	Then you should apply a poultice to the patient's body, which for this type of ailment would be a mixture of wheat flour and something else.
Capitol .vi.	The text appears to be in a language similar to Italian, Latin, or French, but it is not clear which one without more context.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	This is about treating the condition of the disease known as gout.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	And if it is necessary to apply heat to the affected joint, then use a cushion on their legs and hold their hands over the area.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And if it is the patient's intention to treat the pain with a cautery, then it is done so by burning the affected area.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And if the patient has a cold humor in their ears, they should be treated by applying a cushion to the area, and by using other methods such as cauterization depending on the cause.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then if you are not yet familiar with the use of a sharp instrument to remove blood.
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	Then apply a gentle extraction to the patient's leg; if it is painful, use a strong one.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is necessary to cauterize someone's foot, it will be cauterized by the fire.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	Then apply cautery to the area of the affected part with force.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	Then treat the patient accordingly, as their condition requires.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then place a cushion on the patient's legs and keep them dry.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	This sentence is in a language similar to Occitan, which is related to Catalan.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	Then place an aurelia on the patient's leg to cut into the vein and release the other humors.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Then if you are a skilled physician, use appropriate remedies for the wound to heal quickly.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And when a cushion has been placed under their chest, they are called gout.
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	And administer a cautery to that area where the pain arises in the joint.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And if you are thinking about the patient's legs becoming swollen.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	Then place a cushion under the knee of the patient, and if the patient has a cough, then they need another cushion for their chest.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	And so if you are in need of burning your bowels, use a hot iron to be placed on them.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	E ja, if the patient has a cushion under their legs, they are already being treated by the physician.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And if there are other places where the skin is swollen, they should be cauterized as well.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	When a beast's body has been opened, apply cautery to the flesh and hold it in place, and then you have to be careful that the incision doesn't get infected.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	A further practice is to cauterize the affected area and to apply pressure to prevent the ailment from spreading.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if there are no immediate causes for gout, take a wide needle to remove them.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And if the patient suffers from the disease of the feet, they are called for to apply a cautery.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	Mays you see if it's necessary to apply heat to the circuit of the cushion so as to cure the gout.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And apply medicine to the swelling in their ears with this instrument, which is also used for that purpose.
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And if you want to use a bandage, apply one made of silver or copper.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And then apply heat to whatever is in the knee joint.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want to make your patient feel better, apply a cushion to their legs.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And when it is necessary to cauterize the patient's body, it should be done with a small fire.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And if the patient has too much pain in their legs, place another cushion under them.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	And if you wish to cauterize the ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Then treat the stomach (area below the navel) so that the patient's bowels are not harmed by the burning.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	Then apply a cushion to their preon so that the patient's legs are supported and do not move.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And if you are treating the affected area, take care to protect it from the sun.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so if you see symptoms of it, treat it as a wound that needs to be treated.
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	And if a patient's legs are affected by gout, it is customary to use cushions, and one part of their body should be treated with the other.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	Then apply a cushion to the affected area if the patient's body is suffering from gout.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	Then apply the cautery to the patient's leg for relief.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	Et autre te calsom formem per la cauterizacio.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish to treat the intestines or another illness, apply a poultice of herbs and oils to draw out the heat.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If blood flows, place a cushion on their legs to stop the bleeding.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	For the treatment of the ailment, which affects the eyelids, the physician uses a cautery.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery, use it on the eyelids, as it is sometimes used for eye pain.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Then we should cauterize the patient's legs, as they are the ones who are affected.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	When applying a lancet to the body, apply it carefully, as you would on a delicate patient.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best way to treat it is to use cautery on other parts of the body, but this is a text about gout, not its treatment.
Capitol .ix.	This is a description of how to treat someone for gout.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Then return the cushion under the patient's foot.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	It means that in some cases, if doctors cauterize the body, they are called physicians.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And you put a cushion under their legs, the thickest of which is for the patient's feet, to be used on the feet or another place.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	And if it is necessary to cauterize a patient's limbs, it is important to perform the procedure carefully.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	So the patient has a hot poultice on their body.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestines.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if it is large, you will need to use heat to treat it.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if a little bit of that pain in their feet, you'll find the wound heals itself.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if you have opened the intestine for the patient, you will leave it open to allow the doctors access to the area for cauterization.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And if the wound is on the leg, treat it with a hot iron.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	This is likely referring to the use of cauterization in treating an ailment affecting the eye socket.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Apellasion: It is customarily called the ailment of gout that affects children.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And if you wish to make them sleep, you must apply cushions to their limbs, or rather to the legs, which are usually cushioned by the physician when treating a sore foot.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And if you need to make a poultice for the foot, you should use a cushion on their legs so they don’t have to feel the pain.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the whole body, it is customary to do so in many ways, but you must use a cautery that is appropriate for the location of the wound on the body, and apply it carefully.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	And if you are applying a cautery to the limbs, use those from the left side of the body for the right leg and vice versa.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to injure the intestine when applying the treatment.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	Then you have placed a cushion on the legs and another cushion upon the body.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And if you want to help someone who has a wound in their leg, apply another to the patient's legs.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then apply your hand to the affected area so the pain doesn't spread further.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	When the sore occurs in the leg, it is healed by applying poultices to it.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	And if it is necessary to apply a poultice or other treatment to the affected area, then use them carefully.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	The first three are just a few examples of what doctors call humoral medicine.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Therefore, if you have an opportunity to treat the patient's ailment, then it is best to call it gout.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And so if it is necessary to make points on the foot, then place them on the patient's body, put a cushion under their legs, and they will be healed as if by the application of a poultice of myrtle.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	And then there are those who believe that the ailment affecting the eyes of the afflicted is due to a wound in the eye.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then apply heat to the affected area, and make sure the intestine stays inside.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And then place your hand on their legs to support them.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Then carefully place a cloth over the wound on their foot to prevent bleeding if you want to make them bleed, and don't worry about the blood flow through the other two.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then you should put a cushion under their legs for three days or three to four days.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	But if you wish, leave the plagua on their feet, and cure that which is dry.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	The patient must not be afraid of the pain caused by the use of a cautery.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And if it is necessary to use a different method for applying cautery, you should place a cushion under the patient's thighs.
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And if it is necessary to use a pointed cautery for their treatment, you must use it on the body's surface only after applying a cauterizing agent.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the patient has an infected wound, it is healed by cauterizing the edges.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If a patient has a problem with their leg, they use a cushion to protect them from harm.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	Therefore, for the pain in the foot, use the cautery on the area as we have said, which is used to apply it.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Then apply the appropriate treatment for gout to the affected area.
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and he'll be able to see the blood vessels in their eyes.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And if it is necessary to make an incision in the legs of the patient, and they are holding their thread.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	This sentence is describing the symptoms and treatment of a medical condition (likely referring to bleeding into the joint), but I don't recognize the specific wording as a known language.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	Mays es un'altra forma de dir humors.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore when the body is affected by a disease, it is said to be a proper treatment.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And then apply this method to the other parts of the body:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	And if it is cushions, neither too much nor too little should be used.
Capitol .xii.	The other hand should be used to place cushions under their legs.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	It's called "le" in the same way you would say "the leg".
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	If you have pain in your feet, it may be gout.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the intestines should be about the length of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	E if you've a burning pain in the feet, they will be treated by the physician as gout.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And you have placed your hand on their legs to be placed upon the cushion.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then apply the needle to the foot, where it is necessary to place the needle in the patient's body to quickly alleviate their condition.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then apply it to the skin or the foot so as to avoid further complications.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And if the patient has a wound in their eye, another cushion should be used to cover it.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area, and if necessary, use other remedies for pain relief.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And thus you will have cauterized the flesh, and another remedy for the pain in the feet, by using a method that returns their state to normal.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	E another servant adjust a cushion to be placed on the foot so that he is no longer lifted up by the pain.
Capitol .xiii.	This chapter discusses the use of cushions in treating the patient's injury.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	If there's an excess of humors in the eye, another method is used to treat them.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When the disease of the body is called leprosy, it should be treated with a burning cautery.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	This means: "apply a cloth to cover the wound"
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And if your body needs to be treated with heat, apply a cushion to the area.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Usa that which is like to cause pain in the legs, and apply a bandage or compress to them.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the cure for your ailment lies in knowing that you have a powerful enemy in the pain of gout.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And if that's the case, the location of the burn is ready to be treated.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	The first line should be translated as:
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This is a true case of acne, which is sometimes called eye-lid plague.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Then place another on the patient's legs and another on their feet, and apply them to the body with the plague or other ailments.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	Then apply the cautery to the body part, and when necessary, use it on the patient's body to treat the illness.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then apply a cauterizing tool to their legs, and then put your hands on them.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	Then place the cushion on their eyelids, and apply another to their eyelid area, if they are needed.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	The patient's body has been affected by two sources.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And if it is necessary to apply a poultice to the affected area, you'll use a poultice (Greek: podragua).
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	Then place that part of the body back into its proper position.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Use cushions to soften and treat the affected area.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if the patient's pain is caused by a wound that has been made in the leg, the surgeon should treat them as for a wound.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And if it is necessary to separate the two lips as described previously.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	And the treatment for the illness depends on the condition of the patient's intestines and feet.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And so the surgeon's tools are always prepared in case they need to be used on the patient's body during surgery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	This means: When the foot needs to be opened up by a cushion, it is customary to call it gout.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	Then apply a cautery to the eyelid as needed.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And if it is necessary to make incisions on the body you should use a sharp tool.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	When the eyelid is affected by a condition that requires cauterization, apply the heat to the area in the way that you would apply it to an eye infection.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then apply salt water to the affected joint because it's the best remedy for humors which are being treated.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then, after three days, use it for the treatment of the foot, as the patient may be cured.
Capitol .xvi.	This is the beginning of the sixteenth chapter.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of which fleshly part are they suffering from.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Then it is clear that you have already described how to treat gout with a pointed cushion (likely used for cauterization).
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	When one uses a hot cautery, it should be applied gradually to the patient's tear duct, so as not to cause pain.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	Another way to say that, or at least a more common way to say it, is to say that the patient's legs are affected by pain in the foot.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And if you need to make a puncture on the foot, then use a needle or a lancet in that case.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And then you will cauterize those areas on their legs.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Then apply the cautery to the area to remove any excess fluid from the patient's body.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is necessary to put your hand on the patient's foot, it should be done gently to avoid disturbing them.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	The pupil was pierced, and be careful that you do not touch the cornea with the eye-opening instrument.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	The first step is to apply the cautery to the affected area.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not diseased or inflamed, it is treated by doctors, and healed by other means as well, for the good of the patient's health.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish to divide that, open the cushion of the patient's body, and let me know what you want to call it.
am subtilitat.	And if it is a subtle matter.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if it is necessary to perform cauterization on the joint, you will apply heat from the inside, out of which the humors are caused by a cold nature.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And apply a hot cushion to the affected area of the joint.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then place the cushion under their legs again to apply it to their thighs, and another on the foot to make them warm and comfortable.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	Be careful, for the condition is serious and can be treated by physicians.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And if there is a need to stop the flow of tears from the eyes, so they do not protrude.
Capitol .xvii.	When gout appears in the legs, it is necessary to apply a pointed cautery for pain relief.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	And so apply the cautery to the affected area of the body.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Some are given to believe that gout affects the body, such as causing pain in the feet, but they are actually caused by other factors.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	The patient has gout, and the only way to treat it properly is to apply a cautery to the affected area.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And let your leg be burned with small hot irons, as the case may be.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	When your purpose is to reduce inflammation from an injury, you may use a poultice for that purpose.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if the doctors are called upon for the treatment of a particular condition, they will apply hot cautery to the affected area, as needed.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	Then apply heat to the legs to draw out the natural humors.
Capitol .xviii.	This sentence appears to be describing the symptoms of gout, a condition where a cushion is placed under a patient's legs while they are experiencing pain caused by a buildup of something in that area, likely referring to the swelling and pain associated with the disease.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Regarding the gathering of humors, the following are needed:
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	And if your hands are stiff and painful, they are called stubborn.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, you must first consider the cause of the pain before calling it gout.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And if he has gout in his foot, you must place the intestine or leg on the patient for the appropriate treatment.
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	And thus you have opened the door to the treatment of the body's ailments.
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	Then apply a poultice to their legs and feet.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And if you have placed a cushion under their foot, do not be afraid to use it.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you have finished that, apply cold water to the affected area.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	And if you have a cushion in your hands, use it to support the patient's legs for a few days.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the same method to the second area to heal it.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form in which the body's humors are found.
Capitol .xix.	Capitol .xix.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	A la reducton del body's humors, especially in the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	Then, when the intestine or feet are affected by a disease which requires cauterization.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	Therefore, when the bone is exposed and has black spots, use this method to treat them.
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And if there are sharp pains in the legs, this would be called gout, which is characterized by its subtle nature.
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And then, place your hand on the affected bone to prevent its corruption.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And then apply a hot cautery to the patient's legs to treat them.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	When translated into English, this sentence reads:
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if you are unable to reduce the pain in the manner described, then they should be treated as gout would normally be treated.
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The patient should be treated for three days with a hot poultice on their limbs, as prescribed by the doctors, to prevent them from becoming gout-ridden.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then place your hand on the patient's legs to hold the intestine or push down on the bones so they do not come out during the procedure.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Thus, you must treat the patient with medications to dry out the affected area.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, since the body is weakened by the illness, the patient needs to be cared for.
Capitol .xx.	Capitol .xx. is a chapter heading in Latin, likely indicating "Chapter 20" in a medieval medical treatise.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	And then apply a cushion to the area.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	And when the body is affected by excessive cold, it is said to be afflicted with gout, and in this case, the pain is felt in other parts of the body, such as the feet, which are then treated with a cushion.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	Then fold in four pleats the cloth that you've been given for their legs and place it under the cushion on which the patient has been placed.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then apply a cautery to the intestines, and place another cushion under them.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then apply the cupping therapy to their legs, and if it is necessary to make more than one incision on the back of the knee.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	Then cover them with warmth.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then you must stop the patient from being in pain.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	If the patient's body is not healthy, then apply a poultice to their legs.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Then apply a cushion to their legs and let them be treated.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	The first line describes the condition known as edema, where there is swelling in the legs due to imbalanced humors.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then place a needle between the patient's hands.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	Then apply a poultice of herbs to soothe the affected area, and use a bandage to heal the wound.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes it is also necessary to cauterize the intestines with a small cushion, et le preon of its location.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	The treatise states that when the condition of gout requires it, a cushion should be placed under the patient's feet.
Capitol .xxii.	Another translation of the provided sentences would be helpful in understanding the context for the source language being used.
De curacio de alconati.	This means treatment for gout.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness is called gout, and it affects only the legs.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	And if you want to treat a patient for pain, you must first understand that it is caused by a hot humor and then apply the appropriate treatment.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it doesn't subside, the pain is considered chronic.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	Mays (if) the patient has something to be cauterized, they must use a small, subtle tool for the incision.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	And so if you are susceptible to humor-related ailments:  So then apply heat to the affected area.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And if it is treated by a physician, then it will be healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Another option, which aligns better with the literal meaning, would be:
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	This refers to the treatment of diseases of the body.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	Now, if you want to see what happens when I use a hot needle to pierce the skin on which a cushion has been placed.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery on the patient's right or left eye, use the right eye with a cushion under their humors.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And if it's a right-handed person, use the right hand to apply the cauterizing tool.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And if you have already opened the way for the pain to subside near the head.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	Then place your hand on the foot to prevent its infiltration by other humors.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	When the condition of the body requires it, apply a cautery to the affected area.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And if you want to see the patient's suffering, you must use a poultice.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Then burn them [the affected joints] a little, because they are already resting on their knees.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And thus, when the doctors are finished treating the humors in the body, they say that you should apply a cautery.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	May our people be free from the pain of gout.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you are unable to find a suitable remedy for a gouty condition, this is how to treat it by applying a poultice.
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And thus, the joints are pierced by the lancet to identify the cause of pain in those parts, which is known as another type of ailment.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then apply the poultice to their ailment.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	When you burn the skin, it is customary to call it gout, but the patient's condition should be treated by a doctor.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery, place a cushion under their legs and hold their hands steady.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And it will be the third day when they are ready for their pain to be treated.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And if you place a cushion on their legs, then cover them with a cloth to prevent the spreading of the infection.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And so the patient's pain should be treated as soon as possible.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	And if the patient has gout, they can only treat it with a cushion.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	And if an abscess forms in the chest, you should be careful to apply a cushion under it and treat it with another method.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	When you see a patient with pain in their legs and their face, they will be treated for many days, but existing on their feet, the patient's pain is from the head of the humors, not from the foot.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	et al' si ocuso on the cause of the illness.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	The patient should be given a cushion for comfort when experiencing a fever, while using the word "operation" to refer to the treatment.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And so it is said that the doctors are already burning their hands on the patient's body, which was made by fire.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	And yet, I have never seen a person in our land who had perfect gout.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the types of specialties that doctors have so that they can be prepared for anything.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And let it be understood that the point of the disease should be treated as follows:
Capitol .xxiv.	The chapter is titled "Chapter 24"
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Then comes the treatment of the flesh by cauterization.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	This refers to a condition that resembles the symptoms of gout but affects the hands instead of the feet.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	Then if there are other things that cause pain to the patient's feet, the doctor is a good person to put a cushion under their hands.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in this case, it is necessary to place a cushion under their legs.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	When there is pain in the body, one should know that it is usually caused by a sharp and sudden attack of a disease called gout.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	This hand is affected by a malady that causes gout, for he suffers from gout in his legs and feet.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Then apply a cushion to the patient's nose; if necessary, use a cautery on the nose to treat the other ailment.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	Mays si le nas is a common way to say that the text is describing a medical procedure using a poultice and possibly cauterization, as indicated by the mention of "humors" and "cushion."
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	And if the humors are not rising to the surface, they must be treated as gout.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, if a person has gout, you should apply a cushion to the area where the hernia is, as well as for other ailments.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And when it is necessary to apply cautery to the patient’s foot, the person should be careful not to burn the patient as they are using the cushion on their legs.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Here comes a possible English translation: You have already cauterized the two sides of the abdomen, one part above and the other below, where the intestines are located.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And if it is necessary to let the bile be drawn from the body, one should use a cushion to keep them open, and another to apply heat to their feet.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a lead cushion to the patient's body for as long as it takes for them to heal.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	Then use these remedies when the pain is severe, but if the patient is in pain, use those that are suitable for the area affected.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	E aquesta lu purgeys, e si'l n'ha un'altra cosa per la qual s'ha de fer una cosa especial per la forma del instrument.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And if it be a burn caused by silver or gold, it should be treated as if it were a wound on the legs.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	If you want to make a cut on the foot, use a sharp instrument to do so, and place the patient's leg in a cushion placed under their feet.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And this is how they would call it a poultice of rue.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	And if you are applying cauterization to the nose, use a cautery tool.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	A hot iron should be applied to the affected area to treat the illness.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And if you wish to make a living by treating ailments, know that you must be skilled in the art.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then place your hand on the patient's legs to prevent them from becoming inflamed.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	Then apply a hot poultice to that area, but don't cauterize it.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	When there are cold sores on the body, they are called lion's touch.
Capitol .xxvi.	E aprop reduzeys le body
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	And if the lips or mouth are cut, the nose will be closed.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You know that in this case, only a man who has a good understanding of anatomy can translate this:  "Translation: And you'll notice that some are affected by humor imbalance."
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if there is an infection in the wound, you should apply your hand to its thigh, while also using another cushion for the patient's comfort.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	If the lips are already separated, then they must be cauterized, but only if the patient's health allows.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Adjust the legs to their proper position and apply a poultice of dragon's blood to them.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	When a surgeon performs a suture, they must ensure the patient's body has been properly prepared.
Capitol .xxvii.	Then apply the appropriate cautery to the afflicted area, the heat used to treat various ailments.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	When using a tool to remove something from the mouth, use a hot cautery on the lips, and another on the arms or legs.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	The pain of gout affects the legs, and it is customary to say that the body has been affected by it.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish to make a cure for those joint pains, I will tell you how to treat them.
Capitol .xxviii.	**Capitol .xxviii. translates to Chapter 28.**
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Make cuts in the flesh, so that they are made to look as if they were made by a cautery.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	A large number of them are on the gums, so that's where you should use the dental tools.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And apply to them another cauterizing powder or other.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	Then cauterize that flesh, and if necessary, use cushions to support it.
Capitol .xxix.	In the 29th chapter...
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Then use a hot iron on their legs and feet.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When there are already many painful parts of the body that are swollen, apply a cushion to the affected area and use a gentle cautery on the gums.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And now you must place your hand on the patient's body to prevent them from being in pain.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If you are going to apply a cautery to the affected area, do it carefully.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you know that teeth have different shapes, depending on how they are prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	E per cushion the pain on their legs or feet.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol .xxx. is the beginning of a chapter, likely meaning "Chapter 30".
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On the removal of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	For he who has a cushion placed beneath him to prevent pain, and another cushion on his leg or foot.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	When the tooth is extracted, the toothache will be gone, as long as the other teeth are also sound.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	And if you are already be certified by a doctor to have a pain in your teeth, apply heat to the area to help them heal.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And if the patient's foot needs to be treated, the doctor will treat the pain in their legs and feet.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And so if there's no cushion to put under the patient, then you should use a hot cautery on their feet.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	This sentence translates to: If the tooth is inflamed or decayed, then it should be treated with a subtle approach.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And if you do open the patient's mouth for a treatment, treat them gently, so as to avoid harming their gums.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And if you are already applying cauterization on an ailment, continue to do so; if they have done something wrong, apply it again.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And if it is necessary to use an acidic cautery on their feet, apply a cushion under them.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	When there is a flow of blood on the legs, they are to be treated with fire by a qualified person.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	When using tweezers or tongs, be careful to avoid damaging the gums.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And if it is necessary to make incisions on the body, they should be made only on the surface where the feet are.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And if they are experiencing pain in the joints, it is called a "descentment" of the bone marrow to its cavity, and place your hand on their bones to alleviate the pain.
Capitol .xxxi.	Of that which pertains to the treatment of gout in the foot.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Then remove the teeth from the fractured thighs.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	Then you should place your hand on the affected area
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	When it comes to their legs they should be treated like the intestines, so that they don't protrude.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if it is necessary to use forceps to remove the small intestine or hernia from the body, here's how to do it:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And if the small intestine is opened, which is the case when the patient's intestines are treated with cautery.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	And if you have already opened the patient's legs, it is best to apply a cushion to the area below the knee.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	Then make the second instrument more delicate for use on the legs.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And then place a cushion under their legs, etc.
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And if they are to be cauterized, place a cushion under them;
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And if the pain is in the legs, put a cushion on their feet.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And then you cauterize the teeth, while also using a cushion to apply pressure to the patient's gums.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The ancients believed that many illnesses were caused by an imbalance in the humors of the body, which can affect the health of the legs and feet, but they did not know how to treat them with their own tools.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then when the pain is in the bone, use forceps to hold the bone while making the incision.
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if the humors cause swelling in the leg, apply them to the cavity of the body.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you have pain in your bones, apply a bandage to prevent further pain, place a cushion under their body, and put a hot compress on it.
Capitol .xxxii.	Gout is caused by an imbalance of cold humors in the body, which is why it's important to use heat as a treatment option.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	And from these other teeth are made.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the toothache is severe and in the legs, it is called gout.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	E que lu aprop es another way to say "and if" in this context.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	Translation 4: And if you wish to remove the pain from the intestine or joints, then you will use a file.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	Then place the cushion on their legs to prevent pain from the patient's body fluids.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then apply a cushion to the patient's legs, and apply your hand on their foot.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if you have already found the root of the pain in the foot, and there's a need to cauterize it, then hold your hand on their leg, so that the other one doesn't affect the treatment.
Capitol .xxxiii.	And if it is necessary to treat pain in the legs, apply cold cautery.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Then apply a gold or silver poultice to the affected area.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	And if you have already placed a cushion on their legs to treat them, then apply it to the mouth, or use another type of cupping therapy.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And you should place another cushion on the legs to prevent the other from being doubled by the good humors.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Apply a cautery to the affected area to help the patient.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	When the pain is in your legs, you should put your foot on the cushion and hold it there.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	The patient's legs are kept warm and the body is protected from harm by placing a cushion under them.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And place a cushion on his legs so that they do not protrude.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	And if there is pain or swelling in the legs, treat it with a cushion and another on their feet.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And if it's necessary to apply cauterization to a wound on the feet.
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	This passage describes how to treat someone suffering from pain in their feet.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And so it should be done by an artisan who is skilled.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	Then you must be careful to keep the intestine from being affected by the other cushions.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Then apply the cautery to the affected area to treat the pain.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	And if it is necessary to speak of the tongue, it should be said in the language of the patient's condition.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This is a ligament which is caused by inflammation of the accidental, which is inflamed.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	Then apply heat to the affected area using other cushions.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If the patient has pain in their legs or feet, it is likely due to other causes.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	If you wish to avoid the patient needing a doctor's intervention for the wound on their foot, they should be careful.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	and you should put your hand on their chest; that is the custom for gout, which is what the other means by this.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	This sentence describes the treatment for gout using a cushion and a cautery.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Then place it on their chest, keeping their legs elevated.
Capitol .xxxv.	This appears to be a medieval Italian medical text.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Then apply the same method to the affected area on the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	And if there are no other causes, this pain in the feet is called gout by physicians, which is why they are called "gouty" when they have it.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	Then consider the patient's foot carefully and examine it for signs of illness.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see someone with a pale complexion or black humor, do not touch them.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	E then you cut into the thin intestine of the patient.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the appropriate remedies to the affected area according to their condition.
Capitol .xxxvi.	The text appears to be in Occitan, a Romance language spoken in Southern France.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	And if there are other inflammations, you should know that a cushion should be placed on the swollen area, and then the legs should be covered with cushions, and the patient's hand should be kept away from their feet.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	Gout in leeches was often mistaken for a sign of illness.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if the patient has a cushion of fat, do not apply the cauterizer directly to the body.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	When a sharp pain arises in the body, the doctor may recommend making incisions on the affected area.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	E then apply cauterization to the affected area only if necessary, using the method of applying a cushion to their legs and feet.
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And if it is made of silver or a tool, it is used to hold the foot in place.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the foot, then cauterize it.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And so cauterize the patient to treat any ailment caused by bad humors in the body.
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And if you have already used a hot iron on its joints, then place a cushion under them.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	And if a cautery is needed for the other leg, use a cushion to avoid burning the one that’s already swollen.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And then apply a poultice to the wound to draw out the pus.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Migt-se que the patient's pain will be cured by applying a poultice of almond or myrtle leaf to their bowels and a bandage on their chest.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the legs or thighs, it is customary to do so with a hot iron.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And the woman was already being treated by a doctor who prohibited her from eating or drinking.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had already risen so high that it required two holes to be opened for drainage.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	And if there's pain in the joints, it is called podagra.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And if it is a small amount of blood that flows from them.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	The cushion should be placed on their legs, and the other should be placed on their feet.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then you should cauterize the first line of the patient's foot.
Capitol .xxxvii.	When there are no more pain in the joints, only a cushion will be placed under the patient's legs.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	From incision of the thigh when a boil has formed.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	And if the illness affects the feet, it is called "catarr" in the thighs, otherwise it is called "gouts" in the feet.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	Then if you want to cure it, use poultices, as we have discussed above, and make sure that the patient has been properly treated; the pain is caused by the humors being out of balance, which is what causes the inflammation.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	When treating a patient's tongue, use a tool to apply pressure and prevent swelling.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And if you do not know what to do, I will tell you how to proceed.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for the operation to be performed correctly, use a cushion on the legs, use two of them.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If a doctor is needed to treat the patient's foot pain, as described in the previous chapter, then they will be called for by the person treating them.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	When there is pain in the joints, and the body's humors are out of balance, doctors call it gout.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	Then apply a poultice for a full hour to the uvula when it is not asleep.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	Then let the patient be placed in a cushion of the cushions of their bowels.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you see a swelling in the body, especially in the feet, which has been caused by the gouty humor being out of balance in the body, then apply hot cautery to the affected area.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And so this type of healing is more effective than cautery and more effective than fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	And if the patient's body has a cushion, it is to be used as needed for pain relief.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And if the pain comes from other parts, then apply a cautery to those areas.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Do the same to their legs as you do to the other parts.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	This means that if the patient has pain in their legs or feet, we can use heat to treat it.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	And if it is necessary to remove them from other causes, they are treated by physicians.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	And if it is necessary to burn the body or joints for some reason.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	And if you want to make a poultice, apply it to the area where the cushion is placed, hold the patient's tongue in their mouth.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	When the patient's bowels are swollen, you should put your hands on them to help avoid further complications.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And if there is a need to make an incision, or in case you need to draw something from it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	"If you are experiencing pain in a limb, then apply cauterization using this method:"
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And if you apply heat to burn out the humors to their neck or throat, they will be used to it by doctors.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	Then place a cloth on the patient's body to protect them from the heat of the fire and prevent the opening from closing up too soon.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	The patient must be prepared for their ailment by using a cauterization tool.
Capitol .xxxix.	E si es ja de la primera cause
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	And so you should place a cushion under their feet (or cushion) to prevent the blood from being drawn from the neck.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When treated with medicine, the patient's tongue pain can be relieved by applying medicine to the affected area.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you have a fever, apply the treatment to their body as needed.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to cure the patient's condition (to remove the other ailments), you must apply heat to the affected area.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Apointedly place a poultice on the affected area, made from herbs to stop the spread of the cold humors.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If there is pain in the feet, then apply it with a hot iron.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	And then, apply on the affected area a hot poultice to draw out the blood.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And then apply the cushion to the patient's legs.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if you do not cauterize yourself, abstain from eating salty food and drinking alcohol.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This sentence refers to the use of forceps in treating gout.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	Then apply the poultice to the patient's legs, so if there are any problems with the leg, the poultice will be applied on the legs.
Capitol .xl.	The next chapter.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	When phlegm is present in the legs, they call it gout.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	And if they are boils, treat them with special care in their location.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And then there are various ways to treat the apostemas depending on the condition.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And le cushion on their legs.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	May the doctors be careful to treat their wounds.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	The other way to treat a disease is to use cauterization on the affected area.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	When a boil has matured, you can lance it.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	Then apply another heated cautery to the other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And if it is necessary to cauterize a patient's boil, it should be done carefully to the affected area.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And if a burn occurs on the surface of the leg or foot, place your hand on the affected area to apply pressure and prevent further burning.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	And if you treat the boil with honey.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Sometimes doctors incorrectly call painful swellings in the body gout.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And if the pain is severe, treat it with hot poultices and large incisions.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	When the humors are out of balance, it can cause pain in the legs or feet.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And so you must apply your hand to the patient's legs, and place the cushion in the correct position for their condition.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And so there are two types of treatments for those conditions:
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	Then apply it to the legs only in the case of superficial boils on the limbs.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	The pain will be lessened if you apply a cushion to a limb affected by an illness similar to gangrene.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	You have already opened the space of the body, so you can place your hand on their chest.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Here's a possible translation of the text:
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if the pain in the patient's foot is caused by an injury, apply a cushion to alleviate the pain in their foot.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	And if bloodletting is necessary during surgery, use cloths to apply vinegar and hot wine to the affected area.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	And if it were necessary to treat the ailment, apply the remedies I have described in more detail elsewhere in this book.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If there is an inflammation, use a cushion to apply heat between the thighs, and if oiling is necessary, then do so with a cautery.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is summer, you should place a cushion under their legs and apply a poultice to the affected areas, using the appropriate treatment for the specific condition.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	Then apply the appropriate remedies to the wound based on your understanding of its nature, as in the case of other cases.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter xli.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	This is a cut to the foot.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the small intestine, a pain in the feet can be a sign that the patient has a cushion placed on their legs.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And of those who have a pain in the legs, it is said that they are like lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And in their case, even if the body seems wet, they are prone to dampness from being treated as such by physicians, etc.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And on the foot there should be another cushion placed upon it, so that no further pain comes to them.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And so the doctors will operate on the legs of the patient.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	And if there are symptoms of the disease in the affected area, you should treat them with a cauterization to reduce inflammation on their surface, and apply heat to dry up the humors that have surfaced.
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And when it is necessary to make points on their feet, they will be made by the .B. physician, because of another reason, the patient's body should be treated as a whole.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Then put oil on their legs and feet to prevent them from becoming inflamed.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	Then cure the wound on that leg with the ointment called Egyptian.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And here's how you make an incision on the legs to treat the ailment.
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	When the body's humors are imbalanced, causing pain in the foot, apply a poultice to the affected area.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	And if you're dealing with a patient's foot pain, it is important to know what kind of pain it is.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	Here, the word "semlant" means "similar," so you should place something similar to the patient.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	Gout causes pain in the joints by infiltrating the body through the feet.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	Therefore, if there are other sores (ulcers) on the body, they are not typically referred to as boils.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	You already have a cushion under their legs to relieve them from the pain.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then apply a poultice suitable for the affected area to its place.
Capitol .xlii.	The text states that the cause of pain in the thighs is known as "podagra".
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	And if it is necessary to cut on the neck, it is called "scrofula".
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	This sentence describes a treatment for pain in the feet and ankles, using a cautery to burn away excess humors.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	So that the patient does not feel pain during the operation.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And if the patient has these symptoms, they are typically called a physician to treat them.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	And so, if pain occurs in the leg or foot, you should apply a cushion to the joint to relieve the pain.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more cautious to leave the cushion under them.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	This sentence describes a situation where a doctor would treat a patient with a cushion under their feet and another by cauterization to prevent gout from spreading.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When blood is drawn out from the body.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore, you should have done what you were doing on your own body.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	Then apply other remedies for the small pox if necessary.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is in the leg, a cushion should be placed under their foot, so that they do not feel the pain.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	The patient should be protected from harm by placing a cushion under them, if they have been treated for a medical condition.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then apply a cushion to the wound and let the patient rest their legs.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you cauterize the other parts of the body, you must place a cushion on their legs, so that the patient's legs don't become too swollen.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	Mays you have to cauterize it, if you are going to make incisions on the legs or feet because of its size.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	When the body has an excess of humors, the patient's blood is let out to prevent its growth in the affected area.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	Then apply a cushion to the area on the leg where the pain is located.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And if you have healed the affected area, place your hand on the healed part to prevent further complications.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	When you cut the incision into the intestine for a surgical procedure, another incision will be made on the legs or feet to drain the abscesses.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	Our ancestors used to say that gout could be cured by applying cushions.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is how the leg is treated for pain in the legs.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	Then apply a cushion to their body, as needed.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	When someone has ulcers in their mouth or throat, they may be treated for what is called gout.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, if you have a patient who has suffered from gout in the feet and ankles.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the physician cauterizes, let him ensure that he avoids the other blood vessels.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then return your hands to their original position on the patient's body.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And then apply the cushion to the thighs.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	And if the patient's body is affected by a plague, place two hands on their legs, and one on the chest.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	Then apply medicine that heals the flesh.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And so then Albucasis, that is to say, the wise physician Albucasis, has said that the pain of la coysau  is a disease of the blood.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Then let the pain be treated by the physician; and let them hold the patient's legs for three days.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	A person suffering from the plague has a swelling in their neck, and I have seen them to be cold and stiff.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, it is necessary to apply cautery to the patient's foot.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And if you are a physician, do not cauterize the patient unless necessary.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that there is no fear in the case of a proper groin/hip injury.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter xliv.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	A hernia on the legs is called a hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	And this boils down to the fact that they have an abscess in their throat (or neck).
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	This pain is caused by an imbalance in their body.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And if it is necessary to heal by applying cauteries.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And [the doctor] will place a cushion on their legs.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	Then if you have a small wound on their legs, apply ointments to the intestine or coyus or foot.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you are a doctor, you'll need to examine your patient carefully to determine if they have gout.
Capitol .xlv.	E si is the 45th chapter.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	The first part of the section on swelling of the joints.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	From the nodes you mentioned, which are caused by many different types of humors, you have already mentioned the various types that cause pain in the joints.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And do so with a cushion under their legs.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, you must be careful with the treatment of the disease called gout.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	And if there is no heat in the legs, they will be burned.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And if it is a great pain, the patient's body will be treated by cauterization.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And if you want to treat the illness called gout, apply the cushion where the joint pain occurs.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	This is a description of the use of a cautery in surgery.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And apply the proper treatment to the cushion based on the size of the boil.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if it is necessary to open the veins in order to release hot humors, you will apply your hand to their legs.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	Then place your hand on the patient's thigh to apply another cautery treatment.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	When the pain has been removed from the patient's body, it is no longer called gout.
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	And so if you are skilled, use a cautery on any part of the body where there's pain, and then keep it closed when necessary.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	And if it breaks open during the operation, apply a bandage to their thighs, keep the patient's legs elevated, and apply a cushion to their chest, so that the wound may heal quickly.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If there are any other symptoms, the body will be treated by applying a poultice to them.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if there is some disease in the thigh, it is called acute by the doctors.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	When there's a large swelling, you should use a cushion under their legs to elevate them.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	And if you are experiencing pain in your legs, put a cushion under them.
Capitol .xlvi.	This sounds like it's referring to a chapter in a book.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	From the surgical tools required for sectioning and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	From these symptoms, you can tell if it's gout or something else.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	Then apply a hot iron to the affected area, and then use another cushion to apply pressure to the affected area.
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	And the way to treat it (gout) is as follows:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	This sentence suggests that the text might be describing a situation where doctors are treating a patient's legs with a cautery tool.
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	The pain is caused by the infiltration of humors into the joints, and then the doctors treat the joint with a cautery.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the methods used on the patient.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And if it is the foot, it is large, and somewhat affected by the pain.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	Then apply a bandage to prevent the swelling from spreading.
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	La forma de experient means the location of the patient's body.
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	Another word for "knee" in Latin is "genū", and "lu" appears to be a variation or abbreviation of that.
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	Then apply the appropriate remedies to the affected area.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	E if you are applying a hot poultice to the legs, use wool, wax, or silver needles as needed for the treatment.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And if the patient is suffering from gout, that is, pain in the feet caused by a cold humor, it is customary for the physician to apply heat and treat them with a cautery.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And from the three types of pain, depending on the type, it can be treated by one or another method, such as applying a cushion to the area where their fistula is located, but use of the other methods should be considered.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	A cushion is placed under the affected limb.
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Lead is a form of illness that affects the legs.
Forma del experient petit de plom:	A cushion should be placed under the affected area during an attack.
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The patient is one who has a tendency to be affected by gout; and for those suffering from the same, they are given special care.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And thus they are of three types.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	You have two choices of treatment for them.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And if there are three curves in their joint, they are the signs of a disease which is called gout.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	Then all these things are done by the physician.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	This looks like the beginning of a translation of "Formed by a simple shape, such as a circle or square, the words 'form' and 'open' are often used interchangeably with these terms: "And for those who have been affected by the illness," etc.
Forma de unci simple migier:	This refers to a form of treatment using a cautery tool to treat a patient with a condition that causes pain.
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The text mentions a cushion being placed on their legs, suggesting the person is being treated for an ailment affecting the thighs and perhaps other parts of the body.
Forma de unci orp gran:	The shape of the foot is often used for the pain in their legs.
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	This sentence likely means: **"A form of treatment for gout in the leg"**
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	And if you have a small burn on the legs, use a cushion for a cushion.
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	I think it means something about an "unci" being a type of bone or joint condition that affects the feet. This suggests it might be related to gout, which is a form of arthritis.
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	This refers to the use of another person's hands to treat gout during a medical procedure.
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	And it is called "having two forms".
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Having three curves, a large nail has been placed in the foot.
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Forma of a three-foot-high man placed on his feet by doctors.
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	And if you are making a point of a patient, then open the space between them for their legs, and put a cushion on them, in the case of an injury to a limb, the injured area will be covered by the other cushion.
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	These are the ways to treat the body with hot cautery and by using cold scalpels, which are used for treating wounds in the legs and three on the chest, etc., of different types.
Forma de scapel gran:	When translated into English, "Forma de scapel gran" likely means "Shape of the large cautery".
Forma del scapel migier:	Forma del s'caut el which treats the patient's body.
Forma de scapel pauc:	The shape of the foot is important for determining the proper treatment.
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	For wounds on the limbs, it is said to be good if they are cauterized quickly by the doctor.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And this is how the three humors are described: by means of its nature, you can tell if it is cold or hot.
La forma de magda gran:	The form of magda is great for treating pain in the legs.
Forma de magda migier:	This translates to: **The cure for gout is to treat the body with a poultice.**
Forma de magda pauc:	This refers to something specific to a form of the disease gout.
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area after you have placed a cushion under them and covered their legs with another cushion.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And if you want to apply a cautery to a specific area, use a cushion, but for others, use them elsewhere.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The cushion on the legs is a remedy for pain in the feet, but it is customary to call them gout by the doctors.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And another hand should be placed on the patient's legs.
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	There are three types of bloodletting using leeches or cups, depending on the amount of blood to be drawn: large, medium, and small.
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	Another person holds their foot steady while the surgeon uses a hot iron to remove excess fluids from the body.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	These are various types of treatments that doctors use for these ailments, but I am unable to access external information to provide an accurate translation.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	But if they have to be cauterized in the legs or chest, place a cushion under them, but there should be no use for it on their bones, as that would be bad.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And if it is necessary to draw blood, this is done by letting it flow from small burns made on the surface of the veins;
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And another way to say it is that some humors are caused by pain or pain in the legs and feet, and they cause them to swell,
Capitol .xlvii.	The text describes the process of treating a patient with gout using a cautery tool.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	And if they are in pain, you should place cushions on their arms and thighs.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some people say that some cushioners are necessary for the legs when they cauterize the body, while others are on their backs, and hold their hands.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	The patient's bowels are treated in the same way as the plague, by making incisions on its surface to treat the infection.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if the breastbone is burned by a cautery, then it’s necessary to apply pressure on the area so as to prevent it from festering or bleeding.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	E so if it is your intention to cure it, apply a poultice of corroding concoction to the affected area.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Make an incision to allow the pus from the abscess to drain.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	And if a physician sees a cushion on the legs of another, he will be sure to know what it is.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	Then, if they are in a good position, you can lance the boil and allow the patient to be treated for the boil in the thigh.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And on their body, where there is pain, they will be healed by an ointment appropriate to the ailment.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	When the patient has a swelling in their legs, it should be treated by applying a hot cautery to the area around the affected area.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	Then administer the cushion treatment for the plague as we previously described.
Capitol .xlix.	Gout is a disease caused by an excess of humors in the body, which they are calling for you to cauterize.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	This likely refers to a surgical procedure involving the location of abscesses (from veins or arteries) in the body.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	E si la pena es de l’aquar’e.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	When bloodletting was done on the veins, the patient's thighs were opened to the bloodletting.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And if the patient's limbs are swollen with inflammation, then a cautery should be used on the affected area, but not on the extremities.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Then apply an incision to the affected area to relieve the pain.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	The other cause is the pain caused by the other part being affected.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	When placing a cushion under the affected part.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And they will treat the illness that is in the limbs.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	E tu, the first cushion is placed under your own leg while the second one is applied to the area where you already have a cushion under your arm.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	And if you have a problem with the swelling in the foot, apply a poultice to draw out the pus from the affected area, and then use a cautery to reduce the inflammation.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	And if you have to make an incision on the patient's body, it should be done carefully in the affected area.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then place the cushion on their legs and feet.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	And now, if there's a boil, you'd apply a cautery to it.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	And if the foot has an excess of blood or blood flows out from the body due to an injury.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And if it affects the whole body, then the patient will suffer from gout in every place where they have joints.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And if a patient suffers from severe pain, place a cushion under them so they may be treated by cauterization.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And if there is an abscess present in the body, it is customary to use a cushion on the patient's body, and apply the poultice to the affected area.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, it is customary to cauterize the intestine or the hernia to create an alternative pathway.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	And you put a poultice on their head or forehead.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	Mays means "when" if there's a little bit of pus, then use the hot cautery to treat it.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it's a large intestine or hernia, then you must use the other methods, e.g., apply a cautery to their feet, to heal them.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	The first cut is made on the belly, and the rest are for the treatment of other ailments.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Then place a cushion under the patient's body, legs, or feet to prevent the opening from closing up.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And they are two parts, one of which was in the intestine, e.g., two-thirds of the body, etc.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	When they are open, their lips will be moist and they will feel pain.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	And if you have pain in your legs, it is customary for the physician to treat it with a hot poultice on the area.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And if they are white, you must cut the flesh in the place where the patient's legs are swollen; if the metas are swollen, cauterize the metas.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you see the patient's pain, use a sharp cautery with caution, and another cushion under their knees, and another on their feet to prevent them from moving, which is how they are treated.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	E another be adjusted with care, so that he does not bleed out.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	Mays if there be a need to make incisions on the foot, one must treat it as though it were a wound.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you are going to burn the area of the joint.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And if the patient has a wound, treat it carefully to prevent infection.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	Then you should cauterize the foot, as it is customary for those of a dark complexion.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And you will see a wound on their legs.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On treatment of the navel.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	And so too the belly can be affected by many causes.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	And if the patient has a wound, it will appear in various forms.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if the humor is gone, then you have to close the wound on the patient's leg.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	Mays, the pain is constant, and worsens when premes is applied to the body.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And you must treat the inflammation, as well as the underlying cause.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	When there are imbalances in the body's humors, you might get a boil on your foot, which is treated by applying heat to the affected area.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	And if it is caused by wind, it is called gout in the patient's legs or feet.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	This means that if the patient is suffering from pain caused by an imbalance of your humors in their legs or thighs, you should use a cautery to treat them with heat therapy.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	Et si la ale below, you have the other on the foot, which they use for the cure of the patient.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And if it is necessary to cut into the patient's skin to treat a problem that affects the joints, then do so.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	You have found the area of the affected limb; treat that with a poultice.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	Mays if you find that the pain in your bowels or the joints is painful, use a cautery for those areas, and apply your hands to them with care.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish to perform a procedure on someone, remove the needles (or other sharp tools) from them.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	This means that the patient's foot has been treated with a cushion so that the patient can be placed on their chest, and the rest of the body can be addressed.
Capitol .liii.	The following text is a Latin phrase that translates to: "Chapter 53"
De curacio de cranc.	Translation: Another example of treating gout.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	In this case, it's important to remember that the practice of medicine was different in the Middle Ages, and "treating" an illness with a specific term like "gout" was done differently than modern medical understanding.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	The text describes how doctors would treat a patient suffering from an ailment affecting their intestine or intestines.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When it is necessary to stop the pain by applying points on their legs and feet, then use this method to heal the patient.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	This sentence describes a scenario related to treating someone with a medical condition. It seems to be outlining steps for a procedure using a tool called a "malaute" which I believe refers to a type of cautery treatment and translate the first part of the phrase as:
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Then, place your hand on his chest to ensure that he does not have any other causes for pain during the operation.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And if your body has some other kind of pain in their legs or feet.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If there is pain in the feet, then use another method to treat them.
Capitol .liv.	The old metges have already been summoned to the patient's location.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of swelling in the body.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	Then apply the remedies to their legs and call it gout.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	When the patient has been cured, a cushion is placed on their legs to prevent them from being harmed.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	The cushion is placed on the patient's abdomen, so as to prevent further harm from the illness.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	When treating the patient with gout, you should use a hot cautery, and if you need to cut, then make a small incision in the area below the chest, where the pain is located.
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	Let's say that the word "de" means "of", and "juncturas" means "joints". Then we have:
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	This line describes the use of three cushions in a medical setting, possibly for support during treatment.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	And if the patient has a water retention disease, it should be applied to their legs, but not on their feet.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	E si the pain is caused by a blockage in the intestines, then apply a cautery to the affected area.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	E no cove that you have put the cushion under their side where the pain is, and another on their chest.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And if the pain is in your foot, then you know it's a type of pain by the time it has been around for a while.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And if you want to make a cut on your legs or chest, use a cushion.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Place the cushion so that it protects the patient's legs from the cautery, and another cushion on their chest.
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	This passage describes the use of a specific type of cautery called a "canula de eram" in treating gout.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	The first part of the sentence refers to the practice of using leeches for bloodletting, a common treatment for gout in those times.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	And if the patient needs to be treated with cauterization, then you should know that it is already in the process of being done.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And apply the proper method to remove them from the body.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And you should apply the heated instrument to the patient's affected area for several days until the pain subsides.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	And if the foot has been injured, you should apply a cushion to it, while the patient remains at rest for a long time.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And place your hand on their stomach if you must cauterize the gut.
Capitol .lv.	Capitol 51.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	This is for treating children's conditions, which should be done carefully.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes the intestines are in pain from the disease.
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	And thus, a small incision was made on the leg.
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And apply a poultice of lead to the affected area.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when they want to urinate, and you've applied something to help them urinate, then do so again if necessary.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	Then it's possible that the patient's urine will be used to cauterize it.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	Mays aquel del qual le trauc es amplificat es quele ha la malaute.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	And you should hold a hot iron to the area in which the patient's bowels are located, and apply a cold compress for the inflammation.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The first two lines are from a medical text, likely referring to a procedure or surgery.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And if it's necessary to cauterize the surface of the intestine or foot, then apply a hot iron.
Capitol .lvi.	**Capitol .lvi.**
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	The foreskin must be treated with cauterization if there's an ailment affecting the legs or feet.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Here comes the first line of the translated text:
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one of those is bad or harmful, and the other is good or benign.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	In this case, the first-line text refers to a process of treating something called "gout" in a medical context.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if your pain is caused by something else, use another cushion to keep it from spreading.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	Then apply cautery to the top of the skin and outside the body.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	E don't know how to translate that phrase.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And so they treat the other ailments with a different cure.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	Then when blood flow is restricted, you apply a cautery to the legs.
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	And if the body is affected by an ailment, apply a cushion on their abdomen.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if you insert a needle into the bladder through the urethra, then you will be able to access the urinary tract by means of that instrument.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	Then apply a cauterization to the legs if they are affected by the plague or gout.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	Then you should have another person gently hold the patient's hands when the physician determines they are delicate.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Then place a thin cloth between their flesh and the tools used to burn them.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	Then apply a cautery to the affected area to solidify it.
Capitol .lvii.	Another (person) useth the cushion and another (person) holds their hands.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	And it is called healing of the one who has been circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	When a person has a problem with their legs, you should use a cautery to treat them.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the wounds between the legs, or to make incisions on the limbs.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	This is the custom of treating pain by applying a poultice to the affected area.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	Et autre, qui est on the leg, will be pierced by the knife.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	And if in the operation, something goes wrong, stop the operation immediately.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	The child's nature is such that they are prone to these ailments.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	And if the patient has pain in the legs, the remedy is to apply cautery to the areas where they feel pain.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the way to treat it is by using a cautery on the affected area.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And if it is necessary to apply a cushion on their legs so that they do not swell, it is customary to cauterize the intestines.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And so the patient's leg was opened by the doctor, who carefully placed all the tools in his proper position.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then you should apply cauterization to the patient's leg.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Place the second cushion on the lower leg, and use the first one for the foot.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then return the blood to its proper place and apply a cushion soaked in fresh oil to the affected area.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	This shape-shifting form of the ancient world, the modification of which is described as follows:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let there be cushions under the legs if the patient has an open wound or requires cauterization.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	When one's legs are cleansed by gout, another cushion should be used.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, place a cushion under their legs and keep them elevated so the humors do not flow out of the patient's body.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	Then treat the affected area with a sharp instrument to remove the blockage.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	After three days, apply a hot poultice to the inflamed area and make a decision about whether to lance the swelling.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And so if you are treating a patient for a pain in the joint, the burning sensation will be strongest where their foot is located.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	Therefore apply that same cautery to the other parts of the body.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	and if it is necessary to apply a cauterizing iron to the skin, so that the patient doesn't suffer from pain in the legs or feet due to a blockage.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish to heal the patient, it is because they are suffering from pain caused by unbalanced humors.
Capitol .lviii.	Translation 2: And if it is necessary to apply cautery, use it on the patient's feet.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	This means the treatment of urine retention.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Gout is caused by cold humors, which can be treated by applying heat to the affected area.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	Then return the urine to its natural flow, and make sure the patient's bladder does not leak.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place your hand on the patient's legs and stretch them gently as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then already you are ready to cauterize the leg of the patient, because it is necessary to stop the pain there.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	Then use a syringe to draw out the humors from the patient's body.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And if you need to hold the bladder in place during surgery, you should use a cauterizing tool for that purpose.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make a cushion for the patient's thighs, and oil it with an oil of its own kind.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then put a hot iron on their belly, and place another one on their feet to apply heat in a way that is not painful to them.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And if necessary, apply a cushion to their urine.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then apply the other cauteries as needed to bring about healing.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 59.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	This text describes medical tools that would be used for cauterization.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then when the bladder or the kidneys are affected by such disease, it is necessary to cauterize them.
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	When there is pain in the feet, it is treated by cauterization.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that case there are three treatments: two for the one part of the body, and another for the other parts of the body.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning, place cushion on the patient's intestines (to treat gout).
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	When using a hot cautery, apply it to the bladder if you want to stop the humors from swelling.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Then apply a bandage to their thigh to prevent the intestine from protruding.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	This is a bit tricky since I don't have context for the entire treatise, but here's a guess at the meaning:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And if it is made of silver or of brass, the silver one will be used to treat the patient's legs, and the other one will bind them together.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	Then a good physician should place his hand on the patient's legs, and another on the affected area to keep them warm.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then apply the cushion to their feet.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then apply heat to the bladder, for it is the proper place for the application of a hot cushion.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	And if you want to know what it's like to have a poultice applied to the affected area, it is that you should put a heated cautery on the bladder to reduce pain, or apply it to the whole body.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then apply a poultice to their body where the instrument will be placed on their hands and feet.
Capitol .lx.	The chapter mark should be sixty.
De extraccio de peyra.	Peyso is a cushion for cushioning the blow of a fall.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	Nos already know that this is about the return to the body in a medical context, so we can deduce:
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And if they are in pain, we must treat them gently.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And if there are stones in the bladder, they are called bladder stones.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And if it’s necessary to tell you what is in the text.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Apeuzais le pe per les mases e la cushion applied to the bladder should be used.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And if the patient is young, they are usually treated with a hot poultice on the legs.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	Another method used by doctors is to use a cautery on the patient's feet.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And if there is pain in the limbs, then hold them still.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore, the patient will be treated with a cautery at the beginning of the treatment, the which you must apply to the affected area.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And if the patient has gout, they are to be treated with a cauterization method.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And if you have a pointed cautery to remove the cushion from under the patient's legs.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And if you are near someone who has gout, apply your hand to that area.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	And if you need to apply cauterization to their legs, use a cushion to protect them.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	If you are using cautery, apply it to the entire area affected by the ailment.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And if there is a stone in the cavity of the body, you'll need to hold it steady.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And slowly bring the bladder back to its proper place.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then apply pressure to that area with a cushion, and hold it closed.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	E si la cushion on the patient's legs was in contact with the patient's body, they were still experiencing pain in their feet.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the affected joint, place the cautery on the area where the pain is located in the body.
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	The intestine or humors are too much for the patient, so you should apply a cauterization to the area below the knee and another cushion on the leg, and if necessary, use a cautery on the left foot.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	Then apply heat to the affected area to ease its pain.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from their legs, a lion's mane appears to be made of fire.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Then, if it is the case, you will burn their skin with fire if you cauterize them.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	When you place the cushion on the limb, it will be placed gently on the bone, so that the pain of the illness is lessened.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot find relief through other means, you can cauterize the patient's pain there.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	If the patient has more than one stone, you should use a cushion at their legs and feet.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	When there is much pain in the body, then it is called gout if the physician has made a mark on your foot, but if the physician has done something else to you, such as apply a cautery tool to your legs, then place that above the continuosly afflicted area and hold them.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	The patient should be treated by applying hot compresses to the affected area.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, when you have completed your treatment, use aloe and dragon's blood to treat them.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And apply a cloth to the place where the infection has been treated.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then apply a cushion to their stomach, and you will see.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And so when the wound is treated, they are healed by the cure of a balm.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	And when there are ulcers on the legs, it is also known as gout, which is often caused by the infiltration of cold humors.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply heat to the patient's feet as needed for its treatment.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	You have already explained the treatment by the name itself: "gout" refers to the pain in the joints caused by the specific nature of the treatment, which involves a pointed cautery being used on the patient's limbs.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if there's a small stone in the flesh of a person, they are forbidden to use the cushion on their legs.
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	When you apply heat to the affected joint, it is important to be careful so as not to cause harm.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then place a cushion under them, and another cushion on their legs, for he who has the ailment, another cushion on the affected body part, so that it does not return to the area of the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And if there are no cushions between their thighs, place them on their chest, holding the patient's legs together.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And then apply the cautery to the patient's legs, and then slowly close the wound so that the urine can flow freely.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	When the other sources say that the patient's foot was affected by the cold humors, they are right to call it gout.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	And so, if the patient has a wound in the leg, there will be a need for a cushion for the legs and another for the feet.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	Then apply a bandage to the leg and place the second bandage on their feet.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then place that on their body.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Then, if necessary, apply a cushion to the affected area.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And when the pain returns to the legs or feet, the other will be placed on the body in order to prevent the intestine from being infected by the bad humors.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And you, if you must use a surgeon's tool to treat the ailment, should do so on the legs or thighs.
Capitol .lxi.	And then apply the cushion between the legs, and make the patient's body be held still.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Another common treatment was to apply a cauterization with a pointed tool on women suffering from extractions due to illness or injury.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	This translates to "The pain occurs in the legs" in the context of the previous lines.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	Treating gout is difficult if it has already spread to other parts of the body; otherwise, it's treated with a cautery.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	The woman has one pain which is gout.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And if you are a doctor treating a woman, or a man who has a wife, you should know that she was born with a pain in her leg, which makes her a good candidate for a poultice.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	And if you have mastered the art, you will know that the third person is already a master of the art.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth condition is that if it is necessary to cauterize the leg, there are long-term complications so they should be treated carefully.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	When the need arises, you will use cauterization on the patient's legs, but it is rare.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	Mays if you are deprived of that, there is no need to be ashamed.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	And if you are a man, and the person who wants to be cured is young, you should first cauterize the lower leg, and then place a cushion under their knees and apply another to the lower part of the leg.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if you have pain in the legs that is caused by a condition where the blood is too thick or viscous.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If they are not a virgin, then do you know what to call them?
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then place a cushion on the bladder to keep it open.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then apply the cauterizer to the affected area, and hold the patient's legs steady.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	Then apply a small amount of cautery to the affected area.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And some people think that large, painful swellings are caused by cold humors in the body.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	And if you know how many species are there in the world, you will say that they are of the same nature.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if there be a bleeding wound, apply pressure to stop the bleeding.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And so they call it the gout when they use these instruments to treat the patient.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see a bloody flux, know that it is a sign of a serious illness, but apply cautery to their legs and other parts of the body.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And it is for the plague that they say they have a cushion.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	The physician uses their hand to apply the cautery on the patient's legs, so that the intestine or the hernia is kept in place.
Capitol lxii.	A cushion is placed under the affected area.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Then another cushion under their legs.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia is caused by an excess of humors in the body.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And then there are other things that are used to treat it.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And if there's weakness, which causes a type of sickness, the patient needs to be treated by a cautery.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And so the intestines are called by the color of their humors, which are yellow.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	Then use your knowledge to help you understand what type of disease is being described in the previous translations.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if there are humors in the patient's body, then use a cauterizer on their legs to treat them.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the doctors apply water to the patient's feet, they should be aware of the cushion placed under their legs.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And if you want to know the nature of the ailment, which one is to be called by the name of the place where the inflammation appears?
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	And if you are unable to stop bleeding in the foot, then another person should apply pressure to stop the bleeding.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And if there's a need to remove the intestine from the body on the right side, then use a hot cautery to stop the bleeding.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And another servant you place on their left side, and another on the right, and another that is placed upon the patient's body by the hand of a skilled physician to cure the ailment.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And apply heat to the legs with a cautery to treat the patient's pain.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make an incision into the flesh so that the pain can be relieved.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	You have already opened the way to that place; observe the patient carefully for any possible complications.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And so you must carefully apply the cautery to the wide area below their feet.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	When applying cauterization, separate the two sides of the incision as far apart as you can.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And if the pain persists in the legs, apply the heat to the affected part carefully so as to avoid it spreading further.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	Mays is translated to English as: May the intestine be treated as the others.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	Then return your hand to their place on the legs of the patient.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	When the water is heated, apply it to the patient’s body, where you have already placed your hands; apply the rest to the other part of the body.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Then apply oil to the cushion; then place the cushion on the patient's thighs.
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And if you have to apply a hot cautery to the patient's legs or arms, do so on the thighs, applying pressure and ensuring the cautery is used correctly.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	This is an example of how to say "Here comes the text" in English using only the translated version.
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And if it is a burn on the feet, it is customary to treat them with a poultice.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	When it is necessary to cauterize the legs, one must apply fire to the area where the cushion was placed.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	When you are ready to apply cautery to the legs, place a cushion on the body so that the burn does not occur.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	Then, if the patient has a cushion in their legs, they should be treated with cauterization.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	And if there is pain from bloodletting, then you must use the appropriate treatment.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	When the pain is severe, it may be necessary to cauterize the area, but the patient is not yet ready for that treatment.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then you should apply cautery to the abscess on the patient's legs.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And that which is placed on the legs, above the body part.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And if it is necessary to pause the intestine from leaving the body, they would be placed on their legs to prevent them from being too far away.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And if it is necessary to cure the plague, apply a poultice to the affected area.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	In the hour that the patient experiences pain in their legs or feet, you should apply a poultice to the area where pain is felt.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	If you have pain in your foot, it is called gout.
Capitol .lxiii.	Capitol 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	To cut open the hernia and apply cushions to their legs.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	When this disease is treated by doctors.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And if you are remembering the operation in their case, the doctors will consider it gout.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Then apply a hot iron to cauterize the wound in their legs.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And if the cushion is opened on his legs, it is customary to do so by hand.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	E for leu's pain be treated as a condition.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes swelling in the veins occurs due to inflammation.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	Then when the patient's legs are swollen, you should apply cautery carefully to their veins.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	When the pain is in the veins, and it is caused by something, it is called inflammation.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	E then it is possible that the legs are swollen from the pain as well.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the humors have solidified in the joints, you should use a cautery to burn them out.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	Then apply heat to the affected area.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	Mays if you are experiencing pain in your legs due to cold humors, consult with doctors for treatment.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then when your hand has been placed on their legs, it is already filled with wool.
Capitol .lxiv.	Capitol .lxiv. translates to **Chapter 64**.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	This refers to the treatment of a painful condition in the legs.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	The doctor would call this condition an "apoplexy" of the intestine if there were pain in the intestines and other parts of the body.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	This is for fear that the disease may return.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	But I advise burning the thighs, as they are the first to be affected by the fire cautery.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And if you want to prevent the patient from being seized by gout, suspend his/her leg in its natural cavity.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Then place a cushion on their legs to prevent them from being cut.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	Then apply the cautery to the area that was causing the pain.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	Translation 2: Then put a cushion under their legs and place it behind them on the patient's body.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And if they are already swollen, you should extract them.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Then treat the plague with the cushion to prevent the spread of the disease.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	And if it is necessary to remove the pain from the testicles, because it is painful, use the cushion for their application.
Capitol .lxv.	et another apply the body with its own set of tools.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Then use your hand to hold the intestine in place for treatment.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	And if the patient's bowels are affected by the ailment, and he has been given aid, then you must apply a hot iron to the area where the rupture is located.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And if the patient has been weakened by pain or weakness in their body or limbs, then you must apply these remedies, which are used for such purposes: these are the reasons why a surgeon would treat with cautery.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	When treating the foot for swelling, the pain will gradually subside.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of this pain is that it appears suddenly in the legs, and feet, etc.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And when some cold humors are caused by the disease called gout, they cause pain in the feet.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	E's corpulence or a bodily ailment which causes pain when pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	Then in the treatment of the illness, cushions are placed under their feet, to support them, and their hands are kept in check.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And if you place the cushion on their legs, it is used as a tool to treat the patient's illness.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Then you will apply the cauter to your legs and the other one between them.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	E si'l'ha fatto.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Then he will be open to the possibility that the cushion is for their feet, the intestine for the other.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	When the pain is in the white part of the body, it should be called the second source of pain.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And if you find a hardened mass in the abdomen, apply a poultice to the affected area.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	E cerqua am for the patient to experience pain in their legs if they are already inflamed from gout.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find a stone in the foot, then you will need to cauterize it.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And place a needle into the area of the body where the pain occurs in the legs, which we will call gout.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And place a cushion around the veins on their body to prevent inflammation in the area where the patient's bowels are being treated.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And let the patient be placed on the cushion for three days after the first three days have passed.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	"Then, if necessary, you will need to cauterize the affected area."
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And let the patient be treated for gout; and if it is necessary to cauterize their legs, use the cushion on them.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	And if the cure is delayed, apply cold compresses to the area, as well as applying a cushion, etc.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then heal the other ailments within the plagues, as well as the pain.
Capitol .lxvi.	And if there are joint pains, it is customary to call it gout.
De hernia ventosa.	Then describe the state of the patient's body after the surgeon has performed the procedure.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	And then they will know that you have treated me well.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	Then you must apply a poultice to the affected area, and place a cushion under the patient's feet, so that the vessels near the swelling are protected, and the patient's body will be able to better heal.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the plague according to the method we have described, so that it may be healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	E si vos altri que es necessitat de costumava, E'l qual tengua le uentres e suas mas.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Then return it to its original position.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	When there are pains in the legs, apply cushions to support them.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And return to the patient's chest in the evening.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	Then place a cushion under the patient's thigh in case of pain, but use a hot cautery to treat it.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	This refers to treating someone with a cushion.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And some cases are cured by applying a hot iron to the affected area, which in this case is the intestine or leg.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	Then apply a cushion to their back and place your hand on their stomach, and they will be healed.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's legs.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And thus they adjust the suture for two locations on their body.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Then apply heat to the legs to reduce swelling.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And for the plague that has already been opened up, you should use heat to draw out the infection.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And the patient's health has improved.
Capitol .lxviii.	Capitol 68.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	And for the softening of the pain of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	And it is alleviated by the use of cautery.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, when you treat the patient's wounds, it is necessary to use the right techniques so that the treatment will be effective for the patient's body.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And apply a hot iron to their legs three or four times, to prevent the disease from spreading.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And so cure the patient's ailments by treating the intestines while they are open.
Capitol .lxix.	Another explanation for the translation is: And if there is no cushion available, then apply heat to the affected area to relieve the pain.
De castracio.	Concerning castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	And so by the way of the surgeon's art, a cushion is placed on the wound for the patient to heal.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	Castration can be done by either constriction or incision.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	The way to treat such a condition is by using a hot cautery.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then apply a hot poultice to those areas where the pain is resolved by cauterization.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	When you are castrating animals, use your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And so you are near to the patient's body with two humors, which are the main cause of gout, but not necessarily in its place.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Then incise those parts which you would have to be cauterized.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And if there are no other causes for the pain in their feet, then use a cushion on them.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This is a description of how doctors would treat gout, which is often caused by an imbalance in the body's humors.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Then cure the plague wherever it may be in their body.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	In men, the pain is sometimes caused by the inflammation of something called gout.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And when there are already some cushions, it is said that the patient's leg is swollen, and another cushion will be placed on their testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	Mays in the women's case there exists a special ailment, which is similar to what men get when they are suffering from the pain of a gouty condition.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	There are three types of cures: for men, for women, and for both sexes.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	Cove es that you are careful to avoid pain in the future.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And when the men are suffering from gout they will often be in pain in the area below the second part of the body.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol .xxi.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	When you have a pain in your legs, and by the way, the other leg is swollen.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	And apply a cauterization to the body of those who have been afflicted with gout, which we call "lentig" encasing their bodies in such a way that they are unable to move during the act.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	When your foot has been injured, apply a poultice to the affected area.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And then apply a poultice to draw out the humors from the affected area, so that the disease does not worsen.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And apply your hand to the area of the afflicted person where the cure for the sores lies within the healing.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if to make the patient's flesh healthy, it is necessary to cauterize their body.
Capitol .lxxii.	This appears to be a sentence from a medical treatise written in a language that combines elements of Latin, Italian, French, and possibly other languages. It likely refers to instructions on treating gout in the feet.
De curacio de alratica.	Another cause for the treatment of gout is the application of a hot poultice.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Then, for the treatment of a woman, use a small cautery on her legs.
E es o natural o accidental.	And so it is, whether natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	And the physician heals the ailment by applying a cauterizing instrument to the affected area.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	When your doctor makes a diagnosis, or the patient has pain in the legs or chest, they are said to be suffering from leeches or other medical procedures being used.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And if necessary, you should apply the cushion when the pain is in the legs or thighs.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If the patient has gout in their body, you will need to use a cauterizing tool.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And do not let the physician's hands be laid upon them.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	Another method of treatment involves heating the affected area.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then you put a poultice on the cushion to apply heat to their feet.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	And if the cushion is thick enough, you will use it to put pressure on the foot to stop the bleeding.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	The disease called podagra can be treated by suspending the use of meat in the diet.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And if it is necessary to treat the condition by cauterizing the skin, the patient should be prepared for a cure.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And apply a lead cushion to their legs, and if necessary to keep the plague from spreading further.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And if they have had them cauterized, keep using the same type of cushion for a few days.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And you should apply another type of treatment for healing to the patient's legs and feet.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And other times the condition is caused by an injury or inflammation of the flesh.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	And if it's a wound to the legs, then it should be treated with cauterization.
Capitol .lxxiii.	"Then apply a cushion to their legs, and place another cushion on their legs, et cetera."
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Treat the hemorrhoids by applying a cushion and using cold compresses.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	The following sentence is in a language similar to Latin, but I believe there are some errors in the text provided. It appears to be a jumbled attempt at translating the phrase "Gout affects the blood and is caused by cold humors" into a single line of gibberish.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	This is the way to treat those things that cause pain in the legs.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	And then comes the translation:  Therefore, I say that if the intestine is affected by gout or other diseases, the first thing to do is to apply cauterization.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Then those who are ill will be cured by you, or at least find some relief.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	Then return the patient's legs to their original form.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then pulverize the blood with a sharp instrument.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Then apply the cushion to the patient's feet for an hour.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the flux of blood persists, apply a cautery to the affected area and you will see their ailment.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Then apply the cushion to the affected area.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	Then apply two cupping glasses to the affected area.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then, apply the cautery to the wound, but only after it has been applied to the location of the pain.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May your second ailment be that which the physicians call a sharp pain in the belly, which you have already mentioned.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is caused by a cold humor, it is called another example of the body's humors being out of balance, which is what causes the pain.
Capitol .lxxiv.	The translation for "Capitol .lxxiv." is **Chapter 74**.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	The physician's hand is placed on their head.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Some pustules are called ulcers, some for inflammations of the feet, and some for other ailments.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And if the patient's humors are out of balance, then they need treatment for gout.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	If a patient has an abscess on their feet, place a cushion under them and apply cauterization if necessary for treatment.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	When the body's humors are obstructed, causing pain in the feet, apply heat to the affected area.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then you must place the woman on her back upon the cushions so that she has two cushions under her legs.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	When it is necessary to treat the patient's leg, the midwife should use this instrument.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	Then apply a hot iron to the legs of the patient to prevent the cushion from becoming cold.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	And you should apply heat to the patient's legs, so that they are treated properly and their pain alleviated.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And when you are experiencing pain in their legs, apply a cushion to the area where the pain is felt.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And if there is pain in the area where the body is pierced by a pointed cautery, then that's what they mean by another name.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And if there are no signs of sickness, apply a hot compress to the feet when the physician deems it necessary.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	The intestine or other organs are already being cauterized, so the body must be heated up slowly.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the healing balm to the affected area.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And if it is necessary to treat the wound, they must use the following methods: wash it with water and apply a poultice made from herbs.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	Then you must apply a cushion to the plague-ridden leg, or the patient will be in pain.
Capitol .lxxv.	Capitol .lxxv. translates to **"Chapter 75."**
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	And thus, to treat the ailment, it is necessary to use methods that address the imbalance of humors in the body, not just in the feet.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	The midwife must be careful to avoid disturbing the natural position of the child and should place a cushion under them if necessary.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	When you see these signs, you should apply a cautery to remove the excess humors.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	Then, for that part, apply a cushion to the upper leg and use your hands to hold it closed.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	And let a wise midwife carefully tend to all these matters in the delivery.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And do you see how the patient's body is shaped?
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the patient's body is weakened by nature, then it is called gout.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	Then apply a cushion to prevent further swelling.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And if the pain in the legs spreads to the surface of the body it is called gout.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	Mays it be that the patient has a wound, the cushion will be placed on their legs, and they are to be cauterized.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And if the patient has a sore throat, they should apply a poultice to it, be treated for an hour or so by a physician, and then have their mouth and nose cauterized.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the pain is in the legs or feet, apply heat gradually to relieve it.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	And if you are not able to move your legs, then hold your cushion above your body; for the body of the woman is placed upon the chest of those who suffer from gout.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if a person has pain in their limbs, it is customary for doctors to call it gout.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Then burn the skin with the fire cauterizer to relieve the pain in the patient's legs.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the foot swells, you should apply a cushion to the area above the affected foot and say that the pain in his foot is due to humor buildup, and cover the other affected areas.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	Then you should place a cushion under the patient's legs, and do what you will.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	Then, gradually, return the intestine to its place.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	Et autres on the foot that have been made wet by the application of a cushion, apply the ointment to the area around the wound.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Then apply a cautery to the patient's foot and other areas as needed.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	E cum vezes that the body's humors are subdued by the heat of the myrtle.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when there are chills in the body, you should use a cushion to keep them from spreading.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Then apply it to their legs and feet, and leave them alone in the cold.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	Here's the single-line translation:
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Then gently press on the area, but only after it has been prepared by the doctor.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the intestine or any other part of the body has been thrown out, you must put them back in place gently.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then apply a cushion to their legs, so they can be heated gently.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Then apply your hand to their legs and hold them steady.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	And if he has been placed on the cushions, they are to be lowered, and another servant is needed to assist in reducing the swelling.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	Then if the patient cannot walk, place their legs on a cushion to prevent injury.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if they have a fever, it is customary to apply heat to their chest, the legs, and the feet.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Then apply heat to the feet.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	This midwife must be careful to avoid disturbing the mother's body while she is in labor.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when you are in pain from your legs, place something on them.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then command them to be treated by applying small amounts of heat, gradually increasing the intensity.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The patient's foot pain is caused by a need to burn their legs or feet.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	Consider how severe the pain is when you press on the affected area in such a manner.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if your foot has been injured, you should apply a cushion to their feet, another to the legs, and another on the body to keep the heat in and prevent swelling.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And if it is necessary to bleed the woman's feet, place the leech upon it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	When pain is caused by humors in the legs, they are at their worst when they are in the feet.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	And you know that when there are three or four gouty bumps on the foot, it is said to be a sign of a bad omen.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's legs, it should be done carefully, as the other methods are for those who cannot be treated otherwise.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And so you should treat those who suffer from those ailments are difficult to cure.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if it is necessary to treat the leg pain, apply a cushion to the leg and use a cautery for its effectiveness.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	And apply these cushions to their legs.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	"And if you have to use a cautery on someone's legs, it must be done in a way that avoids further harm."
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And if the patient's belly is in pain, use heat therapy and apply it to their feet, which is the correct way to treat them.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Capitol lxxvi.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	And then apply a cautery to the limbs of the deceased.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	And if you need to cure the pain in their joints, which is a disease that has infiltrated the surface of the body and is causing inflammation,  it is necessary for the patient to be healthy and strong because they are inflamed.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	And then apply it to the legs on their thighs, and the woman must be placed so that her feet are elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And when there are complications in the leg, it is customary to apply cauterization to the affected area.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	Et autre on has found a cure for the pain in their legs and another uses a cautery to treat it.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And if the woman has a cushion for the patient's foot, she should use it for its intended purpose.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And then you must consider if the burning pain is on their hands or legs.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	And if there are other causes, such as injury, then this should be treated by a physician.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And if you wish to know what's wrong with the patient, place your hand on their arm above the elbow, and use the other hand to feel for the swelling in the joints.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then apply a cauterizer only after the patient has been properly prepared for cauterization.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And then you can treat the legs in order to alleviate their pain.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And if the pain is felt in their feet, the patient should be treated accordingly.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the patient's first joint is affected by pain, it is customary to treat it medically as gout.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	This is a trick question! The text uses Latin-derived words, but the true meaning is obscured by the use of archaic spellings and grammar that would have been used in a medieval setting.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And so, if you have to make your hand go on their thighs, put it on the leg.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Mays use “alun” if the patient's swelling in the foot is caused by a cold humor.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And treat the patient's pain similarly to how you would treat natural joint pain; for which use tools as needed to remove the cause of the pain.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And then place a cushion under the patient's chest when you are using a cautery.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	Translation:
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	If you are unsure about the meaning of this text, it's best to consult a medical professional.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the pain is in the feet, it will be easier to treat.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	Then you apply pressure to the intestine to relieve pain, so that they can be treated.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	May you treat the other parts of the body with a cautery, as needed; but for pain in the joints, it is customary to apply a cushion, or cushions, depending on the situation.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	E aor the pain of gout is caused by an excess of cold and fatty humors, it is customary to treat it with a cautery.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	Then apply a poultice to the leg to soften it.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	Then apply a cautery to the patient's side, if necessary: and use a hot iron to cauterize the area.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	When it is not possible to guess the meaning of the text, you must treat them with cushions on their legs and another under their feet.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	Then burn the second toe on both sides if necessary.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	Then apply yourself to the task at hand with all your skill.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	When it's necessary to open the intestine or thigh veins, use other remedies.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And another's hands have been placed on their other leg to ensure the patient has not been burned by the fire.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	You have already opened the space between their legs, so you must apply the cushion to their stomach and the other cushion to their foot.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And if he is already healed, he will be called upon for healing, et autre
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then place a cushion on their legs, for the patient needs them to be held in place while you are applying the poultice to their legs, and then apply another, to the body's humors.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	Then he placed his hand on their feet.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Therefore, treat them with the proper treatment for plague.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	When you have already opened the space between the legs, then the other two are used to burn the foot.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	De las formas del cuerpo are already used for the extraction of the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Then apply heat to the area around the legs of the patient.
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is how to treat a patient who has gout in their legs or feet by using a special technique involving the use of a cushion on their legs.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	The emperor's legs or the emperor's feet are to be kept in place, as needed.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	The first sentence is a translation from a text that is similar to English but uses words like "fust" which are archaic or borrowed from another language.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And if you are using a cushion to open the legs, place them on their feet.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Take its form or shape, which is similar to the second example, and place your hand on the patient's body.
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	And if you are to treat them with a cautery, another one (meaning cushion) should be placed on their legs, and another on their feet, etc.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But perhaps the pain in the foot is caused by cold humors, and they are often said to be the cause of gout.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	This is a description of how to treat the body for pain.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then you must open the wound of your patient's body, but carefully.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	This refers to the patient's condition, not to be confused with a modern medical term.
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Translate the cushion into a shape that is already under the patient's leg.
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The patient's legs are burned with a hot coal to cure la dolor en la coys.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	and if it is necessary to treat the patient's ailment by cauterization, then use a heated iron on the affected area.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The body is being treated by applying a cushion to their legs.
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Another translation for the first sentence:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Forma de unci havent so doas spinas:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	This is the form of forceps that is used to grasp the leg during treatment.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	If a patient has an ailment in the groin area, and the physician needs to treat it by cauterizing, they should place their hand on the affected area.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	This refers to a specific type of treatment used by doctors, which involves burning or cauterizing the affected area.
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	When the tools are used to treat the body, they will be used as needed by those who use them, which can be doctors, for their work on the patient.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And so you must apply cushions to the patient's legs, and another to the patient's stomach.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Then extract the second toe.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	And if the pain spreads to the patient's legs, use a second cushion for their knees and use a cushion under the body part below the waist, and apply the cushion with your hand.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if necessary, you apply heat to the affected area.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	These herbs or some of them should be submerged in water, and their purpose is to preserve the intestines or other internal organs from the cold.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	E aprop pausa una canula de la canviera in la boca del mayre.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	Then they will quickly become accustomed to being treated by physicians.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If you have already treated the patient for a while with altea, then use a hot cautery to remove the excess skin from the wound
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Then apply the cautery to the affected area.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And if the patient's legs are drawn up tight, apply a cushion to their thighs.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is closed, they will not be able to speak or cough.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	And if the patient has been treated with a hot cautery.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	When you are in pain, it is necessary to apply a cushion to the area, which will be called "a cushion" after that.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	May the ancient one apply their hands to the patient's feet, another cushion under them, and hold them in a specific position.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	And if it is necessary to place a cushion under them when they have pain, then it should be done carefully.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	A cushion under their thighs and a hand on their legs.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	The treatise says that the first servant placed on the thighs of the patient will cause pain, and then the doctor must apply their hand to prevent the opening of the cushion.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And if it be a cushion placed under them.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Tend to the child's needs carefully, as the illness can be exacerbated by improper treatment.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	If gout affects the legs, they must be treated with care.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then cover the patient's legs.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	E aprop pause over the patient's body; e another cushion on their legs, and another on their feet to prevent them from becoming inflamed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	The other servant is for their feet.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	When the illness has taken hold in the legs, it is customary to treat it with cauterization or by applying poultice; otherwise, it would be necessary to apply a hot cautery to their feet and hands.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	When the wound is healed, the cushion may be removed.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	And if there are cushions on the legs, put them on their feet too.
E es una fistula o motas.	This is a surgical procedure for a pointed incision on a body part that is affected by gout.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And if a patient's legs have already been injured by a certain injury or something similar.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And if it is necessary to burn away the excess heat in the body, you must cauterize the legs of such person.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the intestines or other parts of the body, place a cushion under them.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	A person will only be burned by the surgeon if the patient's condition is known as gout, which is caused by the cold, and in the case of a wound, they should treat it with a cushion for the rest.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	When pain comes on in the body's joints, it is called gout.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	If you don't feel the swelling in the joint, cauterize it instead of applying heat to the patient's legs.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And then the patient's bladder or the space for the fistula to be treated medically.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	Perhaps: When you feel pain in the leg, there are various remedies that can be used to treat it.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those other cases, the cause of the pain is elsewhere, and applying cautery there would be vanity.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	And if you have opened a space in the leg where there's no other opening, healing is hoped for by means of a warm poultice applied to the leg.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And if you are treating someone with a swollen foot, use a different cushion for the area near their feet.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	Then apply the cushion to the affected area of their legs.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	If your feet are swollen, apply medicine to them directly.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	Then perhaps he will be healed in some men's time.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And if it is necessary to apply heat to the area of the fistula, you will know that it is a fistulous condition.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And if it is necessary to treat the flesh affected by a disease, then apply a poultice.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if it (the pain) goes deep into the leg, apply heat to the body in order to remove the cold humors that are causing it.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then do you also cauterize the affected flesh to avoid further spread of the disease.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the patient's body, use a cushion for the places where they are burned or treated with hot cautery.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And apply your knowledge to treat their ailments.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And use medicines that are styptic to stop bleeding and prevent its recurrence.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	If someone has a fistula or other boils, the patient should be treated by a doctor.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	Therefore if the pain is in the tendons or flesh, it is another type of pain that they are treating.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	Then treat the patient with a poultice to help the opening heal.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	Then apply an ointment to the area in question and puncture it with a needle.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And if the pain is in the foot, a poultice should be applied to cover the affected area.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	And if you must make a cut on the patient's body, then be careful to place cushions under their thighs and prevent the blood from flowing freely out of the wound.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And if it be healed, another servant will treat it.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if there are fistulas, you should use a cushion to apply heat to the area of the fistulas so that they may be healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	This form of the disease called fistulas can be treated by a physician.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	And for the which they should be treated as if it were an open wound.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	And if it is necessary to treat a person for their pain, use remedies on the hands, but apply them above the wounds.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And on those legs, the great and small are already in place.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	And these are the causes of pain in the legs, which are caused by the second kind of humor.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	Then have the patient's legs supported by someone who can hold them in place.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you put the poultice on their legs, applying a cushion to the area, and use a tool to cut into the skin of the patient.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	Then apply cautery to the affected area, using a method that uses heat to stop the bleeding.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And another application for the treatment of the legs.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	Then you will have to place his hands on their knees.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If you treat them with a poultice, they will be healed by heat, and if it is necessary to apply a hot iron to burn them, then do so where the cause of their ailment is located outside.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	When the patient has an open wound, apply the poultice to the wound, place a cushion on their legs, and then cauterize the wound.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	Then let the patient's excess humors flow out, for you are about to cauterize them.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place another on their back to hold them closed.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if the patient is suffering from pain in the legs or feet, treat them.
De curacio de fistulas.	This refers to healing fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Painful swelling occurs from excess blood.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And if the wound is already closed, but still needs the old-fashioned treatment for it.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then apply a bandage to the wound and keep your hand on the patient's abdomen when the leg has been pierced by a pointed tool; and for wounds that are open, bandage them; and when the foot has been pierced, treat it with a cauterizer.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	When treating gout, it is important to consider the areas mentioned by doctors, such as the treatment for the ailment.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	When doctors know that the patient suffers from pain in the legs or feet, they will often treat them for ailments related to the body's humors.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then you should apply a poultice to the affected area and treat it.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	Then apply the cautery to the other part.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Then come the small growths on the body, which are called warts, and they appear in many places.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And if you are treating them for their ailment, take care to treat the whole body.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	Then use, as you see fit, fire or medicine to cauterize the pain in the legs.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And also remove the illness from their legs by the use of cauteri (Translation 3: E: And so on)
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	If gout affects the legs or elsewhere on the body, then apply a cushion where it's located in the body, and apply another to their feet, etc.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	E thus you cure gout by applying a canula to the affected area.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, use a hot cautery to treat the condition.
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the legs be kept open so that the patient's pain may be addressed with a hot cushion on the affected area, which should be done with the use of a cauterizing tool.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you wish to cauterize, use the method already described for treating a burn on the body.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	And thus the instruments are used to treat the patient for the ailment.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	This sentence seems to be describing the use of medical instruments on a child, mentioning both small and larger ones depending on the situation.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	And it is necessary for the doctor to apply his hand to the patient's body.
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The cauterizer should be used to apply the poultice in this manner, so that the patient's intestines do not become inflamed.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And if you are using a cushion on their legs, use it to apply the cautery.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And if it is necessary to apply a poultice to the bladder of pellagra, the patient should hold their legs still while the poultice is applied.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And if the patient's legs are affected by gout, another treatment would be to apply heat.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	Then place the cushion on the patient’s belly to keep them warm and soothe their pain.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Then apply a cushion to the affected limb(s) and if necessary, a member of the family would hold them in place.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if [the disease] heals with another area [of the body],  the patient will have to be healed for the whole night.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If you cauterize the body, it will be healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	If your feet have been affected by gout, you can apply a poultice to them.
De curacio de las plaguas.	And then for the treatment of the plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	The original text was likely attempting to translate:
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	The pain in the intestine is caused by humors that have been drawn out of place.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	Is there a chance that the patient's pain will be relieved by other, similar actions to those used in treating gout.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Then place on his body a cushion so that he might be treated for those pains.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And yet another method to cure the disease is to apply heat to the affected area.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And you will see that the plague spreads to the legs.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	And if it is necessary to open the vein for bloodletting, do so with a small incision and the blood will be drawn from the vein.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And if it is necessary to perform surgery on the affected part, proceed with caution and only when absolutely needed.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	If you are in pain, do not eat too much food or meat, nor should you come near it when there is a fear of gout.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And apply cauterization to the affected area if you are using cautery for pain in their legs, and another for the feet, and the patient's legs should be covered with a cloth or a bandage to prevent burns.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	It is certain that it is an abscess if heat arises from the wound on the body's surface, but if a cushion is used to stop the pus from leaving its place.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And then let the patient be treated with cauterization if they have been burned by hot coals, or something similar.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the plague is great, apply a cushion to the area where it's located.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	And so you have put the patient's body in harmony with the use of medicines.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if the pain is severe or in the feet, apply cauterization to the legs and another treatment for the rest of the body.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If it is necessary to treat the patient's blood flow, you can use heat or cold therapy.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these sores are simple and small, that's what we call them in the world of medicine, and they are treated by cauterizing the area with a poultice.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	Then apply the powder to the affected area, one which has been made by grinding three times in a mortar.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And so you must treat the intestine that's inflamed with medicine to make sure it doesn't spread further.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	Then use a hot iron to cauterize the wounds.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And then apply the cautery to these great plagues (of the foot) so they are not altered by the air.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	If the patient's condition worsens, apply those remedies to the affected area; they are usually called "cautious" by doctors.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	And if the patient's body suffers from a fracture, then treat them with a poultice and call upon a surgeon to set the bones.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the bone, we will place a cushion there.
De las plaguas del col.	When the plague affects the feet, the foot will be treated with cautery.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	The text says that if you have a simple cold, it is customary to use a cushion for comfort.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If a patient has gout, these treatments should be used to treat it.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	Do not hesitate to treat any ailment if you believe it will be good for all the body, even the nerves, which are found in the foot, the legs, and the arms, are treated by this method.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is treated with gentle medicines or water, then it is considered a light humor by doctors, but should be treated with remedies specific to the ailment.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	The doctors use various methods to treat gout.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	Mays you are to be treated for a disease affecting leathers or bowels.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	Then apply a hot cautery to the affected area.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	The pain in the legs will be relieved by applying heat to the area.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	Mays if gout has been caused by the humors in your body, you should remove the cause.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the plague is recent, apply powder to the affected area.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	And if they have an issue of their legs, the patient has to be treated in a way that the pain is cured.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Then apply a cautery to the affected area.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If there is a cushion to the leg or foot, then the doctor will consider if the pain is due to gout.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	Here's the English translation of the provided Italian text:
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if you have another pain relief method, it should be used to help soothe the pain.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	When there are three days or more between the plague's onset and the healing of the body, then the patient will likely be cured by that point in time.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If the pain is relieved by resting the affected area and applying heat to the legs and feet, it is likely a fistula.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	Then apply a bandage to the wound if they have a wound requiring cauterization, or use powder for smaller wounds.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	When a patient has already suffered from gout, which can be diagnosed in the bones, then you should use the hot cautery to treat them.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If the plague is in the feet, treat it as if it were a visitation by the plague.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other ailments, accidents happen in their cure.
De las plaguas del ventre.	And from the plagues of the belly.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	When there is pain in the stomach, it is called a pain in the belly.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Then apply a cautery to the legs of the body, so that the heat will drive out any lingering coldness.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	and so that the wound does not become inflamed, the physician should apply another cautery on the place where the patient has a problem in the foot.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	E siu la cushion of their legs will be a good thing to have for the first time.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And then you should suture the other four parts.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And then there are two other types of sutures, e.g., those that are proper to the belly and related to them.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And you are familiar with its cause and symptoms.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	And then I say that when the plague is caused by such things, apply a hot poultice to reduce them.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And thus when it is necessary for the body to be treated with such a strong cautery as you use for those who have gout.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	When cushion is used for gout, it is better to apply water on its own than to use it with other medicines.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And so when the patient's legs are treated, the pain subsides.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	Then apply a small cautery to treat them.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is better than using a knife.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	And if you wish to treat a patient for something like gout, make sure the pain is in the right place before applying a treatment.
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	Then, if one part of the body is affected by the inflammation, the other parts are treated with a more gentle cautery.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And then, if the plague is spreading and requires it, apply cautery to the affected area, but only if necessary, because it’s better for the body to expel the infection by itself than to be burned in a place where it shouldn't be burned.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When it is necessary to make an incision in the surgical procedure, they should be made above the lower part of the legs?
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And if there is an imbalance in the two intestines, you should apply a poultice to the affected area.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	This line translates to: And so apply it to the affected area on the feet.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	Here comes the first sentence:
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	E questa es la causa de la dolor: el metriolo, o
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Then apply a cushion to the affected area where you wish to make an incision.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	The needles represent the pain caused by the cold humors in the body, and are applied lightly to the legs, which are the areas where the needles are placed on the body for a specific treatment.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And if it is necessary to put a needle into the flesh for treatment, then let it be done only after careful consideration of the patient's condition and with proper care taken to prevent a serious illness from developing.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And it is not good for them to be opened up by surgery.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And if you have already cut into the intestines with a knife, place a cushion under them and then leave it alone as it is now consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These are the types of wounds that are best treated by using this method on the patient.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second translation: This means that you are applying an instrument to the body in the same way as one would apply it to a patient's legs when treating them with a cautery.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	Then return to that part of the body, using a needle there for which it is necessary to have cushions ready for such use.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	Then apply a poultice to the patient's legs.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And then sew the wound closed.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And you have already placed a cushion under the man's body to prevent his bowels from being disrupted, so he should be called "a man who has been afflicted by plague and was afflicted by a cold humored illness."
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	The plague was cured in 15 days or so, by being treated with care.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And if it was necessary to apply a poultice to the affected area, they would apply it by using a crones's potion.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	This is a description of the process of a surgical procedure for a wound in the leg or foot.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is necessary to do another operation, for the legs are now numbed.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And if the needle pierces the intestines, the cushion will be applied to the entire body of the patient; and if the needle penetrates the right side, the left side needs to be treated.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	If there are joint pains caused by cold humors in the body, they should be treated with a specific cautery method.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And if you must let the humors in the body flow freely, it is necessary to use another kind of cautery, with which one can be cauterized by a physician.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to that side which is the opposite of the one they have already used for the other, then apply it there with a cushion.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And so you see, for gout, one needs to apply a hot cautery under the patient's legs, and another on their feet.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this method is that you sew the skin together with a needle, using the cushion to support the patient's intestine while making a stitch.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	And if they are to be stitched together by a special kind of stitching, it is recommended that they use their own judgment for your health.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	You are correct that the needle was inserted into the first part of the body, but I don't think this is a medical text.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then apply the heated iron to the patient's legs to prevent them from being closed.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this way of stitching is better than the common light stitches.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the translation of the first three sentences you provided.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	When you cauterize the patient's foot, be careful that the heat does not damage the surrounding tissue.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	You only translate that which is difficult to translate:
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	And then the treatment for the plague is medicine for all other ailments.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	Then put it under the feet of the patient.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And so if you apply a cautery to the affected area, it will be cured by fire if the air has already left the body, which is usually called the foot.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	The phrase "Mays si a tu" in the provided context suggests the meaning: **"May the use of bandages" or "And if the patient needs a bandage."**
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	When the plague affects the main limbs, it is customary for doctors to call it gout.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if there is pain in the intestines, place a cushion there.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And it is easier to heal something in the legs than in the chest.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	Then apply the treatment for the plague to their legs, apply a poultice to the patient's body, and hold a bandage on the affected area.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	May this be a modern translation of "May the plague be upon you" and the other leg muscles are affected by the fever.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	When there is no inflammation, the patient may have a fever and their legs are black from the cushion and other methods, you must cauterize them.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And if you are to cure the plague, then apply another incision on their limbs, which will relieve them from its grip.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Then apply a hot compress to their legs.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	If there is inflammation in the foot, it is good practice to cauterize the area.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then apply the cauterization to the patient's legs, for this is the place where the pain resides.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And if you find that a wound has healed poorly, causing pain in the patient's body, apply heat to the area around the wound on their legs, and a cushion should be placed under them so they don't need to worry about the wound.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	The two lines below are the most accurate translation of the provided text:
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then the patient's condition should be assessed to see if they need more or less cautery.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then treat the affected area with heat to relieve the pain.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	This text appears to be a combination of Italian and English words, likely indicating a playful or experimental use of language.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	Then treat with ants (presumably as a remedy).
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	When the plague is great and widespread, there will be more suffering than relief.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	A cushion is placed under the patient's legs and another on their feet.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	If you understand, doctors say that such an ailment should be called by its true name.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And if you are a doctor who needs to make a cut on a patient's body, then always use a cautery.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And in some men it heals by itself after some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And some humors are thick and moist, and others are thin and watery.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	Then apply a cautery to the area of the intestine to prevent infection from spreading.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	When you cauterize, apply heat to the affected area to release the pain.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And now I will tell you how to treat a fistula which requires surgery for its cure.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And if they have a fistula in their body, one should apply it to their bowels, or the veins and arteries, or the bones, or the spine, on the parts of the body where the intestines are, and on the bones.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	Therefore, that which is difficult to heal is called gout.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	If the body's humors are too strong, you should apply a poultice to it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	Mays es que el dolor se cura con un cautery of the finest lead.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	If there are fistulas in the patient's legs, it is called a fistula.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then place a cushion under their feet, and hold another one on their legs.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	Then apply pressure to the area around the abscess or boil, so that you may keep the pus from spreading.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And then you will be able to see the true nature of the disease.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then return the patient's thigh to its proper place after the operation.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	And if the fistula is a long way from the skin, and as directed by the physician, you must carefully place a cautery on the wound.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	Then apply a bandage to the patient’s legs and if necessary hold the other end of the bandage.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And if it is necessary to restore the body's health, the patient should be placed on a cushion.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	Mays is short for "Mayes" which is the Latin for "May I say".
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is a case of a fistula affecting a major organ, then you should treat it as such, for it is a serious condition.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	When you have to treat a patient's foot pain, use the appropriate technique for the type of ailment.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	Then if it is not healthy, you may have to consider whether the condition can be cured by removing a cushion that has been placed there.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it is not cured, it will spread throughout the body.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the bone is rotten, use small tweezers to remove them.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if you must use a cushion to apply it to the bones where the pain is located, then place your hand there, too.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	Then apply cautery to the patient's limbs if they are afflicted by pain from other causes, as the physician sees fit.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	Then place your hand on the patient's flesh to relieve the pain in the leg.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	And from these other joints, if they are affected by inflammation, it is customary to call them gouty.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if the fire in the body is extinguished, the plague will return.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	Then apply a cushion to the affected area.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And if you want to know how to treat gout in men, consult a doctor.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Then, if you have a wound on a person's body, place a poultice on it, and if they are young, put them in a position to be cauterized.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And then apply the cold to the affected area for relief from pain.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then the doctor will call for many remedies to be applied to the affected area.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And he was looking at the body of the patient to see if there were wounds on his feet and a yellow color appeared.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then apply a bandage to the affected area.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Then place your hand on the affected area to hold their legs open and see if there are any signs of disease in the legs.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then they will be able to cauterize the wound on their foot.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then apply a cautery to its place on the body near the affected area already treated by medicine.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	Then if I've understood correctly, you will already have placed your hand on their legs or feet to cauterize them.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	Then apply the poultice with restorative medicine on the patient's legs for a long time, and do not let them go cold.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And if the patient's leg needs to be opened up, one should use the other methods first.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And so the patient's intestines are affected by the cold humors, but not cauterized.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then he will be able to apply his knowledge on the leg by cauterizing it with a small amount of heat.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to make further points in the operation if they are for a bad condition.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so, if you've got a hard lump in your body, apply a cushion to their condition and no resistance from it.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	And if a member of your body needs to be a part of the treatment.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And then apply the knife to the affected area, carefully avoiding cutting the flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	The patient's condition worsens when their gout causes pain to spread throughout the body.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If a wound is found in the thigh, it is covered.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And if there's a need to cut into the affected area, do so carefully.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	Continue to incise the joint if there are signs of corruption in the affected area.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	When there are another body part other than your hand that needs to be cauterized, you should know it is a process for treating ailments through burning.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	Then apply cauterization to the affected area.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	This passage translates to:
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	Then you have to know that there are many ways to use it.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	Then you will see a cushion placed on his chest, which you must now treat.
Forma de serra:	And if it is a pain in the joints:
Forma de autra serra:	This refers to a type of sergery, but I don't know what "a quascun" means.
Forma de autra serra:	A form of gout that affects the legs was called "gout" by the doctors.
Forma de autra serra gran:	Forma (shape) of autra (other) things, not just the legs or body part you are referring to.
Forma de ray:	A sharp pain in the legs, they say, is caused by humors that are infiltrating the body through the feet.
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	The patient's foot be now open to the rest of the body.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	It is not appropriate to translate that phrase by phrase.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	A form of the razor most severe among all others.
Forma de razori menor:	A form of gout.
Forma de razori lat:	Shape of the razor.
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	A method to treat gout is used in this manner.
Forma de lu:	Another interpretation of the pain in the body, could be that they are swollen.
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	This may refer to a specific type of razor used in treatments for the ailment caused by an imbalance of humors that was called "gout" in those days.
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Here comes the translated sentence: And if the patient has gout, and the foot must be treated.
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	This sentence describes how to treat a person suffering from gout.
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	The text you provided describes a medical procedure, likely using a tool called a "budel" (Translation 3).
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Then apply a hot cautery to their legs.
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	And so take care of the other forms of the body:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	And if the patient's pain is caused by a cut in the foot, then apply a hot iron to their leg;
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Then, when the metrical needle is used, the patient should be treated with a pointed cautery.
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	I would guess that the first part of the sentence means: And then the extremeties are triangular and of acute sharpness.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And if it's caused by iron from India, it's also called an Indian burn.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	The cushion is placed on their legs.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	Then return the patient to their usual health, or at least treat them as if they were healthy.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	When the body is affected by the disease of blackening, it is treated with a cushion.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly, if the pain is caused by venomous causes, it is due to the poison in the body.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the wound is on the finger, cut the finger and place the cushion in its proper position so that the surgeon can apply it to the patient's leg.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly if you are treating the intestine, use a cushion to protect the area from being burnt.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you are cauterizing the patient's leg or arm, they should be positioned so as to allow for the application of a cautery to the affected limb.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	When pain comes from the heat of the body, it's called a fever, and when it comes from the surface of the body, that's called a cold.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, if there are corrupting humors in the leg, you should apply a cautery to the legs and put another on the leg's surface, which will serve to cleanse the corruption.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And apply the pointed cautery to the leg, and keep it out for the rest of the time.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	The physician may diagnose the condition by examining the affected joint.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	Then treat them with a poultice, and they must be allowed to die out.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the manner of cutting into the limb or the leg is that you always place a cushion under the knee when needed.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And if it is necessary to apply a treatment, make sure the patient doesn't have it applied to their legs, unless you want to treat something on them.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	Mays o: May I say that when you use cauterization for medical purposes, it's important to be careful to avoid injuring the patient.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And apply it to the affected area within that will heal.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	This practice was to be used on their legs, which were swollen, so I put my hands on them.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And then the physician will operate on the patient's leg to treat the affected part.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	If the pain in the intestines is so severe that it causes a burning sensation, then apply the treatment for it.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	For a long time, it has been believed that the patient has a cushion in their chair.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	A cushion was placed on his legs to stop the pain caused by excess humors in his body.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And if you wish to know how to make them a cure for that ailment, they must be made to stop their activities.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	But if the man's intestines are inflamed, he should be treated with a cautery to reduce swelling.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And then place a cushion under their legs to prevent them from suffering further pain.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of the treatment of enflamed bowels with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	And if it is necessary to place a cushion on the body, use another cushion for the same purpose.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	But nonetheless if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the foot or any other part of the body, it is customary to use them for a cushion for the intestine.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And let that pain be treated by burning those which are caused by cold humors, and to make sure the patient doesn't have complications from it.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	Then if you are in need of purging the bowels, use a hot cauteri on the patient's legs to reduce that which has infiltrated them, and apply a clysma to treat it.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And then apply the poultice to the affected area, applying pressure with your hand to make sure the cushion is placed on the legs properly.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And you have applied a cushion to their feet; lay for two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then apply heat to the affected area to draw out the illness.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	Then sometimes it is treated with a mixture of water and ashes.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the patient has no tolerance for the Egyptian cure, you must use honey and water to make him tolerate it.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And if the patient's condition allows, you should apply a clyster to their rectum.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And then apply your hand to the affected area; apply the other to the bandages around the foot, which are used for this purpose.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if it is necessary to apply a small needle to the area for which he is using a hot poultice, then you must carefully apply a cushion between the legs before applying the needle.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And if you find the patient's orifices are swollen, apply a cushion to their bowels, and another to their abdomen, in order to make them more comfortable.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And then elevate that which the patient's body has already been opened to, in order to let the cushion know which are the parts where the doctor should apply a poultice.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	Then prepare the arm with its cushion in case of the patient's need.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And apply cushions under your feet to relieve pain from inflamed joints.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	Then you must cauterize it so that the intestine does not protrude.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	And if it is necessary to hold the body above the ground on their legs by those who have the gout, then hold them up.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And know that if it is a pain in the arm or foot, it is known by doctors as a type of inflammation.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	Then consider the location of that pain, and if there is an infection in the area.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	Then apply the medicine in the same manner as described above, or to the patient's legs, and when the medicine has been applied in this way for three days, then you may use a different method if needed.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	And if there are obstructions in the body, and you apply a cushion to them, they will remain closed.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	If the patient's body has been affected by excess mucus, and the inflammation is prolonged, it is necessary to apply the medicaments in a dry form.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	If the patient's legs are treated with cautery, then another thing to do is place a cushion under them.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	Then apply a poultice to their joints.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes you use (the) herbs to treat them (the patient's ailment) and apply the long-held tradition of knowledge.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	Then if you are treating the pain in the bones or other hard parts of the body, you have to use your hands to apply the treatment.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	And those who are treating a wound in the foot should be careful that the patient's bowels do not protrude.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	The body is treating the patient with an infected toe.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	Then apply your hand to the affected area, and then use a cautery to treat the pain there.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	When bones are affected by cold humors, they will be treated with cautery.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	And if there is corruption in the bones, it is customary to treat them by burning with a cautery.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the disease and corruption are in the legs, treat it by making an incision there.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	When the joint pain is severe, apply a bandage to the affected area, and use a hot cautery for a time on the foot to relieve the pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	And if they are ill, the doctor should apply heat to their legs to prevent the spread of disease.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	A pointed wound or one that causes pain in the foot is another name for gout.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	And for those who have been born in the case of their being born in a specific location, they are called gouty by the doctors.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And for those who are born fleshy, it is said to be gout.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	Mays the pain in the patient's legs or feet is caused by other things.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you are in need of knowing the nature of the pain, it will be necessary to use a cautery on their legs.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	So if you see the signs of a swelling in the human body, you can translate it as:
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then you must apply a poultice to draw out the humor from their body.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly if it is necessary to apply a plaster on the leg, it should be done on the leg according to the form of the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	From the incision of vices, it is treated as gout.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices are often seen as the cause of a variety of ailments, such as gout.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then use a strong purgative on the basilica vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The treatment of gout depends on whether the pain is caused by the disease itself or by an inflammation of the joints.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	This is a single translation for the entire body.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then he lies down there, and commands that they abstain from their food, for the black fever is upon them.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	E. if the patient's veins are congested, they should be treated by bloodletting.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	If the patient has pain in the legs, they should be treated with warm water on the feet so they don't suffer from gout.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And if you must cauterize a patient's vein, use a hot iron to cauterize in the right or left side.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	Then apply another cushion to their chest, preventing further discomfort.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	Therefore, when you open the intestines or the bladder to relieve the pain, it's necessary to do so carefully, ensuring the patient understands the cause of their illness.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And do you place a cushion under their feet, to prevent the cushion from getting in the way.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	When the patient's body has already been treated with a cauterization, then it should be treated again in the same way, but with a pointed tool to make small incisions on the vein.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then you must elevate the patient's foot and hold it in a place where the pain resides, but avoid cutting into the affected area.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And then, the patient’s condition is that the patient is in a state to be healed by cauterization.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	If they do not obey your treatment, try to remove the needle from the body.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	Apply a cushion under the patient's legs to prevent them from leaving the bed.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when the patient has a fever, they are to be treated with cautery and a poultice.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the pain is in the stomach or bowels, it is called a colic.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	Keep in mind that the first is translated as "on the thighs" while the other two are translated as "the" and "use a hot iron".
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Causing pain in the patient's legs.
Forma de unci orp:	Apply a poultice made from herbs to reduce inflammation.
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	A person should only be called "suffering from gout" if they are experiencing a sharp pain in their feet; for a person with a large mass, it is a sign of a more serious condition.
De extraccio venae cruris.	On the legs, there are other things.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This disease appears to be caused by an imbalance of humors in the body, particularly those associated with the feet, as if they were imbued with a special kind of ailment or something.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And if other diseases are involved in the body, you will have to treat them first.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And then, under the patient's feet, place the other cushion.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de l’adulacció de la vena que s'infundutz la vena es a hotbed of pain for those who suffer from its painful nature.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then when you have opened the body by the groin, place a cushion on their feet so that the humors may not leave them.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And if there are pains in the legs or elsewhere, apply your hand with a cautery to the affected area to prevent further damage.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the pain is prolonged, you will cauterize the affected area to prevent further infection.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	The condition of gout requires careful treatment, avoiding any harshness and proceeding gently so as to keep the body from being harmed by the process.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein it grows long in some men, and another should be placed on the legs of the man.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is necessary to make incisions on the patient's feet for surgery, they will be treated with a hot cautery.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	When a pain occurs in the legs, it is customary to apply a poultice.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And if you are already treating someone for a condition similar to Latin, use the cushion.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	And when treating a patient with a worm under their skin, it is called bovine surgery.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This illness is called gout in some places, and this is what happens to a person who has gout, which causes pain in their body.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And if there are bad humors in the stomach, it is customary to call it gout, and these are caused by the other ailments of the body.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	This translates to: "And if it is necessary to make bloodletting on the patient's feet"
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And when you wish to cure that which is causing pain in the patient's foot, the one who is treating it should apply a cautery to the area, and another person should hold the patient's leg firmly.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you are burned in the flesh, it is said that the bowels are affected by the heat from the fire.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	Then return the sick person to their body, for they are already suffering from the evils of the evil-humored; when they have been treated with a cautery.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	On the subject of gout, the treatment involves removing excess humors.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called gout in our land; it causes pain in the joints which are affected by inflammation.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And when I see you, I will tell you what to do.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	And I saw a woman who had suffered a slight injury to her leg, just as if it were a small wound on a living arm.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	Then the patient's pain was felt in the tendons for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	Then place another one on the other side of the body to keep the pain localized.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And you put a cushion on their legs, and your hand on their feet.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And you have already seen this in those who have gout.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	Thus, I do not know what a "m"ays" is, but it is likely referring to an ailment or condition.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And if you are not a cushion, then the cause of the woman's ailment is something else, such as a different kind of illness or some other condition.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And by this method, you can treat the affected part.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	The "de cushion" is placed on their legs to prevent them from being too heavy during the surgery.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	Then, if you don't do it, you will cure the patient with a poultice of that which stinks from bad humors.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Another servant on their legs for drawing out the fluids from the body.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are made in different ways, some with sharp points for the body, some with other types of points for use on the body, some for cutting into the body, some for the joints, some for the treatment of other ailments.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And thus if I were to apply cauterization to an injury on a limb, I would make points on the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And if the doctor's touch causes pain to the other parts, such as the feet, then they are filled with colera, and you should apply a cushion to the affected area, and treat them for their condition.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And if there are circumstances where the patient is being cauterized, then you must stop the bloodletting in the legs.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	If the pain is caused by a cold which has affected the left side, it is known as the left side of the body being too hot for its own good, and if the person has a fever that they are not sick.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And when the plague has affected the body with its symptoms, and the patient's body is weak from the pain in their legs.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	Then if the pain in the legs is caused by an arrow, it is near the foot.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	The arrow of your pain should be treated by burning the area to close the wound.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	There is hope for curing the intestine if there are no complications present.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow has pierced the body, it causes pain in the legs. And if it comes out from the wound it will be fatal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	This person's body parts are being treated for inflammation.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	Then you will see the other cushion on their chest.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	This refers to the cause of tears in the eyes, which are treated by placing a cushion under them and applying pressure on the affected area.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	When the patient has pain in their legs, they are often treated with cauterization.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	When the Juizeu is ill, it is often accompanied by pain in the legs and feet.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And if you have placed a cushion on their legs for them to be comfortable.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And so you have extracted the arrow from the body, which is what the others say should be done when pain appears in the stomach.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And if there are no other signs, then he is being treated for another ailment.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	The woman's body was plagued by illness, so she fell ill.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And if he has not received medical attention for his pain, then he should be seen by someone who knows how to treat it.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And so that the patient's bowels are not harmed by the arrow, we place cushions on his right side and protect his head with a cushion.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And you have to leave the patient alone for three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Then I found that the arrow had struck her in the right foot, causing a plague called "the other" to be afflicted on her.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And place a poultice on the wound.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	The physician must apply his treatment to the affected area for several days, but also take care that the patient does not have any further complications.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	Then, with a delicate cautery, hold your hand on the patient's feet for as long as necessary, so that the pain does not return.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And apply heat for as long as four months to treat the disease.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	This text seems to be describing how to treat a condition where someone's intestines are protruding. It appears to be written in a mixed language that draws from Italian, Spanish, and Latin medical terminology.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	The doctors are saying that if they have already cauterized the patient's body for a medical procedure, and then another place on the body needs to be cauterized, they should only use it on the area where needed.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	E tu also apply this treatment to those who are in pain from the disease of gout.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And if the physician can find no other cause for the pain, he will apply heat to the affected area.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	Therefore, I say that arrows are not shot from the limbs in which they are lodged but rather from the opposite side.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And if it is necessary to treat the affected area, one should apply a poultice to the area.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	Then, if you wish to avoid pain in the body's joints, apply a cushion for a few days.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery on his legs, they should be kept in place for several days, and then the person's legs should be moved carefully.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not open the wound further, carefully remove the cushion.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	Then the days will be few in which the physician can be applied to the extraction of the arrow, and pain will be gone.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow remains in the body for several days, you may need to apply a poultice or other remedies to their legs.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If you are experiencing pain in your feet, it may be possible to treat them by addressing the cause.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the arrow has pierced the body of the patient, they will be treated by cautery, which is used for other ailments as well, but a cushion should be placed on the thighs to prevent further pain.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot apply your hand to the affected area, apply it to the chest so that the plague will be removed.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if there are other things that are necessary for the patient's well-being, you must use those to help them.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	Then use your hand to apply pressure to the arrow so that it can be removed carefully.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	When the pain does not subside after a few days, they will be considered for treatment.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	When there is pain in the cavity, it is called "le" by the doctors.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	Then do as you are able to apply your skill to the patient's health in all ways possible.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And so, for the sake of clarity, we will call this condition the pain of the stomach, which can be caused by other things.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	Then apply heat to the affected area.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	Then, if you feel pain in the foot or other affected areas, use forceps to treat it.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	It is customary to treat pain in the legs by cauterization, which are placed cushions or bandages on the affected area.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And so leave it at that for a few days, and apply cautery to the patient's feet.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	Then you apply a hot poultice to the wound on their legs.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	Mays si es sorda, it would be appropriate to use a cauterizer on the thighs.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	When the pain is severe, one may need to apply a cushion, and place another cushion on their chest, or the like, to prevent it from being relieved by cauterization.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If you are afflicted by the pain in the foot, then you must use a cautery to treat it.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to their feet, or to the sides of the chest, one should carefully hold the cautery near these areas.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	A form of tongs is used to apply the arrows:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	And let cushions be placed under the arms of the patient.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	Then apply cautery to the patient's body according to the severity of their ailment.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	This form of medicine was used to treat those who are afflicted with gout, which is a disease that affects the foot.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	The shape of the form of the disease is already known.
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	So too if pain occurs in the patient's thighs, then a cushion should be placed under their legs to relieve them.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	And concerning the treatment of bloodletting from the veins, it is as follows:
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	And if there are other humors causing pain in the body, they must be treated accordingly.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	And for those who are in pain, which is what they are called by the common people, which is caused by the inflammation of the body, they are a vein on which the patient has been touched, and another that is a cushion or something like that, it is necessary to apply a hot compress.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And if there are three veins in the foot; one from the wild type gout and the other two from the domestic type.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	And then apply a cauterization to the foot which is where they are at.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And if it is necessary to treat the patient's condition, they are given cauterization on the limbs.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then take a sharp instrument and make a puncture in the vein.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And apply the cautery to the hand's vein to stop it from swelling out.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And if it is the quantity of two ounces of blood that must be released.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And so the patient must be treated with strength and a cushion for their legs must be placed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And there has been a cushion placed for them, so they don't have to hold their hands on the outside.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	When the pain occurs in the foot, it is customary to call it gout.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	You are referring to a condition in which you see the veins on their feet are swollen, or if there is a problem with their feet.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And elevate the leg to the level of the other legs so that the blood flows freely.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery, then use leeches on the legs, and place a cushion under their feet.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And then it is necessary to remember the patient's cautery and another cushion, and to place them in their proper position.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And so if it is necessary to bleed the patient from the front, they can be bled by the cephalic vein.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the patient's blood is judged by the way in which it is affected by the use of the cauteri.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then let them cauterize the area where the pain is located.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some uses are for the legs, others for the feet.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	When the veins are affected by scabies and need to be treated, it is necessary to use specific methods.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the bandage is tied to the patient's foot, a cushion used for another part of the body.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	Then apply the cauterization to the vein on the foot, for the patient's flesh should be protected from such things as are used for bloodletting.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And apply a cauter to the foot (for those who have a gout).
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	And bleeding the veins of the head was believed to be good for diseases of the face and those who are prone to headaches.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And if the patient has a wound on their foot, apply a poultice, because the wound is one that allows for the placement of a poultice to be used.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Cove that you use the following methods if necessary.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	Mays le,  "then" meaning "in the case of", or in the context of a medical procedure, "then apply" to suggest a specific action.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	The cushion placed on the patient's legs for the treatment.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And to cure the inflammation in the body's joints, they will apply a poultice on the affected area.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	Then place a cushion under their legs to protect them from the heat.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And if they are to be treated by venesection, it is necessary to treat them with a poultice on their foot.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The placement of a cushion on one's chest is a good way to stop them from being cold.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If there is uncertainty about which of these symptoms are present, then we can assume it is a case of the most obvious.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	"And then the two veins in the thighs are to be considered."
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It is customary for doctors to treat wounds on the lips by stitching them together.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	The text you provided appears to be written in a combination of languages, potentially with some spelling errors that make it difficult to translate accurately.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And if it is necessary to apply heat to the affected area, they will be treated with a cushion on the affected leg.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	Then pay attention to the following:  I am but a humble cushion-bearer, but you should know that if I were to be a good doctor's assistant, you must perform the following actions in this specific order.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Gout is often called a "running" illness in the medical texts of this time, and other doctors might refer to it as something similar to a fever or inflammation.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And if there are no other methods to cure such ailments, we use cauterization as a last resort.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	This sentence needs more context! It seems like you're asking me to translate something that might be related to the previous examples.
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	And when the patient suffers from gout, it is necessary to apply a hot poultice to their legs and feet.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is how you perform a bloodletting properly.
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And if you have already opened their veinous passages, this is the way to treat them with cauterization.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	Mays le is another name for the other vein: those who are sick to the point of needing a doctor, which translates to "And if it is necessary"
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And if it is necessary to open the humors that are blocked and allow them to be adjusted by a cushion so that the patient doesn’t feel pain in their legs during the procedure.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if no physician is available, then the patient's legs should be kept warm to keep the humors from their feet.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	The bloodletting should be done in the arm, and the surgeon should take care to use the lancet to make incisions on the appropriate parts of the arm, knowing where to perform the bloodletting.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	So if you want to keep the pain from the joints or other parts of the body under control.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	Then apply a cushion to that part of the body where the blood was being drawn.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And be careful about the patient's health for several days after.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	When the pain is in the joints, apply cautery to the affected area; if you are treating the patient's legs, use a cushion if they have an inflamed joint or need to be treated with hot compresses.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if it is necessary to cauterize a wound in the leg, then use another cushion on the other part of the body to prevent bleeding.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And if you apply heat to their legs, it will be difficult in the area where the plague has spread.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	This text describes the use of a poultice for treating an ailment affecting the body.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And if blood is drawn from the leg, and so forth, in the case of a wound, it is customary to cauterize the area.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if it is necessary to cut the vein, apply cautery on another part of their body.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	Leeches are used in bloodletting from the head vein, which causes blood to be drawn out and relieves pressure on the body.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	If you want to cauterize the patient's thigh or foot, then cauterize with a cushion.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	When it is necessary to treat the patient's leg or foot with the use of bleeding, it is best to do so at the beginning, when the pain is still less severe.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	Then apply a cushion to the area for another wound on their legs or feet.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	And if you are applying leeches to a patient's wounds, think about their location.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	Le leeches are used to draw blood from the veins, but they are also used for the treatment of cephalic, femoral, or basilica ailments.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	Then let them be bled three times a day.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	The operation should be done on the patient's legs during the day or night.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	The patient should be burned (treated with cauterization) if they have been suffering from pain for more than seven months.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the foot, do so carefully so as not to damage the vital organs.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And if the patient has been ill with a fever, and if the doctor wants to treat them for their illness or drunkenness, they should have no hesitation to use cautery.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	Then consider applying heat to the affected area of the foot.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And if it is necessary to make an incision in the foot, they should be made below the knee.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	So perform the phlebotomy on the patient's foot, as it is done in the afternoon.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And so let the patient's legs be guarded from pain caused by these things: animals, which are a danger to him, and also other physical hardships or pains.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And if it's necessary to apply cautery to the legs, it is done by applying heat to the affected area.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And if it's necessary to perform surgery on the patient, and that's what they need.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And then, it is said, apply a hot iron to the arm of the patient two or three times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if there's a stricture in the legs, then it is forbidden to treat it with cautery.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And if it is necessary to treat the bowels, put your hand on their stomach for relief.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And if the patient's vein is already full of blood, put a cushion under their left hand, for that is where they would apply the bloodletting.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, the doctor must be consulted for these purposes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And if there is no need for a hot poultice on the intestine, then apply heat to the intestines, but only enough so that the patient can tolerate it, because it is necessary to avoid pain to the patient.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the patient experiences pain, use leeches to treat them, but don't apply too many or let them bleed for too long; only use a few on their feet.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	Then apply bloodletting if it is necessary for the patient.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	When doctors cauterize the body, they use specialized tools.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	When your body needs to be cleansed from gout, then use other methods for treating the intestine.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And the best remedy for this disease is found in these parts.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly apply oil to your hands, if necessary, for all such wounds, but only apply it to those who are healthy and are not already experiencing a fever from inflammation.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	E if the patient's body has been opened for cauterization, if they have a large swelling in the area, then use a cushion to apply pressure to the affected area on their leg and they will need to be treated with surgery.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And if you want to prevent pain in the cavity of that body part, it is customary to apply a cautery there.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if you wish to know what kind of pain caused by the disease we are discussing is caused by, it is due to the infiltration of humors, which in this case would be treated with a poultice of myrrh and other remedies.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	"Then apply the cauterization to their legs, so they are subject to bloodletting."
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And therefore apply a cushion to the affected area if you have determined the cause of the ailment.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a poultice to harden the area where the pain originates.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And so if there is a need to draw out the fluids from a patient's body, then place a cushion under their legs, and put another on them, and then another that has been placed under the feet will be used.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	When if it is black, you should also cauterize the area of the stomach.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And if bloodletting is necessary to cleanse the body from the excess of bad humors, apply another in the chest area.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And if it is necessary to treat the inflammation with cushions, it should be applied to the opposite side of the body.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And if it is necessary to draw blood from the vein for treatment, it should be done through incision, not cautery.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This practice is commonly called bloodletting.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	Then apply a tourniquet to the leg above the point where the bloodletting will be done.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	Then apply cautery to the area of the body where they are placed.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if a patient has pain in their bowels or feet, they should be treated with a cautery.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And treat the other causes (of fainting) by drawing blood from them.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	If you want to treat them in a specific way, such as a doctor might use a poultice or a bandage on their limbs.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	Mays that the patient's body be prepared for another surgery by opening their veins to drain excess blood; then the veins are made ready.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	Here comes the second cushion for the body.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	Mays, you must apply your cushion to the patient's legs when they have fever so that if they are sick, the doctor can treat them properly.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And if you are purging the arm, and doing so too quickly, it will cause pain to the patient.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	When the patient's body is weakened by illness, it is treated with light cauterization.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	The doctors may call it gout if the inflammation has spread to the joint.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	When there's a blockage in the intestines, use a cushion to protect them.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And if a cushion is placed on the arm, another on their legs, and a bandage is used for “funis del bras” (the pain in the arm) and another for the basilica (the arms), then that is what it is.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And if you wish to apply a cautery point on the thigh or other part of the body of the patient, make sure they have a cushion under their feet so that the foot doesn't become cold and cause pain.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery on their legs; but don't apply cautery across the grain.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	You can cauterize a small area.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	E si es que you are to apply cauterization.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	When it's cold, you should keep your legs in warm water.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And so the bloodletting would be done on the legs of the patient.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	When it is necessary to bleed from the right side of the body, they will use a cautery to prevent bleeding out.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the nature of the phlebotomy, which is practiced by doctors, is to make incisions in the body, so that they are open for bloodletting.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And if you have to put off the burning of your own flesh, place a cushion on their legs instead.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And if it is necessary to apply heat to the patient's legs, they should be placed on the other leg or feet.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And similarly, when you are treating someone for an injury, apply a cushion to their knee and another on the chest to prevent further injury.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	And if the left hand side is that which is weak, then the left side should be treated with bloodletting on the left side.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And for the lancing of the other limbs, a cushion should be placed under them as well as on their legs.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And if the patient has a swollen foot, you have already performed the procedure on the other leg.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And if the cushion is placed on their legs, it will prevent the patient's foot from hurting.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And so you can say that the patient's health is good.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	When you are treating a patient for an ailment, you may place cushions under their arms or legs, but never on the part of the body that is being treated by bloodletting.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And if it is necessary, use another sharp instrument.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	Then you must cauterize it; this is how you do it: first, use a hot iron to remove the blood from the area by letting it flow out.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomist errs in the first cauterization, it’s customary to repeat the procedure on their arms, because those are the places where you put a cushion in the first attempt.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And if it is a cushion that is placed under them (the patient's legs) or on their feet, which is also called a poultice.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	E then make sure to apply your hand to the talus bone to prevent pain in the foot.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	Then use a cushion to perform a phlebotomy on him/her.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the nature of your ailment is such that the pain is in the lower abdomen, and you have already placed a cushion on their legs, and another on their chest, so that they do not feel the pain.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	Therefore, when the patient's body is exposed to the cold in a manner that causes pain, and if a wound is made on the legs, then you must cauterize them with a cushion of gold.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And if it is necessary to perform surgery on the human body, it is done by doctors.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And let it be known about the nerves, and if they are affected by a disease, you will know it's not gout.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then if it is a small area, another incision should be made there.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of the treatment of intestinal obstructions, which is how you treat it.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	And you should also use cushions for their legs or arms.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	The text speaks of two ways to perform bloodletting, one using a blade to cut the skin, the other involving the extraction of humors from the body.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And if you want to make a cut on the body part, you should use a hot iron for cauterization.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And if the patient has had a hot poultice applied to their chest, which are used for wounds, and another poultice on the feet because they have a pain in their feet.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	Then apply cauterization to the veins only if necessary.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	This phrase refers to the treatment of pain caused by illness or ongoing ailments.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	And here comes the question: how to treat it?
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	Therefore, when you apply it on the legs for any reason, and only then do so if necessary.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And if the spine is affected by pain, then you should apply your hand to the area that requires treatment.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This ventosa (bloodletting) is in the cephalic vein area, and they were going to cut the veins there.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And if the person has an illness of the leg or foot, they are to be treated with a leeching (for illnesses) and cauterization (for other ailments).
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And if you need to use cautery on them, be sure they are healed from their ailments.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	And for those who are in pain, apply the cushion to the area of the pain; for example, if the patient has an infiltrated limb, place a cushion on their leg.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	And apply heat to the patient's thighs, already prepared for the operation, as well as placing cushions under them.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And if the patient has been treated with cupping, it is customary to place a cushion under them to prevent the pain from spreading to the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	Then apply hot compresses to the legs of the patient suffering from pain in their legs; those who have a tendency towards gout.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And if you command the use of a cushion on the patient's legs.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the gums in the mouth, use a cushion for support.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	And if it is necessary to use a cautery on the patient, use a cushion under their feet for that.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And if you wish to draw blood from the two parts of the body, they are three veins that are in the flesh, put a cushion on their own, and apply suction with the cupping glasses to the three largest veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the doctor to use a tool on the area that is exposed.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And place a cushion on their legs, and a bandage to protect the cauterized area.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	When you use the large, blunt cautery, you must be careful to avoid using a sharp tool on the patient's feet.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	This refers to gout, a disease characterized by painful inflammation in the joints due to the buildup of uric acid crystals, and explains how the treatment involved applying heat to the affected areas.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	This is a difficult one, but based on the context provided and the similarities to Latin, Italian, and Spanish words for "faint" (Latin: *per* "through", *periculum*, "danger"), "in" (*in*), and "fall into" (*accidentalment* "accidentally") I would guess:
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from their thighs they have drawn out the poison.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And if you put a cushion on the legs or feet, use a small amount of heat to apply the leech for a mild treatment.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	Then return the patient's legs to the cushion.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	Then place a hot cautery on their legs, and apply to them the other things that are customary for treating the intestine.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	When a man suffers from gout, you must open up the area where it occurs and place a cushion on it, so that he does not feel pain in his legs and feet.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And tell the attendant to make the incision deeper.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if there are cushions placed between the legs to cushion them.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	When the patient has a severe pain in their legs, they should be placed on their back, cushioned between the legs, and held down by a cushion on their chest with both hands.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	Then apply a cauterization to the abdomen.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And then, if necessary, the blood can be let out of their foot.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we wish to have a bloodletting, then apply a cauterization elsewhere.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And here comes the pain in the leg only.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	In the summer months, it's customary to call it gout; in the winter, it's called a different name.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the swelling is severe, place a poultice on their stomach.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If the pain is in the joints and caused by an excess of cold humors, then you must understand that it is called gout.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	The pain is alleviated by applying a cushion to the affected area.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And if the patient complains about pain in their legs, apply rosemary, or other herbs, to their body.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	If you have already opened the intestine on which the patient has been operated, it is recommended that you place a cushion under their foot to prevent swelling.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	And you should place a cushion under their feet before applying the cupping therapy.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	At the start of treatment, it's important to consider the patient's condition at the beginning: if they are chilled, use cushions for warmth; if their body produces too much heat, use cooling remedies; if they have a fever, apply the poultice to cool them down.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	Then you will apply heat to their legs with cautery.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And from the patient's body, especially under their thighs, there is a need for them to drink less, which is why they are given a poultice of watercress and vinegar.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And if the patient has pain in their legs due to the wind, then they should be given a cushion for their veins and another cushion on their feet.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	E beure que the patient's drink is given in a timely manner.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	If you are treating the feet with cupping therapy, the patient should be treated in such a way that the first one's body will not be injured.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And if it is necessary to translate the patient's body, apply a cushion to their legs, and if they have pain in the foot or elsewhere, another method should be used.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And then you place a cushion on the foot of the patient.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	E semblantment fa when you apply heat to the body, one applies heat to the other in the following way: to the liver, and the cushion on which the patient sits.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these cupping treatments are administered only by suction; no other tools are used.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	Then apply a hot cautery to the affected area, which will be treated for the ills that the patient suffers.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	Then use a heated poultice to treat the patient's humors.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Forma de ventoza es un tipo de treatment for the ailment of gout.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Then place a cushion under the legs, or use another cushion on their chest if it is necessary to keep them from being exposed.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And if it is necessary for the patient to be treated with a burning candle, they should be put out.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And if it's necessary to treat someone for this disease, use cauterization.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the leeches apply the cups to their legs, the others being held back by the young ones or exhaustion and another.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of making a cauterization with fire on the part of the body where the candela de la ventoza is applied to the leg so that the body's heat may be released through the candle.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And if the patient has a cushion, then they will have a place for the cushion to be placed.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And if the patient's leg is treated with another method (other than applying cautery), then apply a cushion to their legs.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	Then apply a wet cautery to the affected area.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This is how you treat a patient with a large ventoza: by applying more than one leech to each other's legs.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 97.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Gout can be treated with hot poultices.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And if the humors are found to be causing pain in the limbs.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	Then place the cushion on their legs, so that it can be used to apply leeches to the affected area for the treatment of gout.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	Then apply a hot poultice to the legs.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	Then if it's possible, apply suction to the area where the cushion was used.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	Then, if there is still a need, apply cauterization to prevent further damage.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if you have to apply leeches on the lower leg for prolonged use, let them rest there for a while.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if it is necessary to apply caustic lime to the body of the patient.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if leeches are used for this purpose, it is customary to use them on their body.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if leeches are prohibited from being used on the legs, the recent blood should be applied to the legs; et cetera.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you wish to cauterize, apply the cushion to the area to be cauterized.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	And thus begins the treatment for the third part, which is restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is essential to the art of medicine; it's about setting bones and treating dislocations.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	O son, beware of the dangers of this disease, which can affect anyone at any time, but you will be protected.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, they are called "the learned" in our knowledge of medicine.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And if it is necessary to apply heat to the body, use this as a guide.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	Then, I have learned from experience that these are called gouty attacks.
Capitol primier.	Chapter one.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	And another for those who have problems with their bones and joints and need to be treated by a doctor.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	This book teaches you how to understand the truth about the use of cauterization in medicine.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	Then cut the other legs when there are four or more in the body's joints, and if you want to treat a wound that affects the joints, apply a hot cautery.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And if you have to treat a patient with a diet controlled by herbs, use a cushion for comfort in the area where the pain is found.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the intestines to their proper place, and treat them with the appropriate remedies.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	E, therefore, when the bone is broken, it must be done gently with food to avoid a sharp pain.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	Then use a poultice for swollen joints to treat the ailment.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And if it is necessary to cauterize and treat the other ailments in the body, one should ensure the intestines or joints are treated accordingly.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	The patient's strength will return as soon as they are treated.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And thus it is necessary to treat him with a cushion on his legs, which are thick, so that the gouty foot does not move.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	The patient has many aches and pains in their limbs.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	When a patient's body experiences pain in the joints, they are often said to have gout.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I have seen the pain of gout in many parts of the body, including the legs, which is why we use different remedies for each part.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Mota diversitat means there are many types or kinds of fractures.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	E so the doctors don’t know what they are talking about, but some might say the intestine is another matter.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And if it is necessary to do something to their feet, they need a clear memory.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	And so we will cauterize the legs if it is necessary to prevent them from becoming weak.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	This is the first known example of a Latin description of gout.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	Therefore, when there's no apparent cause for pain in the patient's limbs, you must apply heat to the bone to relieve it.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	If you have a tendency to suffer from gout, apply a hot poultice to the affected area.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And if you know that the patient has an abscess, you should apply a poultice to the affected area.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if the patient's pain subsides after a few days, then the physician will continue to treat the patient with poultices and bandages.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And if your wisdom lies in knowing that a sharp pain in the legs is called a "leugiera" by doctors.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And if there comes a need to cauterize that which is already cauterized by another cushion.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If there are injuries to the bones, it may be necessary to cauterize two or more parts of the body: when bloodletting is needed for joint pain, cauterize on the small bones.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And in that position the broken bones will be treated to restore the intestine to its natural state, while the rest of the body's parts are left intact.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And so be careful to apply the cautery to the affected area only as much as necessary; and do not let your hands stray from their proper placement.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	Then do your best to apply this knowledge to the treatment of gout in the foot.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Then let the patient be treated by hot cautery, as many doctors believe.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	The cushion will be placed on the part where there is no pain.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	Translation: When the body is affected by imbalanced humors, it is customary for doctors to call it a constriction.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those who are small, use a soft cloth for the bandages.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	Then you have already opened the area of the foot, so large and strong that the pain in the foot does not spread to other parts.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And if the patient has pain in the joint, or the feet, that can be cured by a proper evacuation.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And if the wound is in the leg, then you should apply a poultice there.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Then gently apply pressure to the legs to elongate them a little at a time, so as to avoid the cushion being too large, for they are to be treated with care.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Then take a bandage and wrap the other leg.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	Then you will find out if the fracture is severe enough to be treated with cauterization.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	Then, when there are no other treatments left, you should apply a cushion to their legs and place them on their feet.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And be that (the) patient's body, like a reed is affected by the hot humors, and they are placed on the top of them.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	And if you need to apply heat to the affected area, use a cushion or something similar for treatment.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	Then you should use a cushion on their legs and feet.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And for a long time, there was no use to burn the affected area.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	Then place the cushion in the right place on the legs so that it doesn't cause damage.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes the pain returns to the legs.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	You see, if you're already treating a broken bone, you can't put your hand on it to diagnose or treat an infection.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is a description of how to apply a poultice:  "And with a cushion you place it on their legs, so that the patient does not have a cushion."
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	And to prevent the pain from the injury to be treated being on their legs, one must apply a bandage to them.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And if you have already opened the space between the legs, then use another cushion on the foot; treat the patient with a poultice made of other materials.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Then apply the poultice to the area and let the patient know that they should be treated for a cold or dampness.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	This describes how to treat a case of gout, which likely refers to a recipe for an ointment or poultice.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	Then apply a cushion under their feet.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	And if your body feels pain, apply a bandage to protect the area where the problem lies.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	And when the patient's illness is caused by heat, it is called inflammation.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Then, if you need to cauterize anything on their feet, put the hot iron on the affected area.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Take a piece of barley bread and soak it in wine to make a poultice for the treatment of abscesses; if you want to soften the bone, apply a paste made from these ingredients on the legs, and place the rest of the mixture on top.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's foot, then use a cushion for their pain.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	When treating an ailment in the legs or feet with these herbs, use these plants to address the ailment, depending on the type:
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	And if the patient has gout, apply the following remedy to the joint as soon as possible by placing a cushion under the affected area.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	This sentence seems to be describing a medical procedure involving cauterization.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	And if you want to treat a painful ailment that causes swelling, redness, and pain in the foot, here's what the doctor will prescribe.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	When there is pain in the body, it is proper to use a bandage and apply a poultice.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	Then apply a hot compress to the area of the foot where pain occurs.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Then apply that to the cushion and the patient's head should be treated with warm water and a sea sponge; place the cold compress on the affected area; and use the warm compress for an hour or so until the pain subsides.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if they have a stricture or inflammation, you must apply a cautery to their legs.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	Then you should apply cautery to treat the patient's boils, just as they do with swollen abscesses, and use bandages to keep them from reopening.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	When the limb is healed, you can leave it uncovered again.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	E altre mas e'n la taula del malaute
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	This sentence implies that the patient's legs are being treated with a method to remove the fracture from their bones.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	If the leg is broken and you want to avoid complications, apply a tourniquet.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	For I have seen that it is more reasonable to call it something else, for they are not used to apply cushions on their legs.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Of all the things mentioned in the text, the second one refers to the treatment of pain in the legs.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	There are many types of fractures.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the pain in their legs, which is common to both fractures and the patient's body, should be treated with a pointed cautery.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And if this injury is serious, you can use a bandage to hold it in place.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And if there is a fracture in the bone, it is called a fracture of the small bones.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And if a patient's body has been weakened by illness, they should be treated with care.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	Then apply cautery to the legs, to prevent the intestine from coming out.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And if there are fractures of these types, they are known as broken bones in the flesh.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And let the patient's leg be held in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And I will show you how to identify and treat these types of injuries.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And especially if there is a bruise, or another injury in the leg, they are cleansed by washing, and your hand is placed on them to see that it is not too painful.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	And when they have been treated by cauterization, you should know that the patient will be cured if the doctor understands the symptoms correctly at the beginning of the treatment, and also if the pain is in the bones, and therefore knows how to apply the appropriate treatment.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if it is an injury, you should put a cushion under them.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	When the cause of joint pain is cold humors, it is customary to treat them in the following way, according to the usual practice of doctors for a patient who has pain in their feet.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	When it is summer, the hot gouty pain comes from the heat.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	E si'l ha un'altra cosa que no puc veure en la traducció:
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And if you are treating the plague, which is a disease that affects the legs, you place a cloth over the body to see where the pain arises.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if there's a wound in the body, you can treat it with a poultice to draw out the blood.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And there are two types of surgery.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so there is one way to treat it, which is to apply a cautery directly on the bone and another on the bone itself, but only if the latter has been affected by cold vapors, otherwise it is called gout.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And apply more cushions to the patient's legs, so that the second one doesn’t get too much pain.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And if the patient's limbs are affected by various humors, some of which are hot and others cold, it is customary to call it pain from a disease of the metatarsal joints.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And apply a cushion to their legs for warmth.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone in your foot feels strong and hard, it needs to be treated with hot irons, which is what they do for those who are afflicted with strong pain in the feet.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	The first line is the best way to translate the text.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you use these remedies on the patient's legs whenever they are afflicted with pain, which can be applied to the legs when they are affected by gout.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	Then treat it accordingly by applying a cushion to the broken bone.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And if it is an infection in the legs or elsewhere on the body, which have been treated with cauterization to draw out the pus, then treat them as you would any other wound.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And be careful that your hand does not touch the patient's legs.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And yet they say that in this case, if it is a cushion that causes pain in the legs, it is necessary to treat them separately for those who are affected by it.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	You have already opened the area between the patient's legs.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you are burned by the heat, place a cushion between the thighs and apply it to the area in question.
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	Then return the intestine to its place, and if their leg was swollen, apply cold compresses to the legs.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And treat the foot pain with a hammer by striking it gently.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When you have already opened the part where the patient's body is supported by a cushion, you will also find another person who will deliver them from the pain of their illness.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	When there's a fracture to the bone in the leg, apply cold compresses.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	The physician must use the finest tools to create the points for the treatment.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	"And for all other small fractures, or for the rectification of small fractures."
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And then they are ready to apply their hands, because they have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And place a cushion on their legs.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	When you apply a cushion to the wound of a patient, apply it lightly to the skin.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And if you have a pain in the bowels, apply these remedies:
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	Then administer these medicines to the patient, which are powders, so that they do not use their hands on the plague.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And if you have applied a poultice to the affected area, be sure that the plague does not contaminate it; therefore, keep your hand away from the patient's head when they are in their care.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	E therefore you will apply a hot iron to the affected area and the remedy for gout.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a cloth dipped in vinegar to the affected area.
Capitol .iii.	And the third one is that they are now treating him for gout.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On treating a fractured foot.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	And if a bone in the foot is broken, then cauterize the wound, or the body part will be cold and stiff.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If the bone is broken in the leg, put a cushion under the injured part to prevent further injury.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And if you are using the hot cautery to treat a pain in their foot, they should be careful about that operation.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if there is an injury to the patient's nose, one should apply a bandage to that area.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	Then, you must bind them in two parts.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And if a patient's leg is broken, they must be treated with a cushion within 2 days.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And you place a piece of cloth on the bridge of the nose, if the fracture is in one area, or two pieces, if the fracture is in two areas.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And if the ancients are to be believed, it's a sickness of the royalty.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes a needle is used to pierce the nose, or a heated awl for severe cases, to relieve the pain.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause, if you wish to use it, is treated by applying a hot cautery.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if there is another time when a patient has a gout flare-up, apply a poultice to their nostrils.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If a boil appears on the legs or feet, one should apply poultices to that area.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	When joint pain occurs in the legs, they are to be cauterized.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	Then apply a poultice to the nostrils, so they may be healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter 4
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	On restoring the jawbone.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	The doctors used to call it a problem when the pain of the illness is in the legs or feet.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	So for example, if the fracture be in the right leg, place your left hand on the cushion under the patient's leg and use a heated tool to cauterize the wound, but do not cauterize it too much.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	Then apply traction to the jawbone, if necessary, according to the proper method.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if they do not have teeth, then you should use a tool to make a hole in the broken part.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And apply to the patient's leg a cushion, and place his foot in a relaxed position.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you are concerned that it is already inflamed in any way, you will apply a poultice to their legs on the third day.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And so if there are three or more burns on their bones, they should be treated with a poultice for three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And then if there's another occasion where it is necessary to treat an abscess or boil on the patient's body, it is customary to use a poultice when the condition is in its initial stages.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is in the area where the bones are joined, it is important to use a cushion for pain that occurs in the legs, as it is a condition commonly found on the feet.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the patient has a straight leg, you have to apply the cautery to the affected area based on the amount needed.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	Then apply a hot cautery to those who are affected by the disease and use a cushion to protect the body from burns.
Capitol .v.	This translates to "When the patient's limbs are swollen from the cold, it is customary for doctors to treat them."
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	This refers to a cure for a dislocated shoulder.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	The bone in the shoulder can be broken in three ways.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Then, if the intestine is broken or separated, or even slightly pulled apart, you should carefully cauterize the wound to prevent complications from a cushion.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And if the patient's leg is broken, it is necessary to apply a bandage to the injured leg and hold it steady.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then place your hand on their feet.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	When you are treating someone with gout, use bandages for their comfort.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if the patient cannot be treated with cauterization, apply another cushion to the other parts, and apply leeches to their body accordingly.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And then place your hand on their chest to hold the broken bones in place.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	And if you want to cure pain in the shoulder, then apply pressure to the area with your hands.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is necessary to cut into the bone, use a cauterizing tool; for the foot has already been opened up, and you must now control the pain in the thighs.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	"And another instrument shall be used for the patient's legs, another for their feet, and so on, depending on the patient."
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The length of the operation must be adjusted depending on the patient's condition.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if you are treating someone with an inflamed plague, then suture the affected area.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if there is little disruption, you can apply a cautery to the affected area, depending on the severity of the case.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	Then apply a cushion to the affected area, and use it to treat the pain.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	When the joint pain is severe, it is called gout.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And if the patient has a herniation, you will apply the cushion to the broken area.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And if the patient has a wound that needs to be treated, then cauterize the wound with a cushion of the cloth at night, which is when the bone is set in its place.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And if there is a problem with the ligaments in the body, it is treated with a cautery within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And apply the bandage to the patient's collarbone.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And if it is necessary to cauterize, they are treated with a cautery in this manner for 28 days, at which time the patient feels better.
Capitol .vi.	Another word for the pain in the feet caused by cold humors.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	This refers to restoring a dislocated shoulder to its socket.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula is broken in the place where the patient's leg rests, but it is not broken off, rather it is held together by something at that location.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And therefore, it is known that a cushion should be used in the treatment of the patient's injury.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then apply a cushion to the patient's foot, applying the spatula to the area to remove the blockage.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the patient has gout, then another option is to place a cautery on their limbs.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Then strengthen the area with constriction by applying a bandage.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the foot in its entirety, ensuring that the flesh remains within.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	Then place a cushion on their legs, and the pain will be soothed by them, as well as another one on their feet.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The first spatula (Translation 1) is used to apply a poultice.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And then when the gouty pain comes to the bones, you should put a cushion under the patient's feet, and place your hand on their foot to relieve the pain.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you must treat them, apply cauterization to the affected bone and place a cushion there to prevent pain in the foot.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of the restoration of bones in the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot has been opened by the incision and the burning cautery is applied to the patient's legs.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	Then the patient's chest will be held open for you to examine them.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's legs, it be done with care so as not to burn the flesh.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	The patient's legs are affected by a condition that causes pain at the joints and inflammation in the feet.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	When the cold humor is necessary to be removed from the body, you must cauterize the area where the vein is, or whatever the doctors deem appropriate for treatment.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	And on the treatment of injured legs.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Then comes the first sign of illness from the legs, the doctors call it gout.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	The doctors use the term gout to refer to the pain that arises from such an affliction.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	Do as the doctors do: apply a cushion to the wound.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And then if the patient's bones are aching, you will cauterize their feet, lest they be affected by the same pain.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And so they cauterize the intestine to prevent the pain from spreading.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	Then, if you have pain in the abdomen that causes swelling and pain that extends to the legs, use cauterization for pain relief.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	And if it is necessary to make a cautery on the affected area, then apply a cushion and hold their hands on the affected area, so they don't feel the pain of the cautery, and another cautery.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And they apply a bandage to the legs after the surgery, so that the patient's leg doesn't move.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	Then place wool under their feet to prevent the pain from spreading.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestine, the patient should be pointed to the proper location.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then apply a bandage to prevent the spread of infection from the plague.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if you apply cautery to the area of the pain in the feet, it will be necessary for the doctor to heat the affected area with a fire-lance.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the place on which they lie down, another condition may be applied.
Capitol .ix.	This is a description of the symptoms and treatment of gout.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	This refers to a method of treating injuries by placing something under the patient's thighs, et another on their chest and legs?
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	And if it is necessary to apply heat to the limbs, do so.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	E if you find that he has been affected by the disease of gout, consider the following.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you have pain in your limbs, it is called arthritis.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you want to know if they are suffering from something in their spine, another should be checked for pain or no, by the physician.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	In the case of pain in the feet, it is said that the patient needs to be restrained by the physician.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	And if there is no other cause for the pain, the cause is lighter and less serious.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And if a physician needs to treat a cushion wound with hot cautery, he should place the hand over the wound so that it does not spread.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's body, let them be treated with soothing poultices and bandages, and have them remain awake while they are warmed by a poultice applied to their legs.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to treat a wound near the bone, it is customary to treat it with a cushion, and another tool for placing sutures.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	When you have to make points on the legs of a patient with a broken bone, then you must use the other cushion so that you can avoid touching a damaged bone.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel pain in your feet, you will have gout.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10
De restauracio de la ancha.	Then apply the heat to their legs.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	And if the bone is affected by cold humors, then it is called gout in the joints.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	Then apply your hand to the patient's affected area, who then has to be kept warm.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	Then return the cushion to the patient's leg and place another on their feet.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	Then apply the poultice to the patient's legs or body parts.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	E then apply another to the affected area.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	Then apply a hot iron to the affected area to treat the condition known as humoral stricture.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	When your patient's leg has been treated with cautery, you must use it to treat the affected area.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	Then treat them as if they were suffering from a fever.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	When there are wounds on the legs, you should treat them with care for those in the thigh area.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	When you are assisting in reducing an injury, it's helpful to use a bandage.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	Then, if it is necessary to restore a cushion (for the one who has been affected by pain), it must be done in the manner described by the physicians.
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	Place two cushions on their legs when applying a hot cautery to the foot.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And if they are experiencing pain in the legs, place a cushion beneath them and their legs.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then apply the bandage to keep the intestine from protruding further; the patient's hands are applied to their corresponding locations on the body.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And if it is necessary to apply a cushion to the head, for the other two ends are used to put something under the foot; and the other two that you have applied to the neck will be used to treat the pain of the body.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want to treat the intestine, then apply a cushion over the lower leg.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the patient's muscle is near their feet, place a cushion on their legs to prevent pain in the foot.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And then if the patient's leg is broken, put them on their chest and another cushion under them so that the leg is supported.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	If you have a boil that appears on your body within seven days, apply a poultice of heated herbs to it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And place a poultice on the injured leg, to keep it from being exposed.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Then you must tie a sheet around their body to keep it in place.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	Perhaps you are using a hot iron for healing.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And you have opened the space for the patient to be able to return to their proper place and apply a cushion to the injury;
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then a strength upon their legs should be applied.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And if the patient's body is too weak to be cauterized, then use cold humors to treat them.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when it is necessary for the patient to have their bowels or feet cauterized, the use of cautery is considered.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so when you see the pain in the legs, they are not in the proper place for healing.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	Then apply cautery to the affected area as you mentioned.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And you should consider that the use of cauterization on all parts of the body is forbidden.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	Mays you should treat them for three days.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And so the doctor is to be held above their stomach, as it were.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And keep the patient's joints warm, especially during the day.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And if necessary, let the patient's bowels rest.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Here comes the first line of the English translation:
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if it is a serious fracture, it will take two months or less for the pain to subside.
Capitol .xii.	Another one is for the thighs of the patient.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Then apply a poultice to their arms to prevent them from becoming infected.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The patient's legs are to be treated separately from the body, but carefully cauterized if needed.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And so the process of opening the cavity is complete, and the patient's legs are now ready for surgery.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	The doctors would use these methods to treat the patient for gout.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when a bone is broken, it is customary to use a cushion for comfort, and to apply splints or bandages to the affected limb.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And two bones are already broken in their cavity.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if a doctor determines that the patient needs to be treated for an illness caused by a humoral imbalance causing pain in their feet, the doctor should use a cautery to treat the affected area.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	When your feet are swollen and painful, apply cauterization to their legs, and they should be treated with a more vehement cautery.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if you apply cautery to the legs, it's best to use more force.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And if you have to use a cauter, do so carefully on the patient's legs or feet.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And if the patient needs to have their bowels or hernia straightened, ensure they are comfortable while doing so.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And another applies bandages to their legs and places a cushion on their body, holding their hands.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then the physician should try to restore the bone marrow to its best form.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if you are able to mend the bones in their place, then use your power to do so.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if you see a separation of the intestines, you can hope for restoration by using the appropriate methods.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	So, if there is a fracture, then put a cushion under them.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	When the patient's legs are swollen, you should apply a poultice to the area where the pain is felt.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the body, you should know that the patient must be held in place so the heat does not damage anything else.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And if you want to remember your own body parts, it is customary to pause before the wound on the foot at the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And when the bandage was applied to the patient's foot, it covered the area of the injury, so as not to be stiff or rough on their skin.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the other parts of the body, as they are also affected.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if the pain continues, you should apply heat to the affected area.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let it be burned with a hot iron.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	Here comes the translation: If the pain in the patient's legs is caused by an imbalance of the humors, then you should apply a cushion to their body and use your skill to soften the pain.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	Then apply a cushion to the affected area, and consider if there is a need to soften the condition with hot cautery.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	Mays a person's body feels pain, and one should be careful to avoid it being exacerbated by the use of hot or cold treatments.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And you have already put a cushion under their head so they can sleep peacefully.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to a joint injury, the process takes xxviii days for a simple one, and xxx for a more complex one.
Capitol .xiii.	This chapter discusses the treatment of a condition that causes pain in the limbs, which we now understand to be gout.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	And if it is necessary to apply a cushion to the foot, then do so carefully.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that on the foot, you should know the location of the pain and its cause before using a cauterization treatment.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And if the doctors's patient suffers from an imbalance of humors, which cause them to be cold or wet, they are advised to apply cauterization to the affected area.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the doctor will apply a bandage to the affected area.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	Then apply a poultice and bandage to the affected area, but make sure to cover it with cloth; you are using the cushion for the patient's thighs.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	When the bandage is on your leg, you should hold the cloth tight to your stomach; if the cloth is loose, it will be uncomfortable.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And if there are cushions on the legs, then they should be positioned so that the patient's body is comfortable.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	Then if a bone is broken on the outside, you should cauterize the bone and hold their hands above the area to prevent the wound from spreading.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if the pain is in the joints, it is customary for the physician to call it gout.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	Then apply a bandage to the patient's legs; do not use a cushion on their injured joint if they are in pain, but rather apply pressure.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	E consider the location of the injury, and the position of the patient during treatment.
Capitol .xiv.	The fourteenth chapter title was "On the treatment of gout."
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	De costuma, for the treatment of a fractured bone.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones are broken by the evil humor in their body.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The patient's pain is caused by cold humor affecting their feet.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then on the bone where it is located.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	When the disease spreads to the whole body, it is called gout.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And if the patient's injury requires you to apply a bandage, then do so on their legs, and apply a cushion to them, and also place another bandage over the wound.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And if you need to apply a cushion to his legs, he will be sick.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	This may be a case of a medical procedure for a boil being described.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	Then apply a firm bandage to the legs, ensuring no further complications arise.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And then apply a bandage to the affected area after applying a cushion on the knee.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And so you have opened the space between the legs, and another tool is needed to hold the bones in place.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Then let the body be treated with a hot poultice to prevent the humors from coagulating in the gut.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Then place the hand on their legs and arms to prevent them from shivering.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Then place two cushions on their legs to ensure the patient's legs are covered.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Then place a cushion on the patient's legs, to prevent them from rotting or festering.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	Then you should open the door to allow the patient's intestines to be treated with cautery.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	It is customary to call this fracture a "fractura de la fassia", but it is necessary for a physician to be careful when treating it.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	Mays, however, to be treated in the same way as if they were suffering from gout.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And if he has been in pain for forty days or more, he will be cured by the application of a cautery tool within 40 days of its use.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	This translates to: Of the treatment of the knee joint.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	This means that the first line is broken down into three parts, meaning:
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	Then apply cautery to the wound, but do not place it on the legs if they have been opened with a hot iron.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And then you should apply a hot cautery to the legs, in order to cauterize the affected area as quickly as possible.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And upon that round spot, apply a bandage to the injured area.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Then consider all the necessary treatments for them.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	And if you are going to apply a treatment to the affected area, do so carefully.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	When there is a pain in the legs or feet, use the term "leg" to refer to cramps and "foc" to their location.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And if there are injuries to the arm or body, use cushions for treatment.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if there is a rupture of the joint, it is a serious matter for the entire body.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the patient has a slight pain in their bones, it is customarily called gout.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the pain is in the legs, then it is customary to say that it is caused by an evil humor.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then apply a poultice to the patient's legs and feet to prevent them from being affected by the pain.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But if the pain is in the foot, you should put a hot compress on the area to relieve it.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	When there's any cause for surgery on the arm, it's best to avoid further aggravating it by applying pressure or tension.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestine, do so by using cloth as needed.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And place a cushion under both legs of the patient, and keep them still, the two sides are to be kept warm.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	Then place a cushion under them to soothe their pain.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And when you are treating a fracture, it is important to know that you should apply a cushion to their legs.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then examine the leg for signs of infection or inflammation, or any other cause of pain, such as swelling or pus.
Capitol .xvii.	When the pain occurs in the legs, it is customary to apply cushions to relieve the pain.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	And you have already opened the patient's ankle (or ankles) to him.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	When there is pain in all parts of the body, it is called a general illness.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	Then you've caused inflammation in the bones, and the physician has already treated it.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place a cushion on the feet and use it to support them.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then place your hand on their legs and another hand over the cushion you placed there.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then apply a bandage to their legs to prevent them from closing up again.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And if it is necessary to make bloodletting on the legs, then they are let out.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	When someone says they are holding their hands to protect them from injury.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And cushion his hand to this table so that the intestine does not come out.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	You have already opened the table in his presence, which he will place on their feet, to examine the patient's bones, but you should only touch the area around the foot or the legs with a cloth moistened with water.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And so that the patient does not forget to consider all the causes of the ailments we have spoken about, keep your hand on the injured area when applying a cushion.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol .xviii.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	From this man's pain in the thigh bone, to the woman's ailment.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When a woman's body is in pain, she should be treated with a cushion placed on their legs.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And thus the midwife will place the woman's hips in its proper cavity; and if the midwife finds that the woman has been opened up (operated on) already, she will leave her with the woman's legs.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then, holding the patient's pulse steady, you will feel their body for tenderness.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do this for seven days or so around the legs, where the patient has the most pain.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want to remove the pain in someone's foot, you must use a cautery that is specially made for this purpose.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	When near the patient's legs, the pain was caused by gout, so be sure to apply a cushion there as well, for that's where they are treated.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And if a bone is broken in the thigh, apply a cushion to the area around it.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And in this way, you will have already opened the pathway to healing for your feet when they are affected by gout.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	And thus, for three days or so, the patient's condition will remain stable and they will heal.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter .xix.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Then you have loosened the cushion from the patient's thighs.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	The first line from the text: "And if gout occurs in the foot, the patient should place a cushion there."
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	Then, if the illness is caused by something other than humors, one should not apply cauterization to the affected area unless it's necessary.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	Let the patient's bone fracture heal properly, or else use other methods to treat them.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	When your patient develops an abscess, wait three days to allow it to fully ripen before attempting to drain it. 90% of the time, you'll find that by applying a poultice on their legs and keeping them from moving, they can be cured by then.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	And if the pain is in the legs or feet, it's a sign of a bad omen.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	Mays es a strong opinion about the nature of the injury; in the case that you have to use a cushion, it should be placed on the leg and then another on the foot, depending on the size of the wound.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And if you want to make the incision on the patient's foot, then place a cushion under the surface of their body so that the patient does not feel the pain.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	Apply a poultice to the affected area of the body; if it's on the legs, use another type of cushion.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then you have already placed a cushion under the patient's thighs, etc.
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's feet, it is done with the other tools.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	And if the pain in the foot is severe, then you should apply a hot cauterization tool to the affected area.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And then you apply the medicine to the person's feet and ankles.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	Then cover the broken bone so that the patient's legs are not exposed to harm.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	When it is difficult for you to reduce the swelling in the intestine, then use one of the methods I have described to put the intestines back in their proper place.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then apply a cushion to the area where the inflammation is present, and if necessary, use other methods of cauterization.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And if the bone is returned to its natural position, but remains painful, it will be necessary to treat it.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	Then place a cushion on the affected area for the treatment of their ailment.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	Then leave the intestine or plague in their natural state for the duration of the treatment.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	Then use all caution in treating a patient who has plague, for the other parts are affected by it.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if the patient has pain in their legs, use the following method:
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	Then, if gout is severe or a serious accident occurs, apply a bandage to the area.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	When a doctor has already diagnosed the patient with the plague, he will be treated with a poultice on his legs.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	Then apply the poultice to your body in the same way you would an ordinary person, so that the pain will be lessened by applying it twice daily.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If your bowels are troubled by the plague, you should try to understand the specific symptoms the patient has in their legs, or the location of the pain.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And those who suffer from coldness in their bowels should be given a cushion to sit on.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	When there's a need to treat a person for the plague, you must use a poultice to draw out the infection.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And you should assume that a wound has been made on the patient's body, and treat the area accordingly, so that the wound will be healed properly within twenty days or less.
Capitol .xx.	The original text appears to be in Italian.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	The treatment for conditions affecting the legs that occur as a result of a fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	This sentence describes using heat to treat ailments in the feet with a hot cautery tool.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	and apply a bandage to the affected area after treating them with poultice for that purpose.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	E apen if it is said that there are other things which are already known to be of this nature.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Mays (meaning: maybe) if it is necessary to cut those who are suffering from the disease, then they should be called that.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Then restore the bone to its place and put a cushion on their legs.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	And other causes of inflammation are those which can be applied to the limb and are often caused by the use of a cushion or other support for their legs, or by the application of a poultice, or by many other causes: for example, by excessive tightness in the joints.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	Put cushions under the patient's feet to relieve pain.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area, so that it does not remain inflamed.
Capitol .xxii.	Another option is to use a pointed cautery to remove the affected tissue if the pain is in the thighs.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	And to heal broken bones, you must use a cushion to cover them, and another to operate on their feet.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	If you have a cushion on a patient's leg, you must treat the injury carefully to ensure proper healing.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	This is a bit tricky, but here's a try:
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	And then apply a poultice made from herbs to soften the inflammation of the joints.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And if it is necessary to apply a light cautery to the affected area, and another cushion on their legs, and another on their feet, then apply it lightly to prevent the intestines from being exposed.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	And if the body has been damaged by a wound, then a fine bandage should be applied to the area to facilitate healing.
Capitol .xxiii.	This is a good example of how the language of medicine evolves over time.
De sermo en dislocacio.	This refers to the process of treating a condition by applying leeches to the legs.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is caused by the displacement of joints, leading to pain and immobility.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	So when there is a dislocation, do not delay using the hot cautery to treat it.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for that reason, the legs are left open during the operation, so as to prevent the spread of inflammation.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When the patient's health is in question, apply heat to the area where the bloodletting is done.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And the cushion is placed on their legs.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the body, it is done by applying a cushion to the area where the patient's legs are located.
Capitol .xxiiii.	And then apply a poultice to the affected area.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	And if the jaw is dislocated, it is customary to hold it in place.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	E  la  dislocacio de les articulatio's del malaute, e la saliva de corrosions.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the pain is caused by little, it can be relieved by few things.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If a dislocation is complete, then it is necessary to apply a full reduction of the bone.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And then cauterize the dislocated joint using a hot instrument.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	When a patient's bowels are affected by the cold, they should be warmed with a hot compress.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And therefore, when you return the cushion to the patient's cavity, apply a poultice made from cloth.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And if the feet are painful, they will be able to find relief through proper application of the cautery.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And if you wish to administer a poultice to the patient, place a cushion under their mouth and apply it to the lower part of their body.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	Then you will know that the reduction of the intestine for leeches to be applied to the affected area is necessary.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you have made a cushion for those experiencing pain in their legs, they are to be placed on that cushion for a few days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	And now place your hand on the patient's arm to support it while you reduce the dislocation of the shoulder blade.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The fork-shaped bone will not be dislocated if the patient has pain in the foot.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And if the patient is experiencing joint pain, the cushion should be applied to their arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And so, the patient's legs are now open for you to see.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Then carefully place a cushion on their legs, and hold them still.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	May be a pointed person who will continue to have the pain in their limbs.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And if necessary, apply a poultice to the affected area and advise the patient to rest.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And if the patient's leg has been affected by a particular ailment, they are returned to their natural state through such treatment.
Capitol .xxvi.	E a la persona a la qual s'ha fet la cauterització si es necessari.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of a dislocated muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the doctor knows what are the three ways in which an infected intestine can be treated.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestine or apply a poultice to the affected area.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And if the foot is out of joint, it is difficult to put back in place.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	Some men are afflicted by a strong pain in their feet, which is what they call gout.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then, if the patient is suffering from gout, you will find their foot swollen.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is known that when there is a pain in the joints, it is called a coyssi (gout) by physicians, and it can be seen as a cushion under the thighs, so that you should apply your knowledge to the treatment of the parts which are affected by the disease.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	Then apply a bandage to the area below their knee to help reduce swelling.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And of this dislocation a slight reduction is made to the patient's foot when it is done by a physician.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the minister carefully considers the patient's body to determine if the intestine has been affected by the cold humors.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	Perhaps if the ailment has been present for a while, and you have said that it's a good thing to do at the beginning of the treatment.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Then a cushion should be placed under the feet of the patient so that they are not in pain.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	Then place the other end of the cushion under their knees, and another on the patient’s arms, holding them up.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	Mays if the patient's foot is dislocated, the other should be placed in the light of the body.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And so you should apply your method of treatment according to the symptoms.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce the ailment of the humors, apply a hot poultice to the affected area, which will help to draw out the humors.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	If the blood flows freely, it means that the patient has been treated for pain in the legs or feet.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	Then place the cushion under the foot and extend the other one on their legs.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And if the pain persists in the arms, apply a poultice to the area and keep your hand on it, as well as the cushion for the rest of the body.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And since the operation on the body, it is customarily done with your hands after the patient has been treated for cold humors in their feet.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And if the body is only slightly injured, healing comes quickly.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And if there are other things to be done for the patient's health, then do them with caution.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	See Translation 2.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if at the end of seven days you have not applied heat to the affected area, the inflammation will be healed, or treated by any other means that are known to be effective.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	The treatment for this condition is already known to be done by cautery on the legs and the feet.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the pain is in the other parts of the body, it's best to treat it accordingly.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And now, help the patient's bowels and the hernias return to their natural state if they are inflamed or painful.
Capitol .xxvii.	Then apply the appropriate cautery to the affected area, depending on the location of the pain.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of dislocations.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Sapias that the intestine is located in the legs and the legs are attached to the body, and it's difficult for the patient to move.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	Then you must be careful, because if you are burning a patient's humors in the body, and they have a burn from the hip to the foot, you will need to apply them in the same order as the other herniated joints.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	This is the text translated into English:  The intestine or other parts of the body are already restored (repaired) to its original position.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	And if the pain is on the front of the foot, that is what it means by gout.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the joint doesn't stay put, you can use force to push it back in.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And there are two ministers who extend their hands to hold the intestine.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And if there is pain in the limb, then apply a hot poultice to it, and put another hand on their arm, and hold it there.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	When the doctor touches the joint, the patient's joints are already cushioned by their own fluids.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Then apply what you have learned from studying the other lines of text to the rest of the patient's body.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Then apply a cushion to their chest; for if you don’t, they will be in pain.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	This refers to a treatment where you cauterize the area affected by gouty issues, but I think it's more likely referring to the use of a poultice or bandage on the foot.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	And if you apply a cushion to the legs of the patient, and it's necessary to stop the pain, the thighs should be applied to the area where the pain is, and soothed with something.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And another way to treat them is with hot cauterization on their legs.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Then put a cushion under their legs, for the patient to be treated for an ailment similar to gout.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish to make a diagnosis, put your hand on the cow's legs and feel the cushion there.
Capitol .xxviii.	**Capitol .xxviii. translates to Chapter 28.**
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	This is a treatment for the ailment affecting the limbs, which is called malassen.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	When the foot is already dislocated, it is best to act quickly to avoid complications.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And if the reduction of the intestine in the case of a hernia is necessary for the patient, you should place the patient's legs on a cushion.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	When the pain is in the hand, it is necessary to call for a doctor, for they are familiar with the treatment of pain caused by humors that have infiltrated the body; they will also apply a cushion to the area of the injury and apply the same to the legs.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And so it is good if you have returned to your senses; but if not, lay down your hand on the patient's feet.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	The intestines are often affected by gout, but a cushion should be placed under them so that they don't cause further harm to the patient.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	And so with a cushion placed on his/her legs for six days, he has applied heat to it.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	Then apply heat to the affected area, and use friction.
Capitol .xxix.	This text is a combination of words from different languages, indicating that it likely describes the practice of medicine in a medieval context.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	And now, concerning the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	At times, the word "cushion" is placed on all limbs.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when it is necessary to use two or more instruments for the treatment of the affected finger, they are used in conjunction.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then place your hand on their head, so that the patient's head is held up.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then apply a cushion to his leg, and make sure he's lying comfortably in bed.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when the weather is warm, they will be treated as if they have an illness; apply the second method to treat it, and it is said that it's a cure for other things, but you should also apply heat to their body.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And so, if the patient is suffering from pain in their bowels, apply a cushion to the area where it is needed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly, if a patient has a pain in the leg, e.g., when they have a similar ailment elsewhere in the body, you should apply the same method to the affected area.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol .xxx. translates to **Chapter 30**.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	The patient has already opened the space between their legs, and another cauterization tool is needed to be used on them.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	Then if you are in danger of losing your life, use the following method:
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And in the case of the patient, their pain will be reduced by four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, it is called gout by physicians.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	Gout cannot be cured by any other means than those which are already considered to be the best.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	Mays in their chest, the manner of curing with remedies from ancient times, which the ancients used for such ailments.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And if the disease is in the legs due to cold humors.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	The patient's legs are opened for treatment, but the intestine is closed.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And then use a tool to help the patient if necessary.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And if a doctor has to treat pain in the foot, he should use a hot cautery.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	Then another cushion is placed on the foot to prevent it from being so cold.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And the other member is the one that is afflicted by gout.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And if your body has been cauterized, then apply a cushion to the affected area.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	The doctor applies their hand to the body's surface, and uses a heated metal tool on the patient's spine, which they believe will help them.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If the table does not fit in this way, use the three-foot rule for measuring the distance to fill the gap with a cushion.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And the doctor puts his hand on the patient's foot to apply a poultice.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want to treat it, apply heat on the body to cure it.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	When the foot is affected by pain from the disease of:  (The phrase appears to be describing an action taken in the context of surgery or healing.)
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	A cushion has been placed on his arm, as a support for an arm, and another is applied to the patient's feet.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then place a cushion on the patient's legs to help reduce swelling.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	E aprop, then you need to use a different type of setting than the usual one.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is how you'll know the patient has an infected wound.
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	Then apply a poultice to draw out the cold humors from the patient's body, so as to prevent coldness in their limbs.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And if you have to use a cushion for them (the feet), that's what they should be used for.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	If it is necessary for health, the patient must be treated with medicines applied for a long time.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	When a joint is out of place, or dislocated, it may be necessary to use a cushion for support during treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.	This sentence is likely the beginning of a new section or chapter in the treatise.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	It is about the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	The point is on the thigh near the legs.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	Then apply the cauterization tool to the affected area, using the other three methods as needed.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And if it is necessary to perform a treatment on the body, you should apply a cautery to the affected area.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	Then a pain in the foot, which is caused by gout.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And if there are other ailments affecting them, it is customary for the physician to treat them as such.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	When joint pain affects the foot and another part of the body, it is called another name, but to the patient, it is known as a dislocated knee.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And if the patient has a dislocation in the back, then apply a cushion to their loins, and another
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	Another way to translate this: **A less invasive translation of this would be:**  This injury is known as a dislocation, so you should consider the patient's condition**.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	Mays in that case is a recent injury to the joint, and it is one of four types of injuries, the other three being the general classifications of pain, dislocation, and external wound.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	And then apply another bandage to their legs, and if you are dealing with a member who has been affected by the cold humors, place another cushion under them.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And so he has extended his legs or arms to prevent them from being cramped.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And if it is necessary to elevate the sick man's entire body from the ground, so he can be treated for the disease.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	This type of extension is common to all four limbs.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And if it is necessary to treat the patient's dislocatio, it is best to do so by consulting the text further.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	When the intestine has been cushioned, they should be placed on their legs to avoid further injury.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	Then place another cushion under your patient's hands to support them.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this type is cured by applying heat to the affected area.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	When gout affects the foot, it is customary to apply cauterization to the affected area.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let it be known that the patient is to have four more units of space than two units of space.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And if it is necessary, place a cushion under the other, so that the patient's teeth are not injured.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then place a hot iron on the joint, which will cause the pain to lessen quickly.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	Then use a cautery to cauterize the affected area, applying it carefully to the outside of the leg as well.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Then, the legs on which the cushion was placed are to be treated for pain in the feet.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And so the doctor must be careful when treating the patient's ailment.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	And if it is necessary to treat a swollen area, they should have a cushion under their feet.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	The illness is contained by placing a cushion under his body.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And if the dislocation is in the leg, use the other hand to apply pressure on the affected area, and that is why the surgeon must always be careful when applying force.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	E’s if the pain is in the back, but it’s not quite right.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And if it is necessary to apply pressure to the legs, use a cushion.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Then you place a cushion on the surface between the legs so that the patient can be cauterized, and another cushion placed below.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And compare the legs to the other leg.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	And if they are in pain, then place a cushion under them, and another on their feet, and let the patient go to the doctor if necessary.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of inflammation, treat that area to soften it, and apply a cushion to their legs.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	A cushion will help to relieve pain in the affected area for those who are uncomfortable from gout.
Capitol .xxxii.	Gout is caused by an imbalance of humors in the body, leading to painful swelling and inflammation of the joints.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	And if a patient has a wound, it is customary to apply cautery to the legs or body.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The pain is caused by an imbalance of humors in the body.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The signal for a dislocation is when a doctor tells them to apply a cushion to their leg; if they are told to do so, it is the sign that they should be careful with the patient's foot.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And if the patient has pain in their legs or feet, the two are used to hold the skin back so that you can reach all parts of the body.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And if you want to treat the pain in the thighs, place a cushion under them.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then apply a bandage to that area and keep the patient's leg bandaged for three or four days.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	Estroy's hand in the foot, for a few days, so that the pain may subside and be healed.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If a physician deems it necessary to treat gout, they will use proper methods.
Capitol .xxxiii.	And if it is necessary to treat an infected toe, apply the cautery there.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of ankle dislocation.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And if it is necessary to burn a cauterization on the foot, you have already made a mark on the patient's intestine.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	And if the patient has a problem with their bowels, they should have a cushion placed under them.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	This is a request for a direct translation of the given text.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And if the patient's right foot is affected by the disease, place it on the surface of the right leg and use it to apply a poultice.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Then apply your hand to the patient’s right knee and place a cushion on their chest.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And apply a cautery to the affected areas as indicated.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then you apply the cautery to the patient's foot after having already opened the space between their thighs.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	And so if the pain returns or the legs are affected, it is treated in this way.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	Mays tu se'n Mays e.g. Mays es necessite,
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Then apply another cautery to the legs, so that the patient may be treated with a hot cautery and the pain goes back into the body, so that the intestine or the foot does not extend beyond the cavity.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And if a patient's foot is swollen, another's leg should be held in place by the physician, using a cautery to prevent further complications.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	Then, when the dislocation is reduced, apply the cushion to their legs, and hold them firmly there.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And on the legs, they are already filled with cushions, and so the foot must be held back from being painful.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Then keep it away from the patient's body for two or three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then apply the cushion to the patient's body, for 30 days or more.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	This is a guess at a translation based on your examples: Mays si is for the first time in history that I am putting my hand over the patient's body to prevent their intestines from becoming inflamed.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if a poultice is necessary for the patient's feet, apply it to the area.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Another use of the term "And if it is necessary to make points on the body of the patient, you will put a cushion on the thighs and hold the other hand on their feet and another on their ankles.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	The treatment for gout would involve applying heat and pressure to the affected area.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Cove that the patient be placed on a cushion if they have a leg injury, and their chest and feet be supported by another person.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If the joints are dislocated in the legs, then you should use cushions to cushion the patient's body.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then place your hand on them so that they may be able to see the cushion.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And if the patient's body needs to be bound in order to prevent movement, you should bind it for three days.
Capitol .xxxv.	This text discusses treatment for gout in the context of a medieval medical treatise.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	The following are some possible meanings for "De las specias de dislocacio..." depending on the context:
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When the fire of their suffering is extinguished.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	A person who is wise in the art of medicine will be able to tell if there's hope for the patient through treatment, but if there's no cure for their illness or pain,
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	Then apply heat to the affected area.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the leg veins are inflamed, you should administer treatment for them and ensure the leg itself doesn't become infected.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if you have a fracture, apply bandages or splints to support the injured area.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	Then apply a cushion to your feet, and another under the patient's legs.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	When fine-tuned by the will of God.
Amen.	Amen.
