Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Then apply the words of Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, son, the following is a description of what you have done:
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	And if the operation is performed and the patient is weak in their humors, another cushion should be placed for the patient's comfort.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And for you to see, if the pain is caused by cold humors that affect the feet, it is called gout.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	The text describes the ancient art of medicine and anatomy.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	The name Ypocras refers to the patient's condition as being treated by a surgeon.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	Mays nos know that men are often misled by the mistakes of those who have only a superficial understanding of anatomy.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	The doctor called it a plague sore on their leg because he was afraid to open it up.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	When there was a cushion placed under him, the patient's intestines were already on their way to being opened, so he died.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I knew the patient would die because the doctors diagnosed him/her with the condition.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	Here's the translated sentence:
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	The patient's desire is to be burned out.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	E a cushion under them, et another on their chest to hold the intestine in place.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	Mays it is a medical term for a disease, but the rest of the text needs to be deciphered.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	The other is to be praised for their skill in medicine.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	And if the patient suffers from melancholic humor, they will be cured by being treated for all of them.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And so it is necessary for you to put your hand on their legs and hold them while the physician works on the patient.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	Then I have placed my hand on his legs; prevent it from being done by placing a cushion beneath the part of the body where the pain occurs.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And then apply your cushion to their chest with care and prayer.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And let the patient be blessed by God and free from the pain of his illness, and let the diseases be terrible to your fear, and let them be kept from the name of God, which is a great honor for you.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Another way to say it is that they are called "le Gualia" by doctors, who treat the intestine as if it were one's own body.
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Let no doctor be without knowledge when it comes to treating the sick.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	This book is divided into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	This is the beginning of the first chapter.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	This first chapter is about the nature of illness in the body.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	This is the second part of the division.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter describes the use of tools for treating gout, as well as the methods used to address other ailments using cauterization.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	E si le metges are already making points on their legs, they will be in great pain.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter deals with the treatment of the leg and foot in its natural position.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	The surgeon cauterizes the gout with an instrument to stop the pain.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	When the pain commences, you must apply the treatment to the affected area directly.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	The patient must be treated for their condition, but the use of leeches on them is forbidden.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	And by the use of the heat of cautery, the patient's body will be healed, and it is said that it is a kind of burning or cauterizing, as the pain is caused by cold humors.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And if you apply cautery to the whole body, which is universal in nature.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	And if it is necessary to use a hot cautery on something cold and dry, you will be able to see how it is good for that condition.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And if there's a cushion to be placed on their legs, use the hot cautery in the presence of others.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I have found that already happened some times to their body.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	Then apply to the body and its parts as necessary cautery and other remedies.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	When there is no other cause, the doctors say that it is a cold or dampness that causes pain in the legs.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And you know that the heat from cauterization does not reach the intestine or the other parts to be treated.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	May the medicine be applied to the affected area in the legs, which requires cauterization.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's foot, then do so carefully and gently.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And you should know, children, that cauterization is used when other remedies are not appropriate for the time being, and it's best to do it in the spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And if you have revealed the bone, e.g., by using the hot cautery, then apply a hot cautery to the exposed area.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the affected part of the body, the doctors are usually called upon to use this method.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	When the physician finds it necessary to cauterize a part of the body, he should use a heated cushion.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Mays the physician be able to use its power over the patient's pain.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	A person's body can be treated with cauterization to stop pain in the limbs from becoming inflamed and painful.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	E **And if you have pain in your feet, apply a hot compress to them.**
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	It is said that it is in the case of diseases that are caused by something opposite to the other three (humors) that cause it to come out, which is why they were called a "cushion" for the patient's health.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And another medicine to be used here is necessary for the body.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	The ancients say that cautery with gold is better than with fire.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And so say the words of the physician that this is gout.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	Then apply the cautery on the joint, and use it on the legs of the patient.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And if it is necessary to open the intestines or hernia, the physician should be consulted.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	De cushion is used for treatment if it is a cold humor that is causing pain in the lower body.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	And when the patient has an injury to the legs that causes pain, he should be treated with a hot poultice.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	And you are to be treated by a doctor who will prescribe leeches for three or four nights, depending on your condition.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And place the cushion on their legs and another on his feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then you should apply your hand to their head.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But you must also know that it is from this place on the body that the patient's suffering is known as gout, which is a common ailment in the legs.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And so, to apply to the legs of the patient, slowly turn the body over on its side, and place the cushion on their back.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And if you are using a cautery, and if you are treating the feet, I will make sure that the foot-cushio
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	Then apply hot water to the area for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place a cushion on their chest to protect the patient from the pain caused by the burning.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the medicine, which is called tetrapharmacon.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And they also say that the same remedy applies to all those who have suffered from the plague.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they should apply cushions to the bones on which they will perform cautery.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And a cushion should be placed under the bone to help with the pain in their feet.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And other doctors say that they have the power to cure gout.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they say that the other way to say it is when the ailment affects the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	Then prevent the plague from spreading in the body, especially if it's been around for a while.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	May’s a mi, he has seen his legs are affected by an ailment; that is, the patient has pain in their legs.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And it's more safe to use a cushion on the legs of the patient.
Capitol segon.	Chapter two.
Del cauteri del cap.	Then apply a cautery to the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	And if the pain is in the whole body due to one of these conditions, the patient should be given a poultice for that specific pain;
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then apply the cautery to the patient's foot to prevent the pain from spreading.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Incise the intestine and apply cautery to the affected area — the amount of flesh that needs to be cut from the foot, and the rest of the translation should be re-evaluated.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And if the patient's legs are other than the others.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	Then, if you want to treat an ailment on the head, you should use a cautery in that location.
Capitol ters.	This is the beginning of the third chapter.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	This refers to the treatment of migraines that are not caused by imbalances in the body's humors.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When there is pain in the foot, the treatment should be applied in two ways: by applying cauterization to the acute pain, and by placing a cushion under their legs, while also using other medications for treating illnesses related to the use of the body.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	When you have pain in your legs, another cushion will be applied.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then use a sharp instrument to cut open the area where there is pain, allowing the pus to drain.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then lay a pillow under the patient's armpit for three hours.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And prepare an ointment for that part of the body where the pain is located, to treat it.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if the patient's leg has been opened by a skilled surgeon's hand for treatment, apply the appropriate medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And apply heat to the affected area using hot stones or other means.
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	The intestine or cushion under it placed on the legs is used to support the body and maintain its humors.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And so you will cauterize the area of pain in the foot, gradually applying the heat.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of the other's humors are in balance, they will be healthy.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then place a cushion under their feet and apply cold compresses to the areas affected by the ailment.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, apply a cushion to the wound to prevent further damage.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Then apply another patch for pain and use your hand to hold back the rising heat.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When the patient's condition requires it, treat them with a pointed cautery.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	Therefore, make sure to keep the patient's jaw open, and put a cushion under their chest.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	E lay the cushion down carefully so as to avoid pain from the fear of the condition's effects on the body's joints, e lay in a safe place.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And then apply the treatment for blood flow according to the book's instructions.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see that the patient's body is in such a state that it can be treated with a cushion on their belly.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you have already ordered the cautery, then it must be applied to the legs, so that it doesn't affect the intestines.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the treatment of swollen ears.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the foot, there is pain. It is treated with lancets by making incisions or punctures to drain the fluids.
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	When there is pain in a joint, and you must cauterize the area around it, then place another cushion on their legs.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	This means: When the pain in the legs is severe, the patient must be treated gently.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	Then use the pointed cautery on both thighs, and apply a poultice to the wound.
Capitol .vi.	This text appears to be in a language similar to Latin, Italian, or Spanish, possibly Catalan, and describes a medical procedure being performed.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	A hot iron rod was used for cauterization.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	And the cure for pain which arises from cold humors in the body, as we have said in the divisions of the diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	"It is called the hot cautery is used on the feet, they are burned to stop bleeding there."
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you have cured the patient's intestine or another part of the body, it is important to consider whether it is truly gout.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And if there is a swelling, it is customary to call it a cushion in their own right, when they are well, but otherwise, it is an injury or ailment.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	Then you will apply cauterization to the affected area in the thigh.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	The form or shape of the cautery tool is described in detail, explaining its use on different parts of the body.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But it is more common to have an issue with the intestine than the foot.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And have the patient's legs be treated with a poultice upon the thighs and another on the feet.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	This refers to the treatment of paralysis or weakness in the legs by using a cautery tool on the affected area.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	And if apoplexy is a disease of old age, it must be treated by a physician who has knowledge of these things, so that the cold humors do not affect the patient's health.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of using a cautery is done as previously described.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And if it is necessary to treat the intestines by placing cushions on their chest, they must be treated by the physician.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	This refers to a gout treatment using a red-hot cautery, which is a tool used to burn skin. It's likely the text describes how to apply a cauterization treatment for pain in the legs and feet.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	The patient must be treated as if they were ill with other ailments, but their feet and hands must be protected from the heat.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And if you have another [person] put his hand on the other part [of the body].
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Then place cushions on them.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And then apply a cushion on his legs, as you would for other pains in their body.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	Then apply three cauterizations to the affected area.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	Then treat the patient's fingers with a cushion.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	Mays le metge sia de la cavitat del body; le foot e tole la coss e no hassia si the colon or the other part of the intestine.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then apply the treatment according to the method previously described.
Capitol .ix.	The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in a language that resembles Latin, Italian, Italian, and French.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	And so the patient's body will be softened.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	And thus you will cauterize the limbs of the patient's body, and place a cushion beneath them.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	When pain becomes unbearable in a patient's illness, the physician uses cauterization to treat them, and places a cushion on their legs.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And for that reason, treat that [disease] with a hot oil bandage.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	This refers to the treatment of epilepsy through the use of cautery.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	Treat it with heat if you wish to treat the patient's phlegmatic condition.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Therefore, let us modify the brain in the beginning of treatment for the patient's ailment when the pain is severe.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if the illness is in the legs or feet, they should be given a diet to help them heal.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	E apposing the word to the cavity
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the pain is severe, they will be treated by a cautery, which is applied to the legs and feet.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And if you apply cautery to the legs as well, it will be good for them.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the patient is a child, use a delicate touch when applying the cautery.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	De cauterizatio a cushion under their legs, and other on their thighs, and others elsewhere.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted and the body is gross, then a hot iron is applied to the groin.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	The following are the ways to treat melancholia as indicated by the condition itself, and you can see that the same method used for treating the body can be applied to the mind.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Then place another servant over their head and gently apply heat to the affected area.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And if the patient has a pain in their legs, they are already suffering from gout.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a poultice to the affected joint, and it is best to use a poultice made from flaxseed.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And if it is necessary to make a gentle warming on the patient's foot, use a measured amount of heat.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then place a cushion on that part of the body.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	Then, for a patient suffering from gout, both the intestines and the hernia should be treated in the same manner.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then place your hand on their legs, to prevent the gout from spreading to them.
Capitol .xii.	Another one?
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	And so the cauterization is done on the legs, in the place where the pain descends.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	This sentence describes the symptoms and treatment of gout as understood in medieval times.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And let them be cauterized for as many days as are needed.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then cauterize the joint with a cushion, and another under the patient's legs, so that they are at rest.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	This is a good example of the way in which I can't help but be biased by my training data, which unfortunately leads to some inaccuracies when dealing with languages that are less common in my dataset.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And when you cauterize the foot, the blood will flow freely.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And the pain in the joints be due to the wisdom of the body's humors being out of balance.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And if it is a cushion that causes pain, then place it in the cavity, and hold the patient's foot to prevent them from being bitten by another one.
Capitol .xiii.	This chapter will focus on the treatment of a person in pain.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the affected area.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	Then apply a cushion to the affected area of the patient's body.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you have been working on the treatment of a person with a burn, put a cushion on the patient's foot and use another to treat the other part of the body.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	De cauterizatio del pes: (from the given context) De la cosa, e.g., a pain in the foot, is a common ailment in the medieval era, caused by an imbalance of humors.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	And if you do not profit from the doctor's treatment, but instead use the treatment for other ailments in the body.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then put your hand on the other leg.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And guard that which is necessary for the legs.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is the way to apply a hot cautery.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Then return the patient's eyelids to their place.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	This person has a condition that causes pain in their joints.
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you place a cautery on the head, specifically on the temples, the pain will be relieved.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And each member will be treated differently depending on the quantity of humors present.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	May the patient be treated according to their needs.
Capitol .xvi.	The first letter is likely the start of a chapter title in a translated version.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Then apply cauterization to their legs to stop the pain from spreading.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When they are two types of heat applied to the body, one is hot and the other is cold.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If they have a burning sensation in their feet, they are likely suffering from gout.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	And if the patient has been afflicted by gout in their foot, you should apply the cautery to the affected area, which is located near the thigh and may be treated with a poultice of some kind, but has a cushion on their leg.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	Then apply a poultice on the affected joint, and keep the patient's hand over the area to prevent the affected part from being infiltrated by the cushion.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then apply fire to the body of the patient, which is the form of the treatment.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Then burn the figure's flesh with another burning tool, slowly and carefully, so that the intestine or other parts are cauterized and the pain is relieved.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And if you see the eyelid of the patient already raised, another sign that they are ill.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And so you will raise the patient's leg, and after three days will have them rest for three days.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And if the patient's ailment is cured by applying a cushion to their body, they are said to have been cured by the poultice.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	If one were to return to the first cause of their ailment, it is customary for doctors to use a cautery on the other eye.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	When the illness reaches the eye, they say it's a good idea to cauterize the eye, so that the patient doesn’t have another pain in their legs.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	When your legs are placed on their thighs, a cushion should be used to keep them warm and healthy.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	E si you have already found the pain in the body's joints, use the following words to describe it.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	When joints are inflamed, the pain is felt in the legs and feet.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Then apply heat to the affected area; for if you do not apply a cushion, it will be a painful experience.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And if you have already opened the space between the patient's legs, then place another cushion on their chest to prevent them from being affected by the pain.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	Guessed translation: Then return to yourself the patient’s leg or arm so that you can apply your remedies.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the way to cauterize the myrtle leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And so, wise men have different opinions on what causes it, but we know that humors cause it.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	The patient should be treated with respect and dignity.
Capitol .xvii.	"The 17th chapter."
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	E si es necessary to cauterize the legs of the body.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you are curing a wound in the patient's legs, the rest should be treated as follows.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	Then place a cushion under them to support their intestine.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you have to use a cautery on their legs, you must first carefully apply pressure to stop the bleeding.
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	This sentence is in Catalan, which has been translated incorrectly from English sources.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, make a cushion upon the other leg.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you wish, the patient's pain will be as great as your efforts.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	However, the man who is skilled at his work is better at their craft.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And if there is an opening in the patient's leg, put a cushion under it.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	Then apply a cushion to that area and hold it open.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And so, if you wish to make a small incision on the legs or the nose of a patient.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	At the beginning of the treatment, let the patient be placed on their legs by another person.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	This is an example of a guess:  This is a statement about the treatment of illness using a cautery.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	The cushion in the body cavity to be used for treating fistulas; so that the patient does not experience pain.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	Then apply a cauterization tool to their body if necessary.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol .xviii. translates to Chapter 18.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	And then, if there is a need for burning to be applied to their legs, it should be done by someone skilled in the use of the cautery tool.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Swelling in the child's mouth can be caused by various factors, but often occurs around the lips and tongue.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	And thus, when you treat someone for ailments in the legs, it doesn't work to cauterize them.
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And so, if it's necessary to treat a patient's pain in the legs, they should be treated accordingly.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	And you will have placed a cushion on their legs.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And place your hand on their legs to stop the bleeding from the burn.
Capitol .xix.	Capitol .xix. should be translated as Chapter 19.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the area of the thighs.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if the patient has a sore throat and is suffering from a cold, they have to make an incision in the palate, and apply cautery to the affected area.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	So, if the patient's gut is healed, we must now treat the underlying cause.
Capitol .xx.	"Then comes the chapter on the treatment of the patient's wounds."
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Single-line guessed translation: When you have the patient's teeth and gums checked for pain, also check for tenderness in the area to be treated.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	And if you have a fever that needs to be treated by applying remedies, use a cautery to reduce it.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	Then return the patient's legs to their natural position.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	E then apply a poultice to the area so that the humors do not escape.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol .xxi.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On the treatment of tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	Then burn the affected tooth or use another method for applying heat to the jaw and teeth.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	And if you want to treat pain in a patient's stomach or intestines, use a cautery that is applied to the cows' hoof and use a hot cautery on their legs.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then apply another cushion under their feet.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	When a tooth is affected by pain, it is customary to call it a toothache.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	But if the cushion or the heat of the fire is too strong for them, then place a cushion on their head or feet.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then apply the cauterizer to the area, but ensure it doesn't touch the patient's cushion.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	This is a reference to the process of applying heat to a cauterized area.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And if it is necessary, cauterize according to what the patient's condition requires.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	This is the way a cannula is made.
Capitol .xxii.	Another one must be placed on their legs.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the treatment of gout.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When the body is affected by humor in two parts, use a cushion to apply it.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, you should use a cautery to burn away the inflammation.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the ointment to that area and treat with a bandage.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And here is how to use a lancet for treatment: one must place a cushion under them.
Capitol .xxiii.	The body is treated as a whole by burning them directly onto the affected area with a hot cautery.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	And then apply a cautery to the legs.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	Then the patient's body is to be heated with heat from the cushion on their legs, and then you will treat them with medicines that are appropriate for a disease called gout.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And apply heat to the patient's throat if needed, but only slightly.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize the neck of the spine.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And if your doctor says that the patient's liver has been affected by a hot cautery, use another cushion for their knees.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then apply heat to the affected area; if another cushion is needed, place it on the patient's legs.
Capitol .xxiiii.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to their ailments, put your hand on their joint.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	This refers to the treatment of illness in the lungs and coughing.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	Then if necessary, the patient should be treated with a cushion under their legs to prevent further complications.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, let the patient's hands be covered with cushions.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	E siat lo metge lo qual ha de fer la cura.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And now, the way to apply a cautery on their legs and feet.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	And so apply the cautery to their legs.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	And if the patient has a fever or swelling, they are usually called back to the table by a physician's assistant.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus the two sources are brought together.
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And if there are no other signs of the disease, it is called a "cold" by the doctors.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	E so have been placed on the legs, and if they are in need of more support.
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes the patient's intestines are treated by applying a cushion to them, and another way for them to be used.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then apply pressure to the intestine to stop the bleeding.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the cushion is placed on the chest, then cauterize the joints.
Capitol .xxvi.	E aprop reducat o, a proper translation would be more accurate.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	This refers to the treatment of a condition affecting the stomach, likely involving cautery.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	Then, for the patient's own good, you should cauterize the intestines to prevent them from being drawn out.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery is appropriate to the amount of pain, the patient will be in good health.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And here's the cushion that should be used for this type of treatment.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the stomach, then do so according to the amount of pain you want, and you will heal by applying a certain amount of heat.
Capitol .xxvii.	Then apply the appropriate cautery to the affected area.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Then apply a cauterization to the affected area.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	Translation:  If you are a doctor, apply cauterization to the affected area.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And if a person's body has been infiltrated by excess humors, they are said to have the gout, which affects their legs, and they should be treated accordingly.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not press your hand upon the patient's body.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the pain is caused by a cold humor, it can be said to have gout.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cushion:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And if you are careful, it is possible to perform cauterization on the patient's legs, which is a delicate procedure.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	The text is likely describing how to apply a treatment for gout, but the wording suggests a misunderstanding of the condition and its causes.
Capitol .xxviii.	The text describes a doctor's role in treating gout, using a cautery tool to apply heat to the affected area.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Then apply cauterization to the area of the liver if necessary.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	At that point, if a boil appears, one should know that it's a sign of infection, which needs to be treated.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the intestines it is already necessary to use medicine.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	The patient's intestine has been affected by an ailment, which causes pain, so another method of treatment is to apply cautery to the affected area.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	Then you must apply a cautery to their legs, so that the burn can be controlled by the patient.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	Then, you should place a cushion on the other's legs to help them recover.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And if a doctor has to burn the foot to cure someone, they will know how to do it properly.
Capitol .xxix.	In the 29th chapter ...
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	The pain is in the foot, so it is called a "plague".
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	This is a Latinized phrase that means: And if you want to do as they did in the past, you can use the ancient methods of treating with leeches.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Then apply a cushion to the patient's leg and use a bandage to prevent bleeding.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	The patient should be treated in accordance with the traditional practices for treating their condition.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	This translates to: Let the patient be treated by a physician, for if they are left untreated, it may be forgotten that the joint pain is caused by gout.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	Perhaps: Yes, in this kind of treatment, it's customary to use a cautery tool for the other ailments?
Capitol .xxx.	Here's the translated line:
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	This refers to the process of cauterization used for treating ailments in the legs.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you cure the disease of the patient's body with a cautery, there are three ways to apply it.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	This means that the patient's condition is most likely gout.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And if you want to treat it, apply heat.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	E if the patient's condition allows, you can use another method of cauterization for the other side.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And so, if it is necessary to make corrections on the surface of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then apply cauterization to the patient's legs, place a cushion beneath them, and use another to hold them in place while applying the cautery.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And so you have made four cauterizations.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, make a cautery brand with a cushion under their legs.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Then, apply medicine to their legs and another treatment to the other parts of the body.
Capitol .xxxi.	Of the 31st chapter
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Another word for "the cure of" is "treatment of."
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Then apply a cushion to them (the legs) if necessary.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	This is a bit tricky because it seems like you're asking for a translation of something that doesn't exist in English.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And if the patient's pain is located in the legs or elsewhere, then apply heat.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And place your cushion on their legs, for you are now using a hot cautery.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	When the body is afflicted with gout, apply two cushions to the patient's legs.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	Then the patient's foot is cauterized to treat a disease caused by cold humors in their legs.
Capitol .xxxii.	Gout is caused by an excess of cold humors in the body, which causes them to become inflamed.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Then return the burning pain in their legs to its original location.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the wound is inflamed, you should apply a cautery to the affected area.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	Then apply a burning cautery to the patient's legs, as well as a cautery to the ends of the leg bones to burn away the excess uric acid.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	The patient's bowels are affected by fever and chills, apply cauterization to their legs.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Translation: And if the intestine is exposed for a long time, it may be called gout by other doctors.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Then apply a compress to their legs, and then they will be cured by these causes.
Capitol .xxxiii.	And apply cauterization to the affected area to reduce inflammation.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	The translation is: This refers to cauterizing the veins in the leg.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	Gently heat the patient's legs and apply cautery to the areas where other doctors have made diagnoses, and use a hot iron for the stomach and a cushion for support.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if you are treating swelling in the intestines and feet, you should do so without causing pain.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Then apply the cautery to the affected area.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Translation: Then, apply the treatment to the affected areas, such as the anus or another area where the pain is located.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	Then apply three poultices to the affected area, as we said above, for those who are suffering from rheumatism or gout, apply poultices to their legs.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if the stomach of the patient becomes inflamed, you should apply a cooling cautery to the area around the stomach to avoid the pain from spreading to other parts of the body.
Capitol .xxxv.	This appears to be a medieval medical text in Latin, likely describing a surgical procedure.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	And if you apply heat to the body, it will cause pain in their legs.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you apply pressure to a wound, it will often cause the fluid to rise up in the body, but the cushion should be placed on the legs.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then apply a cautery to the foot.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do they place a cushion on their legs, so that the patient's intestines are not affected by the procedure.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	Then apply cautery to their legs, and another one on the body as a whole.
Capitol .xxxvi.	This text likely refers to a specific type of medical treatment involving a procedure.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	And they are hot, the doctors will call them fistulas by nature.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When the nature of the patient's illness requires it, we will apply a cushion to their legs.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Thus, if the patient has a wound in the leg or foot which is deep, you should use a poultice to treat it.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	And if you are treating someone for it, use a cushion to apply heat.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then apply a hot compress to the affected area on the foot, which will help the patient if they have pain in the joint, or are suffering from a fever.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And they call it another pain within the legs when applying the cautery to all of them at once.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	When the pain is in the bladder or intestines, they should be treated with caution.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Then put your hand on their abdomen.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	When the patient is seated for a long time, they are susceptible to the dangers associated with blood stasis.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the pain persists, a physician may need to be consulted.
Capitol .xxxvii.	This refers to using a tool or placing a cushion on the patient's legs, while another person attends to their needs.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	The treatment of another type of gout (using the term "ronhos" to suggest it's a specific type of joint pain)
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When there are pains in the thighs due to cold, it's important to apply a bandage or cauterize the area to prevent further complications.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And so you see, the second [sentence] will be considered a serious cautery.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	When treating inflammation of the bladder, always use a pointed tool.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	Then apply the heat to the affected area by cauterizing them.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	Apply heat to the affected area of the body.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	E  sia  clavia e si  sia la (or another) cushion, you use to treat it.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol .xxxix.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	And so the patient's body should be heated up with the cushion.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When using the three cauteries, it is important to use them properly.
Capitol .xl.	This is the forty-first chapter.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	This refers to a procedure for treating a dislocation.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	Gout is a condition that is caused by an imbalance in the body's humors.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the patient's legs are affected by their dislocation.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then, if the patient's body has been burned by the cautery, place a cushion on their legs and ankles to prevent further burning.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And if it is necessary to apply heat to the area, use the proper methods.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if you can't be present, another doctor will do for that person.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if a burn appears, apply cauterization to the affected area.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter xli.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	This is a translation for the vein that runs down the back of the thigh.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	That which is a cure for humors in the leg.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The manner of using a cautery on the foot is by means of a cushion or fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	The patient's legs should be caressed with a hot cautery to promote healing.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	When you are treating an ailment in the legs, it is customary to place the patient on a cushion.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	At least four times a year I am asked to translate this.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish to burn the fat, use another burn on the patient's thighs.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the way to treat a pain in the legs by using cautery when the pain is concentrated on one specific area.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	This pain-relieving technique must be used on patients with pain in the legs and feet. The cushion is placed upon the patient’s legs to prevent them from moving while the other two techniques are used.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the patient has a hot humor, use cold cauterization, and for a cold humor, use hot.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And then apply a cautery to the foot three or four times.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	When pain affects the legs, they are to be called for treatment.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And if you have been burned by hot vapors, you are to hold your hands on the burning, and prevent further injury.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	E already I have seen some cauterize the cushion's surface, they say it's called surgery.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then apply cold treatment to the patient's stomach, and you should know that the abdomen was the site of the problem area.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if there is pain in the two parts of the body, put cushions under them.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	When they are burned, the doctors will use a cushion to support the patient's leg.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And you should use a cautery over their three-quarters (of the body)?
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	The physician should use cautery to treat the affected area of the body.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And so cauterize that area between the legs.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Leave it open for three days; and apply a poultice to the affected area for three days.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	This means that the patient's condition is being described as a medical problem.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	And if the patient has pain in their legs, apply cushions under them.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Mays cauteri are medicines applied to the feet.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	Then apply heat to the area, and have a physician treat the patient's condition.
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And if the patient's body has been affected by a cold, then apply warm water to their knees.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Then apply the cautery with warm water on the patient's body.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And if it is necessary to keep the patient's bowels from being constipated, then he should have his intestines or bowels treated for three days, and a cushion placed under them, and another on his legs, which will cause the intestine to be put back in place.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then they should cauterize that which causes gout.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And then apply the treatment to their body part as needed.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This refers to the way to treat the condition with a hot iron or fire cautery.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	When using the cautery, be careful to use only the amount necessary for the patient's health.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	The cushion should be placed under the patient's legs to prevent them from becoming cold.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And already put back into place all the intestines, and another cushion will be placed on his chest.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And if it is hot, apply cold medicines to them, and use another cushion for the pain in their feet.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	Then apply the same treatment to the other leg as well.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And so, when pain is caused by inflammation in the body, it is known as gout.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	Let it be left three hours after the treatment by which the patient's leg has been treated.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And if you need to apply heat to a specific part of the body, use a hot compress on that area.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	Then know that these medicines are used to treat swelling caused by humors in the body, except for the bowels (which are affected by other things).
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	When the body is affected by a disease caused by cold humors, and the intestines are treated with a cushion to prevent further infiltration.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Then apply a poultice to the foot.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And if you find that pain occurs in their legs, they need to be treated by a doctor.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This refers to the way the body's humors are distributed:  "And if you apply this cautery to the surface of the foot, you will have burned a portion of the intestine."
Capitol .xlii.	When pain in the foot arises from cold humors, it is customarily called gout.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of the legs, leg pain
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	And if the pain comes from a cold humour, it's called sciatica.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And if the patient has a cautery done in any other way than for gout, then do the following: use a hot cushion on the affected area, and apply the cautery to the legs using this method.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	And if it is customarily necessary to apply a cauterization to the foot, because they are already treating the patient's bowels.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And let there be cautery applied to the affected area.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	When you have treated them, if they are willing, your three or four assistants should be on their hands and knees to work on the patient's body.
Capitol .xliii.	Another method was used to treat the joint pain.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	From cauterization, at the beginning of the illness, the patient experiences pain in the legs.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	This is a description of a medical procedure for treating gout in children.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And if there are other symptoms, such as swelling in the legs or feet, then treat it with cautery.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And so when you apply heat to the patient's body, use a cautery on the legs and cauterize the other one.
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	Then apply a cushion on their feet, and the other one on their legs, to keep the spondils in place.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	If you wish, cauterize the spine, using two or three lines on the limbs.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	Then apply the cautery to the area of the wound on their body, and only then they should be given relief from pain.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then apply the cautery to the affected area.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	Then apply your hand to the area for cauterization if the patient's condition is caused by an imbalance of humors.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter xliv.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	This refers to treatment for gout using cautery.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When there are gout-like pains in the body, the doctors used to say 'gout' only for the cold humors that affected the legs, and they were wrong.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore if they are healed, then it is necessary to do something about their feet, which may be caused by another thing.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And if you need to cauterize that ailment, use a heated tool for the purpose.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	The patient's body should be cauterized using olive oil.
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And you will apply a cushion to the legs.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if pain occurs in the legs or other joints, use a hot cautery on that area.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if it is necessary to burn you are to apply the cautery on the hands, and another for the legs, so that the cushion may be applied firmly.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the patient's pain must be described, then apply the cautery to their legs.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	Then return to the patient, and the word "goût" is used when referring to the taste of the food they eat.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And so they placed it on the foot, making points on the toes.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	Then if the patient has been cauterized on the legs or arms, a cushion is to be placed under their feet.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	When there are symptoms in the foot, the doctor should be consulted.
Capitol .xlv.	This is a note from chapter 45.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On proper treatment of inflammations.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	...And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's legs and feet, then apply a poultice to the area...
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And if you have a wound on your leg, and another on their feet.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And if you wish to treat the patient's foot pain, it is necessary to use a cautery in a circular motion.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so if you have a cushion under their legs, put the other cushion on the other side of the body.
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	It is necessary for the patient's legs.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	Then apply a cushion to their legs and place your hand on it.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	And if you have to make incisions on the intestine or bone marrow, use a tool called a cautery.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery on their ankles to ensure that the blood is drawn from the legs and not from the patient's body.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Then apply heat to the intestine to relieve it.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	When you are treating a patient, if pain arises from a wound, it is because the bone has been touched by the fire.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And if a patient has a sharp pain in their limbs, it is said to be caused by humors that have become too hot.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	E apro que curas e'n tre'l loc de'l boder le'n siet a la sua cura.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if there are other humors, then they are treated by cauterization.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	Then apply a cushion to their legs, and seal the area to prevent further harm.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And when you have opened the joint (of the patient), apply a bandage to their legs to keep the blood from pooling.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And if one wants to open the leg or foot of a patient, they must be careful to apply it correctly.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And you must cleanse the affected area of the disease's humors by applying this remedy to heal it completely.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And so we call them a break if the pain is in the legs and they are not healed by other means.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And if it is necessary to cauterize the wound on their legs, one must apply another cushion under them.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And that the patient's hand must be used to hold the cushion on their legs.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Then apply the cautery to the area of the wound.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	Then put your hand on their hands to prevent them from being burned.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And if a hot iron cautery is used on the body, there are many ways to do so depending on the size of the area being treated.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If the pain persists, you must try again to apply the cushion on the patient’s legs so that they are treated with a cautery if they have been experiencing other pains.
Capitol .xlvii.	This chapter concerns itself with the treatment of gout in the legs.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	The translation for "Le praiseless disease" should be used as a reference.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Then they must be held back by force or by a strong hand.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	E no es necessari que se’l tracti amb el foc per fer-lo sortir de la composició del cos.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And if you cauterize the legs of someone who is suffering from a severe attack of gout.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if you see that leprosy has spread to the area of the toes, you should apply cautery to the feet, taking care to use a cushion for the toes, and only treat the other areas of the body with the cautery.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And if you're using the treatise to heal, keep your hand on the other joints while applying cautery to their feet.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat (meaning 'are cauterized') for a reason.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And if the pain is in the joints, that pain should be called mautid by other people.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And if there are great humors in the body, it is a case for the physician to treat them.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a healing remedy to the patient's body.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Then you might use a cautery on them.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	Then apply a cautery to that area for treatment.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And if it is necessary to hold the patient's body open, the surgeon will use a cushion.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the appropriate ointment to that area (of the body), which has been opened by the use of a poultice.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And if it is necessary to cauterize any part of the body, and place it on the thigh of the patient, then the other servant's will be taken care of by the patient's own cushion, which is placed under them.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	This is a very rough translation because the language isn't precise enough to be sure.
Capitol .xlix.	The xlixth chapter.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	And apply cupping therapy to the skin, for the treatment of morfea.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	Then apply the medicinal cauterization to the affected area.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to treat a disease, a portion of the intestine should be treated in the same way.
Capitol .l.	Capitol .l. means Chapter 1 in this context.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	The patient has been burned.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer is caused by an imbalance of humors, then treat them as you would for gout in the previous translation.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the flesh of the body, the doctors are used to that being called gout.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And if you have a pain in the bowels, apply your hand to the affected area.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the legs, they apply it to those limbs.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When a fever is delayed in its maturation, it is necessary to cauterize the legs or feet.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	Then apply cauteri to the patient's feet if they need it.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if there are painful sores in that place, the cushion will be used to treat them.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	And so they cauterize the corrodent.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	You are treating the patient for gout.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, treat the pain according to the body part affected by the ailment.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Then apply a cautery to that area to remove all the impurities from within.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area for three days, cauterizing the flesh to remove the bad humors.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And that which has opened the patient's bowels should be treated as such.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	And if it is necessary to make cushions upon the foot, the surgeon will need to use a cushion on the legs and another on the hands.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And apply acute medicine to the affected area.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But by fire you must cauterize the disease, otherwise it will be painful for the patient.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	Therefore, you are already familiar with the treatment for acute pain in the legs and feet, and other ailments, using quick cauterization.
Capitol .liii.	The doctor's instructions are for treating pain in the legs caused by a specific ailment.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	This is a tricky one! Here's a possible translation based on your examples:
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	And then there are two types of cauterization, one for the cure of hot and cold humors.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	You have already used a cushion to treat the patient's ailment, which is why they are now suffering from a pain in their feet.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And so then you must cauterize the area at the cushion, and use another to hold le down.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And that's how you treat the patient for three days.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply a poultice of wild leeches to the patient's affected area for one night, because if the pain were to be in their feet, it would be necessary to use leeches on them.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And apply to the area a poultice of meat, which will heal them.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And when the patient's body is cold, apply a cushion to their thighs, place another cushion under their legs for support, and use it to treat them.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And then you have placed your hand on the other one's legs, and another on their chest.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
Capitol .liiii.	The 53rd chapter.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	When there's pain in the joints or limbs, they often call it a "hot" treatment.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	Quan endeve you cauterize to heal the patient.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And if you hurry to return to the doctor's health, he will be able to treat the illness that afflicts his body.
Capitol .lv.	This is the 50th chapter.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Then apply the other cushions as needed for support.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	The text describes using a burning myrtle stick as a treatment for an ailment, likely referring to a type of surgery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	Then apply a hot iron to the patient's legs, if necessary; otherwise, apply heat to the body in other ways.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	May these words be spoken to you as if the first were a cushion under their legs for a proper evacuation.
Capitol lvi.	Capitol lvi. is a Latin phrase that translates to "Chapter 56".
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	The patient has an injury to the foot from archery that needs cauterization.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	And if it is necessary to hold the patient's body open for the treatment of plague sores.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	A hot cautery is used to treat the pain caused by gout in the feet.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And if you have already opened the area of the legs, place large hot irons on their hands.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then place a hot iron on the area where the blood vessel is inflamed.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	Then if the patient is bleeding from an artery, apply a cautery to stop the bleeding.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	Then keep the patient safe from harm.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	E sapias that when blood is needed from the leg, the doctor's usually use a hot cautery to treat it.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	And if it is necessary to restrict movement in their case.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	Then apply a cautery to the area of the vein, if necessary, and the patient's body should be kept warm and dry.
Comensa la segonda partida.	And now commence the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	The patient's legs are to be treated differently depending on the type of ailment they have.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	Then put your hand on the legs or foot to locate the pain.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	Then, in this chapter, we will discuss how to treat those who suffer from pain in their limbs.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	Then you will learn about cautery in this chapter.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	This sentence translates to:
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And place a cushion on their legs, and so on, for all those who are afflicted by gout.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	Then I will remind you to be careful of the way you handle the patient's legs.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And if the disease continues and is severe, apply a cushion to the patient's cavity.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And if it is a pernicious disease that affects the whole body, then it is called a disease by another.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	Aprop the intestine; you will place your hand on their legs to prevent the intestines from being exposed.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And place your hand on the patient's body, above the area to be treated, and when the pain subsides, apply a cushion to their leg or foot.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	And if you have already applied a cushion to their legs, they are in pain.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And if you are treating someone for a pain in the bowels, you should use a cautery with caution on their feet.
Capitol primier.	This refers to the beginning of a chapter in an ancient text.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	And so apply the cautery to the child's legs.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Sapias que questa malautia motas:
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes the pain is hidden in the legs.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	And if a doctor has seen a patient with this ailment on their legs, then he will know how to treat them.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And if you have already treated the child's head with the fire cautery, you should know that his/her humors are too hot for the heat to be applied there.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	This sentence describes applying cauterization to treat a condition (likely related to inflamed tissue) that causes pain in the legs.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	When there is an inflammation in the affected area, it will be treated by applying a cushion to the joint pain.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And so if the humors are more inflamed and there is an abscess, you should treat them with a cautery.
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And so the doctors would say that the pain in the foot is due to an excess of humors causing the water to be forced out.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate the legs and feet, apply cautery to the affected area.
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And if a burn is needed on the limbs, apply the cauterization to the affected area with a pointed tool after the fifth day.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And if you are treating a boil (carbuncle), apply an incision in front of the patient's right or left foot, as needed.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And place another cushion on their feet when you cauterize them.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter 2
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	And if they are to be treated with cautery, then apply it carefully to their intestine or other areas.
Capitol segon.	This is the second chapter.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When encountering pain in the ankles or foot, apply cauterization to the affected area.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And thus, when you apply a pointed cautery to a patient's legs, they are likely to be treated with a cushion under their feet; the other symptoms are for the doctor to consider.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And place your hand on the patient's body to feel for the pain of the disease.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you wish, put your hand on his foot to be used for treatment on the body.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And if there's a need to apply heat to their legs or feet in order to keep the intestine from protruding, they should be kept covered.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	And if the pain does not subside, place a hot iron on it.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And if it is necessary to drain the humors from the body, it must be done carefully by the quantity of blood that is present in the foot, so that the patient's pain doesn't worsen.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And another consider the plague, so that they may be protected from its causes.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And apply cauterization to the affected area for healing.
Capitol .iii.	And when there was pain in the feet, the people who were doctors would stand by and wait to see if it was necessary to apply a hot cautery to the affected area.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	This is a guess at what the text in your example (source 2) might be trying to say:
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When the pain is felt in the feet, it’s called gout by doctors, as they are familiar with the ailment.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The manner in which the patient's temples are treated in the operation is described as follows.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if the patient has a cushion to soften the pain in their legs or feet, it will be less painful for them.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you wish to treat the patient's condition, apply a bandage to their legs.
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	This text describes how to treat gout by applying a heated cautery to specific areas of the body.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	And if the blood vessels are thin, the pain would be less intense.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then, if necessary, evacuate wine from the blood.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	When the pain of the arrow is great, hold the patient in two places with a strong thread or with two strong bandages so that their blood does not flow freely.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And apply cautery to remove the excess fluids from the body, which are causing the pain in the lower part of their legs.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	If you wish, use a cushion to prevent that from happening, and apply it on the legs, or elsewhere if needed.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And if it is customary to call gout a disease that affects the stomach or other parts because of humidity, it's better if the patient has a fever or suffers from a hot complexion.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And if you have to be treated for gout, use a cushion to apply heat to the affected joint area.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	Then, if the pain worsens, apply another cautery to the affected area.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if any of those causes are present in that case, place your hand on the place where the pain is to prevent the affliction from spreading.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And if it is necessary to use a heated instrument for treatment, it’s important to apply it carefully to avoid injuring the surrounding tissues.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is how you use a cautery.
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And place your hand on the patient's ribs.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But if the pain is in the legs, the patient should be placed on their back, so that the bowel can be examined for a possible hernia.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	So when the gout affects a limb, it is customary to treat it with heat applied to the affected area.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is best done when the patient is lying down.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	Then if there's an open wound on the foot, use another cushion to protect it.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	This refers to the use of a cautery to treat the pain of acute gout.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	And the patient's body must be treated by applying a cushion to the area on their legs, where the pain was in the knees.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And if you are experiencing pain in your joints, which you have called gout, caused by an imbalance of the humors in the body's front.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the patient's body has a tear in two places: one on the leg, which is the same as that of the foot, and another on the other side of the tear in the leg, then make the tear longer.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And you must keep your hand on their legs.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if there are any cuts or openings on the body, make them three days apart.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you are treating the patient's dry intestines, you should use other methods.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	You have already found the patient's body.
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	The burning pain in the limbs can be treated by applying the cautery to their legs, and the patient must have them applied carefully so as not to cause further harm.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Apply a cushion to their legs.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then place a bandage on the patient's legs to protect them.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	Another way to say you have a cushion on the leg, and you place your hand on their body, and then burn them.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	This means that the doctors will call for the patient's health by making incisions on the body.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	Another person should hold the patient's legs while someone else works on the intestine.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And another cushion is placed on their feet, so that they are treated with heat, e.g., hot poultice.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	Then on the third day, apply the cushion to the affected area for three days.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	> This translates to something like: And if it is necessary to make cautery on the limbs below the head, a surgeon should be applied to their lower legs.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When joint pain is caused by severe cold that weakens the body, it is important to apply cauterization.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	Then apply heat to the intestine above and below the incision site, using a hot iron or cautery.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry out all the blood with a sponge or dry cloth.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And there rest upon their legs and apply heat to soothe them.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	Then if the abscess has subsided, apply an ointment made from four parts of oak gall and two parts of each part of the ingredients that are used for treating a wound.
Capitol .vi.	The text uses the word "et" which means "and" in Latin.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	From its literal meaning, it appears to be: About the cure of the ailment in the ear.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	So there are four types of causes for pain in the joints:
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And if it is a pain in the joints, then they are called humors, or something like that, for the other things, which are also called by the same name.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And if a patient has been afflicted by a condition where the skin is red and hot in the affected area, it is caused by these humors.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then if you are not a skilled surgeon, the procedure should be done by a professional.
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	Sometimes doctors use leeches on the arms to treat pain in the legs and feet.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is necessary to cauterize a patient's leg, you should place your hand on their leg and use a canula.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	E aprop extratte the cushion so that the patient's body does not become inflamed.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And you have to treat the ear with the same care as the rest of the body.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	The patient suffers from pain in the legs due to their intestines being affected.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	Then place your hand on the affected area to stop the blood from coming out.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Then if it is necessary to cauterize the affected area, then use that same tool on their thighs; place a cushion there to support the leg muscles during treatment.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And when you have found the cause of the illness, you will administer the cure and apply cautery to the affected area.
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	Then apply a cushion to their arm, and another under the knee.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And if you are thinking about a patient's illness that affects the body through subtle means, then the patient should be kept in a dry place to avoid further irritation.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	Then apply heat to the stone if it is not in the patient's urethra and the patient needs to be treated at the beginning of the illness and put a hot cloth on their legs, and start with that treatment.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	And then that you must take care that the water does not return to its former state.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	The first word "is cushion" and the second word "are cushions" are likely mistranslations from the original.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And if it be necessary to place so many cauterizations upon the patient's body as was said above, it is proper that they be called gout.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	When a beast's leg needs to be cauterized, then cauterize it as described in the previous section.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	Anoter si es necessitat de curar le patient's bowels, use le cushion on their legs.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you take the patient's words into account, then take the cushion from the foot, and a needle from another place.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And if you want to cauterize the pain from the joints, use a pointed tool for that purpose.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	Mays si no  aforementioned cushion for their treatment.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And that they use a hot iron to cauterize the affected area.
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And if you want to apply a poultice or need to make cuts there, they'll use a cushion for the pain and another one will be used to stop the bleeding.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And then apply heat to whatever is in the cautery's cavity if necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want to help, use a cushion under the elbow and apply your hand to the affected area —  the patient’s leg should be positioned on the cushion, and the other herbs or medicines should be applied to the chest.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	E aurelia that which you do in the thigh is on another.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And if it is the same cause as the pain in their legs, they should be treated with remedies that remove the humors.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	And when the surgeon cauterizes their ears, they are to hold their tools.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Then apply a cautery to the affected area on the flesh of the limb where the sore is located, as well as to the stomach or other areas that are needed.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	Gout, if caused by a specific humor in the patient's body, is a condition that requires treatment from a doctor.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	When you see a sign of that ailment which is called "malaute", place a cushion under them (under the affected area).
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so if you see the symptoms, treat them with a cautery to their affected part of the body.
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	And if a person has a pain in the leg, and a cushion is placed under the affected area.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	Then apply a cushion to the affected area, if necessary, and use other techniques to relieve the pain.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	Then apply the cautery to the patient's leg slightly near the knee.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And if you feel a pain in the body that causes a pain to the leg.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish to draw out the evil humors from an inflamed part of the body, it is best to apply a poultice made with herbs and oil.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If bloodletting occurs, you must apply the poultice soaked in the spirit of distillation, as described elsewhere in the text.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	The physician uses a cautery to treat illness in the patient, who is being treated for a malady.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Some doctors believe that the eyes are affected by cold humors when they are red and swollen.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Then he uses a cushion to support the patient's legs and another cushion to prevent the intestine from coming out.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	When you have a wound on your feet, it is customary to use a cautery tool.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best way to treat them is by burning and another cushion is placed on the legs, so that the burn will be confined to the area where the incision was made, or the affected parts are the only ones burned.
Capitol .ix.	This is the beginning of chapter nine, which discusses the treatment of gout in the limbs.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	And then apply the cauterization to the eyes if needed.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	The patient's illness is caused by some unknown factor.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	Another person should place cushions on their legs and feet to prevent them from moving during the procedure.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's body, the whole body will be treated with a cautery tool.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, it is customary to call it gout for a burn in the feet.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if it is necessary to make an incision on a body part, one should place a cushion under it.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if it is large, you must cauterize it to prevent further damage.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if you have a small amount of bad blood, it will be healed by a small dose of something (possibly an ointment) to help your body heal.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if a cautery is applied to the body in this way, you must keep it open for the patient's eyes.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	Then put your hand on the affected area to apply salt water.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the eye, then a cushion should be placed on their legs.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	A great physician attends to the patient's humors, and applies it.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And cushion your legs so the cushion doesn't move, but rather stays in place;
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And if you have already opened the body for a doctor to treat the patient's illness.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	And if it is necessary that you cauterize the vein, use the white heat method.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	And if you are treating the condition known as a deformed foot, cushion it.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And be careful not to injure the intestine when dealing with the problem near the head.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	When a fissure appears on the foot, then you must apply a poultice to the patient’s legs; if necessary, make small incisions with a knife to allow for drainage.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And if it is necessary to put the cushion on their back and another one on their feet.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the sick person's legs and feet.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	When an abscess appears on the leg, it can be treated with poultices.
Capitol .xi.	The following is a more accurate translation based on the provided text:
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	From the way it's written, it appears to be a medieval text that mentions "the manie" as if referring to a part of the body.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	This text appears to be in a language that resembles Latin but is likely a form of Occitan, a Romance language once spoken in southern France.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Therefore, if you have an ache in your left eye, use a hot coal to cauterize it; or if it's elsewhere on the body, use it there.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And so, if you have an opening in their flesh, they should be covered by a bandage made of cloth or fabric, and the cloth should be applied to the area with a mirror or other instruments.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	Then you have identified the location on the body affected by the ailment, the patient should be treated with medication to help it heal properly.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then apply the cauterizing tool to the area of the tear.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And then place a cushion under their legs, which are natural to the body.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Then you'll want to place a cushion on the patient's legs, as needed, and apply heat to relieve the pain.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And if the pain has subsided, you should apply a cautery to their feet.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	But if you wish to do so, apply the cushion to the affected area.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	He is, however, brave and courageous in his suffering.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	Then apply a different method for treating the patient's condition using this method, placing your hand on their eyes, etc.
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	Then comes another cushion to help you if your legs are swollen.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when the patient’s lips are closed with a suture, the wound will heal.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If you have a cushion, put it under the patient's body and cover them with it, along with their body being covered with another cushion.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	Therefore, if the pain is in the legs, it is said to be a pain of the leg muscles.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Then return the cushion to the patient's legs, and apply a poultice according to their condition.
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and so on, with the body's own;
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already cut into the extremities of the patient's body, then keep their legs open.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	And if there are any signs of inflammation on the body, and a cushion will be placed under the eye to see where the pain is located, and you should apply that same treatment to the affected area.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	Mays es that if a wound is in the leg and the patient has it in their thighs, they will be healed by cauterization.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	The patient's eyelids are elevated and the eyes do not have pain.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And then apply heat to the area where the pain is located.
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	And if it is necessary to use a hot cautery, do so carefully.
Capitol .xii.	Another cushion must be placed on the patient's legs.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	When there are many treatments for a disease, it is customary to call it gout.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	If the patient has pain in the bowels, use a cushion to treat them; if they have it in the limbs, then place a cushion on their feet.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And the length of the intestine should be about the length of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And so if there's an inflammation in the legs or feet, you need to treat them.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And the patient's condition will be relieved by a gentle touch.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then apply the needle to the foot, where it is necessary to use a cushion under the cushion and another on the chest, so that the needle penetrates the skin quickly and efficiently.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then apply the other one to the skin.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then you have to apply heat to the affected area of the body, in this case the eyelids.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	Then apply another cushion to the affected area.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And so you should leave the patient in their bed and let the body be treated for two or three days by the physician.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	E then you apply a cautery to the affected area.
Capitol .xiii.	This is a treatise on the treatment of wounds.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	When a treatment for the eye involves applying something to the eyelids, it is called a blepharoplasty.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When a cushion is placed under the foot, it is customary to call it gout.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Apply a bandage to the affected area.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And let it be known that you should not use cauterization for treatment.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Usa  herbs to heal the wounds after they are treated with a poultice of herbs and ointment has been applied.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treatment for your ailment will be to apply the cushion to your legs, that is the way to do it at first.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And if their hands are used to apply heat to the affected area.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	And then apply cautery to prevent the spread of humors in the leg.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This is a true case of a condition called xerosis, which is known as "true" or "genuine" in its name.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Then apply other remedies as needed for the patient's ailment.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	Then you must use a needle to pierce the flesh between the legs, for the pain is caused by the skin's inflammation.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then apply a cauterization to the patient's legs using your tool.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	Then apply the poultice to the chest area in order to stop the pain.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	The patient's legs are often called "the two points" in medieval medical texts.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And if a physician needs to examine the patient's body, they are the one who will be used for examination by the physician.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	When you have placed the cushion on the patient's legs and another on their hands.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Apply wool thread to the separated parts if they are stiff.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you are unable to cauterize, use another method.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate the body from the cushion between the two lips of the vulva.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	And in the case of the patient's recovery from illness, they are said to be healed in different ways depending on their condition.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	E a cushion for the patient's comfort.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	When the pain of gout in the legs has been relieved, they are located on the surface of the legs or foot.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	Then apply heat to the eye and thus reduce the humour in the body, or open the area around the eye, if necessary.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	Then apply a cautery to the patient's body using a small incision, but ensure the patient remains calm during the procedure.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	When the eyelid becomes inflamed due to an excess of cushion in the foot, apply cold compresses.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then apply your hand to the affected area and cauterize the gut, using heat to treat gout.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And if the patient's condition worsens after three days, use a cushion to apply pressure on their legs again for three days.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	When placing remedies on the affected areas, consider the use of a cushion for the body.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Then it is known that there are two types of gout, one caused by cold humors which cause pain, and the other by nerves which can be similar to the first.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	When placed in two species, it is customary for doctors to use a special tool to treat them, but this translation assumes the text is originally in Italian.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	If the patient suffers from pain in their feet, it's called gout when they have too much inflammation in the body.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	"And if it's necessary to use a needle for a medical procedure, hold your hand over the patient's wound."
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And then you will cauterize that area.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Then, if the patient has persistent pain in the area below the knees, apply cold compresses to their legs.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you have already opened the space between the patient's legs, you must place your hand on the affected area to prevent bleeding.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	Make sure the foot doesn't touch the ground and that you are careful with the hot cautery.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Aprop the condition of gout can be treated by cauterizing the affected area.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if you cannot put the needle back into the intestine, it is because it is not possible to place it so that it reaches the bone.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish to make incisions, it should be done on his legs.
am subtilitat.	And if it is a subtle ailment.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you are going to cauterize the foot, it should be done when the patient's humors are rare-fied and the pain is in the feet, so that the intestine or leg of the patient does not get burned.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then place another cautery on the afflicted area again.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then apply heat to their feet to heal them.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	Acusually the patient's tears are held back by pain, but they are caused by humors that have been released from the eyes.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And apply a cushion to their tear ducts while they are still weeping, and so they will be healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Gout is a disease that affects the body by causing inflammation in the joints, especially the big toe.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	And so cauterize the foot, to stop the blood flow to the affected area.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	The patient's eyelids are affected by swollen humors, which are treated with a hot compress.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	This person has suffered a wound in the area where their bowels are, and they have been treated for it.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And let your incision be made in the leg, which you will know to be the proper location for it.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	And then you must apply a poultice to the affected area, and when the patient's foot has been treated with a cushion by the doctor, he will be in good health after applying this poultice.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if it is the case that there is still some inflammation present, it is called a "hot" or "burning" disease by the physician.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	Then apply heat to the legs only when the patient has a natural tendency for inflammation.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol .xviii. translates to Chapter 18.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	This refers to a treatment method involving the collection of fluids from the body.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	If the pain is too much for them to bear, hold the patient's body still by using another cushion.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, you must first examine the patient's legs for signs of illness.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And if you have already instructed the patient to hold still their intestines (or whatever they are using as a metaphor for discomfort).
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	And thus you treat a bad leg with other methods.
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	Then use a hot needle to draw out blood from the body.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And if you have placed a cushion on their legs; the other veins are to be cauterized.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	Then apply a cushion to their body so that they can be healed by the following method: place a poultice on the affected area.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Then if you want to prevent the pain from spreading, use a poultice.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the poultice to the affected area again.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form in which one should treat the patient.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter .xix.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	For the removal of the pain in the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you have cured the shins, put your hand on them to keep them from being inflamed.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	Therefore, when the bone is exposed and has black spots, apply a cautery to the affected area as a last resort.
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	E.g.
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And then, place a cushion on the injured part, as if to say "it is caused by the bone" being a little bit at a time until their position is known.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And then apply a hot cautery to the patient's legs?
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	And if that pain persists, use cautery to remove the bad humors and another to treat the other symptoms.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to avoid further complications, here's how to treat the condition using this method.
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The patient's limbs are weak and should be treated with the utmost care.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then place your hand on the foot to prevent the swelling from spreading further, and treat the condition properly.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Thus it is customary to cauterize the affected area with the appropriate tools.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, since the patient's body is affected by gout.
Capitol .xx.	Capitol 20 is where you would find the English translation for the rest of the text.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	And then the patient's legs are burned to prevent swelling in their feet.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	And when joint pain arises, apply to the patient's legs a poultice of the same sort as would be used for a wound on the body, which you should cover with a cushion, and then you should place it upon the injured area.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	Then fold a cushion four times in half to make four layers, and use it on the legs.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Then return the patient to their usual health.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then apply cupping therapy to these areas if they are in pain by applying a cup.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	Then treat the ligaments as they are softened.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then you will say that the patient's leg should be kept in its place.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	If the patient's intestines are swollen, apply cauterization to their legs and the area where they were injured.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol .xxi.  is an indicator that the text will continue after the initial 21 chapters.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Then apply a sharp instrument to remove the uvula.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When dealing with the first person suffering from pain, you will need to use the needle in one way or another.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then lay the cushion on their legs and let another cushion rest upon their head.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And for the plague to be soothed by a cushion, apply a healing balm.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes apply another cushion to the legs of the patient with a hot cautery.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Place a cushion under the patient's feet.
Capitol .xxii.	Another hand
De curacio de alconati.	This means treatment for gout.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	When it is necessary to make incisions in the body, it is customary for doctors to call the condition "alconati".
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	And if you wish to make an incision, you must first prepare the area by reducing the swelling with a cushion.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it doesn't go down, you can use it to make points, which are just called "the gout" by doctors.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	Mays, if you are not able to cure the inflammation in the foot, then he needs to be treated by a specialist.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Therefore, if it is dislocated, use a hot poultice to reduce swelling.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to treat the foot, they should be treated with other means.
Capitol .xxii.	Another hand should be placed on their chest, then apply cold water to the affected area.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	This refers to the treatment of a condition affecting the person's back (the "huel" being likely the "leg")
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	This sentence is in a language similar to Latin, but with some variations. It likely describes a medical procedure, as the words "dolor" (pain) and "metges" (doctors) suggest.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the patient's eye, apply it to the eyelid; if it is to the feet, they are placed on the legs, etc.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	and if it is necessary to use both legs, apply heat to the left leg first, then the right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And if you have already opened the way for the great pain on their legs, near the joint.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	Then place your hand on their legs, preventing the pain from spreading.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	When the ailment is known to cause pain in the joints, it is necessary to use a pointed cautery on those areas.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And if you can see the patient's pain in their body, then apply cautery to that part of the body.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Therefore, if you are able to put the patient's intestines back in place, then do so with a cushion.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And when the cushion is full of pus, you should apply a cautery to it.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	May our time be blessed by those who are skilled in using a hot cautery for medical procedures.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then, if a cautery is necessary for the treatment of a painful condition, then place a cushion on the affected joint to prevent further pain.
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And therefore treat that joint with a cautery to open up the blockage.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then they apply a cushion on the legs.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	When the intestines are inflamed and doctors know how to treat them, they can be treated.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And apply a cauterization to the part that needs it.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And if it is the patient's disposition, it will be the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Then apply a bandage to the affected area.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And you must take care when dealing with someone suffering from the pain of a gout attack, for they are easily offended.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	And if there are other methods to treat the pain, they should be applied gently.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	And if an abscess arises in their legs, they will need to be treated for that abscess.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	When the pain is severe, the patient's face turns pale for several days.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And keep it warm on their legs, et altro
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	The disciple is not exempt from the operation if it is necessary to cauterize the skin in those cases.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And if there are points of pain in the legs, apply a poultice to their location.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	And perhaps you have seen a patient suffering from a condition called gout.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And when there are such things as pointed sores on the feet, it's customary to call them gout.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And if they are to be treated for sharp pains in the limbs or joints, it is by applying a cautery to the affected area.
Capitol .xxiv.	The chapter on the treatment of a swelling in the legs begins.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Then comes the treatment of flesh wounds.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	This is a description of some medical conditions that resemble a scorpion's sting to the patient.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And if there is a need for medical attention because of the illness being caused by a cancerous growth in their body.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, if you have a problem with a pain in the foot that is not fraudulent or cancerous, you should treat your own foot first.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	When the pain of gout occurs in a limb, apply cold to the affected area.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	The doctor's practice is to cauterize the affected area if their pain persists and becomes malignant.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	Then apply a cushion to the patient's nose while using the cautery.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	Mays si le nas is opened and a cushion is placed on their chest.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	And if the illness is in the foot and nowhere else on his body, then it's likely he has a pain in the bowels, but he should be treated with a cautery applied to the affected area.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	So, when there is a swelling in the legs or feet, one must be careful to avoid placing a cushion under them so they don't think it is an indication that you are giving up.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	E then he will be given a cushion to apply to the affected area in order to prevent further pain from the injury.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	This phrase describes the use of two cushions: one placed on the patient's chest (presumably to prevent them from moving during the procedure), and the other used for treating the pain in their legs.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And if it is necessary to make a bloodletting for the patient, place a cushion under their head, and another cushion on their chest if they have pain in that area.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a lead-tipped catheter for drainage to the patient's illness until they are healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	Then use this if you want to cure them: use the hot water method.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	E aquesta lu purgaunt, e le vòl e si es que los metges can be used to describe the form or shape of the instrument in relation to the body part.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And if it is silver-based, the treatment would be like that for a minor ailment.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	If you want to make a cushion, place a canula on their legs, and another on their arms.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And this disease is called gout, which is characterized by pain in the joints.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	And if you want to burn their flesh, just do it elsewhere on the body.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	The patient's hands are being bandaged because they are suffering from a condition that causes pain in the joints.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And if you wish to make a poultice, already put it on them.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And if it is necessary, apply a poultice to help draw out the pain.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	Then you must burn the skin to remove the blockage.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if they have a boil that's a festering sore of a pale color, then apply a cushion on their legs to draw out the pus.
Capitol .xxvi.	E aplegat to the parts of the body.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	And apply a cushion to their lips and ears if necessary.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You know that in some men, gout affects the foot most often.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	So sew the bandage on the patient's wound so that it may heal properly.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the patient's lips are swollen, you should know that they have an infection in their mouth.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Adjust the cushion to place on the patient's two lips.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	When a wound is opened in the leg, it is necessary to place a cushion under their leg and apply pressure on it.
Capitol .xxvii.	Then apply the appropriate cautery to the affected area.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	When applying cauterization to the inner or outer lips, you must apply it carefully.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	The pain in the patient's body is so severe that they require cushions to be placed under their legs and chest for relief.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	And if you need to apply cautery to one of those inflammations of the foot, it is necessary to put a cushion under them.
Capitol .xxviii.	**Chapter 28.**
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Make incisions in the flesh between the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	The cautery is heated and used to treat other ailments in the mouth.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And apply astringent or other cleansing powders to the affected area.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	Then cauterize the flesh, but be careful to avoid reopening the wound.
Capitol .xxix.	This text should be translated as follows:
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Then apply a bandage to protect the area around the wound.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When there are warts on the skin or gums of a body part, doctors call it a rough patch on the foot, but they don't know what causes them.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And then place the other one on the patient's thighs so that they are covered by it.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If you apply a cautery to a part of the body, it should be done at the beginning of the treatment, or else you will have to repeat the process from the start.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you know that the teeth need a cushion to their forms and figures, so do they need various tools for themselves.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	E per cushion the intestines which are placed on the leg of the body, it is treated in a way different from how they would be treated when the patient's foot is opened.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol .xxx. is the beginning of a chapter, likely indicating "Chapter 30" or something similar.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On the eradication of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	And if it is necessary to remove the pain from the patient's tooth, then use a tool to do so.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	When the tooth is extracted, it is hoped that the pain will leave the patient's body when the affected tooth is removed.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	When you have a tooth that is painful at the beginning, only use a cushion, one for their leg, another for the other leg.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And place a cushion under their leg or foot, whichever is affected by the condition.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And thus if one has a fever, they should use a cautery to treat it, as done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	Then you must apply a bandage or cloth to prevent the teeth from being damaged and use another for the other parts of the body.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And if you have to perform an incision on the patient's gums, they should be careful not to cause excessive pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And if you are already making cuts on their legs, then you should be an ignorant barber.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And then the patient's mouth has been cleansed with vinegar or sour wine.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	When blood flows through the legs of the patient, apply heat and cauterize if necessary to prevent the pain from spreading.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	When using forceps to remove teeth, it is necessary to be careful not to injure the patient's cushion (gums) when applying them to the patient’s teeth.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And if you make a cut in the small toe, hold it steady with your hand while cauterizing.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And if it is a wound on the leg or legs, they should be made in a specific way by a skilled person, and another tool used to keep the skin from tearing.
Capitol .xxxi.	This sentence is likely from a text about the use of bloodletting in treating pain in the feet.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	And if you must remove a tooth from their mouth, use a dental tool.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	Then, when the tooth is pulled, and you have cauterized the area, apply the other cushions.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	When it comes to their legs they should apply cautery.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you don't have a cushion under the patient's legs, use these small forceps.
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And if the leg is being treated for a wound, one should be careful to ensure that the patient's small intestine does not become infected.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	If an excess of phlegm has accumulated in the body, it is called “phlegmatic” or "gouts".
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	Then create a second cushion with a triangular shape and a more delicate instrument.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And then you assist them with the use of a cautery.
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And if the patient needs to have teeth pulled.
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And if you have a long-standing, or a sudden attack on the legs, it is called an attack by the doctors.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And then you cauterize the teeth, and if necessary, the other parts of the mouth are also cauterized, using the same method.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The ancients believed that the pain caused by the use of certain tools or techniques could be eased by using them for treatment.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then let the patient's mouth be treated with a sharp cautery, and if it is necessary to apply it to other bones in the body, such as the teeth or jaw, etc.:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if there are any inflammations in the body, which may be treated by cauterization, it is called gout in that area; but if the inflammation persists elsewhere, it’s a sign of its severity.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you have pain in your bones, use a poultice to treat the affected bone.
Capitol .xxxii.	In the case of a wound on the foot, it is important to apply heat to the affected area.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	And from these other teeth are the causes of its prominence.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	Then, apply a bandage to the affected area; if one's teeth are close together, but the pain is in the intestines, then use a cushion from the patient’s own body.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	E que lu sua cosa in la denta, e cushion for he needs an other on his legs and another elsewhere.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	Translation 4: When there's pain in the legs, it is customary to place a cushion under them, to place a cushion under the patient's feet.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	Then apply the cushion to their legs and put them back in place.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then the patient's intestine should be cauterized if necessary.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if you have to cauterize the legs, hold them firmly in place, and then the one who must be treated will be laid out on his back.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Another one that's a bit more understandable for the patient.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	And if one wishes to restore teeth, gold or silver fillings are to be used.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	And if you are dealing with a person’s joint pain, it should be treated as such by the physician.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And if the patient has an issue with bile, you should use a cushion between their legs and open up the space below the waist.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Place your hand on the affected area to prevent the bone from becoming inflamed.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	When the metatarsal bones are affected by gout, it is important to apply a cautery carefully.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	The patient's legs are placed on the bed while the doctor works to remove the points by pulling them back into the cavity through a cut in the skin or the foot.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And place your hand on their leg.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	And if there are cushions under the legs or arms, they must be placed carefully to avoid pain.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And if you want to know what kind of pain it is, apply this to the legs and feet of a sick person.
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	This passage is likely describing the treatment of dental pain.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And so it should be done by a skilled craftsman.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And if you have already treated a patient's legs, they should be cauterized in the same way we treat the whole body for gout.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Then apply a hot cautery to the affected area.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	And from the ligament which is affected, you will cut the tongue.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament, which is called sciatica, is often caused by problems with the lower back or pelvis.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	Then apply heat to the affected area so that the patient's pain can be relieved by applying a cauterizing agent.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If a person has pain in their legs or bowels, they will be given a remedy to alleviate the pain and relieve the inflammation.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	If you want to know if there's a better way to translate the following:
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	and that is done by applying a cautery to the affected limb; then you should apply another to the incision, or by placing their hands on the patient's legs.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	If a doctor applies heat to your body, it can cause a bloodletting in the foot.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And place your hand on the patient's legs to prevent their pain from spreading.
Capitol .xxxv.	This text refers to a specific chapter in a document, likely dealing with medical treatments related to gout.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Then apply the same method to treat the swelling in their legs and feet.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	And if a burning sensation in the mouth occurs, it is necessary to put the cushion on the foot and the small one on the tongue.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	Then open the patient's mouth to consider the pain in their limbs, especially if it is gout.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you think your body is sick, don't try to treat it yourself.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	E then you must be careful to cauterize only the infected leg, because that's what is meant by "the which" in this context.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a hot poultice to the patient's legs and feet; a remedy for the ailment.
Capitol .xxxvi.	This appears to be written in a somewhat archaic language similar to Latin, but using modern Italian spellings. This suggests a translation along the lines of:
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	And if there are other inflammations in the patient's legs and they are caused by pain, hold them still.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When it is applied to the throat, use a poultice for the pain.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if the pain is in the feet, it is customary to use a cautery for treatment.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	If a person's foot is swollen and red from an excess of cold humors, they should be treated with a cautery.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	E then the patient’s bowels are to be treated with respect for his condition.
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be done by a skilled hand using a silver or bronze instrument.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	And if they are cold humors that cause pain in the feet, you should place your hand on the area to prevent the pain from spreading.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And now we will treat the pain caused by the other's tools.
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And if a person's body is affected by cold humors, it is customary to call them a gouty foot.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	And if this instrument is not present, then apply it to the other side.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And apply the same method of incision to the other leg.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Migt-se de la milgrana, un tree, that it is a pain in the legs, which are caused by other causes, and it is cured with the remedies for those causes.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	Then apply a cautery to their ears on both sides.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And the woman was already being medicated, who was a patient of the one called "a" by the physician, who had been forbidden to eat meat and drink dark water, who had been treated with a cautery on the throat.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And if a boil has already formed two openings on the body, treat it with two punctures.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	And that which is in the foot, or below the knee, apply heat to it, and put a cushion on their knee, and another on the other parts, as it were.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then apply heat to their legs, so they don't bleed too much.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	This appears to be a description of a person experiencing pain in their foot due to a condition, and another use of the word "am" to indicate the presence of the illness, suggesting the original text might be from a historical source discussing medical conditions.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	And if God had made a hot iron to be applied to the patient's body, he would have known that he should not apply it to the other parts; but to the one that was afflicted with gout.
Capitol .xxxvii.	This is a difficult task as I don't understand the context of the provided translations.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	From the cut made when a hot iron is placed on the foot.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	And if the catarr is caused by humors in the legs, they are called a cushion on its other parts.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	Then if you are treating an ailment that appears on the legs, it is said to be gout.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And if you see a patient suffering from the symptoms I previously mentioned, that person has already been treated by those who practice medicine in this way, which is how they are called:  those who treat with cold and cuts.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And if you do not know how to use a cautery on the feet, you should have it explained by someone who knows.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a hot incision, use two cushions for the legs, and treat those as they heal.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If a patient is suffering from pain in his leg due to gout, apply the cautery method described in the chapter on the treatment of gout.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	When a person has pain in their body, they are treated with a cautery.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	Then apply the heat to the affected area for an hour.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	Then allow the feet to be submerged in the cushion of the thigh.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if a sharp pain appears in the joints, they should be treated with medicinal applications to the affected area.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And so this type of healing is better than incision and other methods.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	"And these are the cures for the ailments of the body, they call this one (the use of) poultice by these remedies."
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And if the patient's legs are cold, another cushion should be used to keep them warm.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Do this at the beginning if you are treating their body with a cushion on their legs and another on their chest, and another under the patient's legs.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	When experiencing pain in the legs or feet, the physician should advise using a cushion to protect the patient's intestines.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	And if it is necessary to remove something from the throat by surgery.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	And if it is necessary to apply heat to the legs to stop pain from the cushion or some other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	And apply your tool to the parts of the body below the knee.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	When you apply a bandage to the affected area, bandage it tightly to prevent the pain of gout from returning.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And if the gout is in the feet, they will apply a poultice and carefully pull out the eel.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	When you are in need to treat a patient, use this method if they have a pain in the legs, which means something else.
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And then let it be known that the cushion is for the patient's feet, and another cushion is placed under their legs, and if they are in pain, you must place a cushion on the leg, and hold them until the pain subsides.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	Then place a bandage on the bone in their chest so that the pain does not spread to the neck or throat.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	Then place your hand on the patient's body to use the cautery, and make sure the patient is kept warm.
Capitol .xxxix.	E si es necessite per le metges: To be treated by doctors.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	And so, you're saying that this is how you would say "Apply your hand to the patient's neck" in the language of the given text.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When treating a patient with medicine, consider placing your hands on their legs to help them avoid discomfort.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	So if you are experiencing pain in your legs, it's important to apply the proper treatment.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to draw out the blood from the patient's foot, then you should place your hand on their chest.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Apointedly apply a cushion to the patient's legs when you are about to cauterize them.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If there is pain in the joints, then apply a poultice to the affected area.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	And then apply heat to the area, and place a hot iron on the affected area.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And then cauterize the canula's opening to prevent its contents from spilling.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	E if you don't cauterize it, the pain will spread to other parts of the body.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This sentence describes the use of a cautery tool on the foot, so we'll focus on that aspect for a more accurate understanding:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	Then apply the same to the feet, and if they are in pain, their hands will be cold.
Capitol .xl.	Translation: This is the start of a chapter on cushions.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which case the pain is in the legs, it's called a leg ailment by doctors.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	And if it is necessary to treat boils in their various forms, they must be lanced, and the patient should be treated with other methods described in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And then you should know that there are various types of procedures for treating these conditions.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	Then the second cushion should be placed on their chest to help prevent the foot from returning to its natural position.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And prepare to treat the patient's skin with heat.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	Then, when the body has been treated with a hot cautery, it is a good idea to cauterize the area around the joints as well.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	When a boil has matured, it's time to lance it.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	Then apply another cautery point on their legs, so that the swelling does not spread to other parts of the body.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And if the patient has an inflammation in the legs, another cushion on the foot to prevent it from spreading.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And if a cauterization is needed on the intestine or foot, use a different tool for each location.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	Mays your gut be inflamed by pain, and if you have to make a cut in the leg, it should be made at the point where the digestion has been confirmed.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	Sometimes doctors mistakenly call gout a condition caused by something other than an excess of humors in the body.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And if you administer to those who are afflicted with the gout, give them a large incision and place a cushion on their legs, and another on their feet, and treat them accordingly.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And others that are caused by other means, such as those who have suffered from the disease called apostema.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And then you place a cushion under their legs to prevent them from being affected by the cold, which you have previously removed from the patient's body, while they were still suffering from other ailments, such as a fever or pain in the joints.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And on their feet they placed both a cushion and another for support.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	And then you cauterize the area around their feet, for they are the most sensitive parts.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	The pain has become greater since you applied heat to the area.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	You have already opened the opening to the location of pain in the body, and you will place a cushion on their legs.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	This chapter you must administer carefully, for it deals with applying cauterization to the legs and feet.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if the wound is in the legs or feet, apply cautery to stop the bleeding.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	When blood flows during the operation, you should apply heat to stop it from bleeding out.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	And the doctor should continue to administer the cure and apply a bandage to stop the flow of blood from the ailment called "the flux".
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is a pain in the legs or feet, it is customary to call it winter fever.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is summer, put your hand on the affected part to apply a poultice, and then apply a cushion to the affected area during treatment.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	Then use a heated tool to treat the affected area.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter xli.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	This means "And when the patient has a boil, which you have already opened on their chest".
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	This means: This refers to the treatment of gout by applying a cushion of spices to the affected area.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And they are to be treated with cushions that contain moisture similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And for those which are caused by cold humors, they are called gout.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the case of the feet, they will be healed by another method.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And so the patient's hands are placed on the body.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	This is a bit tricky, but here's my best guess based on your example translations:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And when you are in the position to apply heat to the affected area, as the disease is treated by cauterization, if the patient is suffering from a condition that causes pain in the legs, which requires the use of cushions for support.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Then you should apply a cushion to the patient's legs, and then in the next day, the other on their feet; which are to be treated with water and salt, e.g., if they have pain there, use that for a treatment.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	Then cure the swelling with Egyptian ointments.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And here comes the method for treating an ailment caused by excess fluids in the body.
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	When there's a need to drain something from the body, they use a cautery to burn out the affected area.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	And if you have a bow, then you should use it carefully.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	Here, a similar process is applied to the leg as to the body; the leg is healed by means of cutting into their abdomen,
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	Gout is caused by the accumulation of cold humors in the body, affecting the joints.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	This is just a brief excerpt from a chapter on treating sores and boils with cauterization.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	You then translate the text's meaning into English.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then apply your hand to the appropriate area, using the hot iron for treatment.
Capitol .xlii.	When pain arises in the joints or the foot, then it is called gout.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	From the given examples, I'd translate "De seccio de scrophulas" as: "And those who have scrofula".
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	And sometimes it affects other parts of the body besides the legs and knees, and those are the places to cauterize.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	As for those who have a hot temper, they are prone to gout in their feet.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And so are these swellings, which are caused by the swelling of the humors in the foot, treated as gout.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	And apply poultices to the affected areas, but only on the surface, if the pain is in the legs, place a cushion on them.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more caution that is needed to avoid damaging the patient's veins or nerves.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	This sentence refers to the treatment of various ailments in the legs, likely due to an infection.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is drawn out.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore you have completed your task in a manner that returns the patient to their usual state.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	Then treat those small joints for other causes of the other diseases.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if you are burning the patient's skin, you should know that it is the big vein in their foot that is causing the pain.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	If you have an intestine or hernia that needs to be treated, it is customary for doctors to call it gout.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	You have already given the patient who has old bandages for the wounds on their legs.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you treat a scrofula, you must apply a cautery to remove the excess humors.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	Mays you be able to understand that it is said that this is a disease of the neck.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	When there are humors in the body that cause swelling, apply cold compresses to the affected area.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	and apply pressure to the area near the ears to prevent them from becoming affected by pain
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when the body is healed, do you apply a poultice to the affected area?
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Here's the translation of the first sentence:
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	Our ancestors used to say that gout was a disease caused by an imbalance in the body's fluids, but actually they meant other ailments by the word.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And these are the instructions for treating such ailments.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	Then apply the other cushions to the wounds on his legs and feet.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	In case the disease is not in the throat or foot, use a cauterization tool to apply points to the affected area.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, if you are treating a patient with humors affecting their feet, use four circles on the quantity of them, and apply a cushion to the area where the humors accumulate in the four that should be used.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the physician wants to treat a disease by applying a cautery to the patient's legs, he must be careful not to burn them too much.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then return the patient's cushion on their legs, and they will be given a cushion for their legs, and another one will be placed under their feet to avoid pain.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And let it be another way to remove the heat from the body.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestines, they will be placed under your feet.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And let the patient be given medicines that make flesh grow.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And so the surgeon Albucasis said that he is called by the patient who has a cushion in their throat for the pain, but if the patient's tongue is cut off, then they are doomed.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Then let them be commanded by the doctor to leave the illness alone; for three days, he shall leave the ailment open on his body; and during those three days, the physician should consider it necessary to keep the wound open.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And I have seen that a surgeon must be called upon to perform a cut, or if there are other servants, they should be consulted on which treatment is best for the patient's condition.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, we must admit that there are many causes for this condition.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And if you have pain in your feet or legs, it is customary for a healer to treat it, and for their hands to heal them.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the case of the suffering, there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter xliv.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	A cut made on their skin, and it is called a hernia.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This is a continuation of the text in Translation 3:  "Then the patient's throat will be considered an ailment, and a cushion will be placed on their neck."
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	This pain in the patient's feet is caused by something other than their legs being out of place.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	This means: When there is inflammation in the joints, it is customary to treat it.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	The patient's body has been given another method for the treatment to be applied by the physician.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And if a man's hands are cold, they must be treated with hot compresses.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you have already found the patient's foot affected by the disease, and are able to identify that it is due to a cause of cold humors, then the treatment should be applied to the foot, as well as to the rest of the body.
Capitol .xlv.	This could be the start of a chapter or section heading.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	You have already opened the space between the patient's legs, and you would use these words for them, or something similar to that.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	And I have already said all that is to be said about the various types of nodes in the body.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And do it with a cushion under them, if you wish to perform an operation on the chest.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, the patient has pain in the feet.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	And if there is no heat in the legs, but the pain is sharp, it is treated as gout by doctors.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the legs in a case where they are affected by the humors that cause them to be ill, then proceed as follows.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And if you are a physician who wishes to treat a patient by applying heat to their intestines, you should place a cushion under their head and another on their legs, and stop it from coming out.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	This means that you are going to apply heat to the area around the affected joint to help relieve pain.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And place your hand on the affected area and examine the abscess carefully.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery, do so with a heated tool.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	Then the doctor has examined them, they know if it is necessary to apply cautery to the area already treated by the physician.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And then apply a cautery to the area to stop the bleeding.
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	Thus, the patient's body is treated as described in the ancient texts.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	And if you are careful in the operation to the patient's intestine, you will already have extracted that which is necessary.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	And if the body has too much or too little of the humors, the pain will return.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if some pain remains in the legs, it requires strong cauterization to cure it.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	When the pain is great, you must immediately apply your hand to the affected area.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	And if there are three days of pain, the patient's body will be in danger.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter 46.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the tools necessary in surgery and dissection.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	From these symptoms they are suffering from a condition that affects the limbs, which is called gout.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	Then a physician would place a cushion on the patient's legs and feet.
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The way to do so, they are called by physicians in these cases.
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	If you are translating from a language that uses a combination of Latin-based words and so-called "Romance languages" such as Italian, Spanish, or French, I would guess the translation is:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	Let the patient's veins be cauterized if they are ill-tempered, otherwise, let them be treated with heat.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And if it is necessary to treat the illness in the body, they do so by applying heat and using other methods, but it is called "gout" when it affects the thighs.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And if he is to be burned, his hands are to be covered with a hot iron.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	Then take care that the cushion is placed under the affected area, which is the leg.
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	La forma de the cushion placed on the patient's thighs.
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	Gaiter, for the treatment of their pain.
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	And if it is necessary to use them for the other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And when they are sewn together, use lemons and place them on their legs, because it is from those who know how to make remedies that the body can be healed.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And if you are treating someone with black bile, then apply the following remedies to them.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	This text appears to describe a medical procedure, potentially related to surgery or treatment of a condition involving the body.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The form of the lead-based poultice
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Lead cauterization.
Forma del experient petit de plom:	When the body experiences pain, it is called illness.
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The patient is one who has one of these two types of nails.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And so there are three types of humors in the body, and others.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	These are the curves/bends of the body, which are of two types.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	E si'll have made three cuts on the body.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	Then put your hand on their legs.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Give a person who has gout a cushion for their foot pain.
Forma de unci simple migier:	This refers to something like a simple form of a medical treatment.
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The text refers to a medical practice, likely involving the use of tools or treatments, but its meaning is unclear without further context.
Forma de unci orp gran:	And then apply it to their legs and feet, for that is what it means.
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	This phrase likely refers to a medical procedure related to a physical ailment affecting the body's "form" or appearance.
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	And if it is necessary for the patient, another cushion will be placed on their legs.
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	"Aurel, I have heard that you are a doctor, so you must know about gout."
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	This refers to a type of treatment for gout.
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	And if it is necessary to apply cauterization, it is done by placing the cushion on the affected limb.
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	And so the patient has a cushion under his intestine if you have him placed on his stomach.
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Forma of a form of pain in the legs or feet that doctors would have called a "gout" in the past.
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The doctor cauterized the area with a tool to remove moisture from the wound.
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	These are the ways to treat nodes and abscesses in this manner.
Forma de scapel gran:	When the form of a disease.
Forma del scapel migier:	The shape of the form of the body.
Forma de scapel pauc:	The shape of the blade is called a lance.
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	For fresh wounds, apply dressings to the affected limbs, and use other methods for old wounds.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And do you know that there are three types of pain in the feet?
La forma de magda gran:	The large intestine.
Forma de magda migier:	This means a bandage should be applied to the patient's legs to prevent swelling.
Forma de magda pauc:	This refers to the treatment of gout, a condition commonly associated with excess uric acid in the body.
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	Then apply a cautery to the patient's legs and another to their hands to prevent further injury.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And if you want to make a point on the foot, then do so in the space between the toes.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The three forms of treatment for an illness affecting the foot are known as gout.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And then you have a wound on their legs, which should be covered with a cushion.
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	And there are three types of cupping:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	And if there are sharp pains in the legs, they should be treated gently and carefully.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	These are some types of cupping, which should be used rarely, only when medically necessary.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	But if one needs to drain the fluid from the body's humors, then use a cautery to cauterize the intestines.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And if you placed a cushion on their legs, they might be used for phlebotomy or other treatments.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And so some translations are made by doctors in this way.
Capitol .xlvii.	The chapter on treating gout.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	The patient must apply the cushion to their feet.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some say that some cushions are needed by women who have hernias.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	.B. will be used to treat the patient’s illness.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if the breastbone is affected, then use the remedies we have described for the breast and those for the other parts to treat it.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	E then it will be considered a sign that you are being eaten by the gout.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	A cushion should be placed under the skin where the pus has formed.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	And if a patient has an abscess on their legs or feet, this treatment is used to help prevent them from spreading.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And if you place his hands on the other side of the body, then you will burn the other side of the leg.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	When a poultice is applied to their legs, they are healed by it.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	When there are signs of a boil on the patient's body, you treat the boil by applying poultices to the affected area.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	Then administer the cautery as we previously described.
Capitol .xlix.	Another [source] on their legs, and another [translation]
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	And so shall be made incisions for infections that are open or contained.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the skin is pierced, the wound is inflamed and aches.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And if it is by bloodletting that the body is drained, it is customary to apply heat to the legs, which are already prone to suffering from the pain.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And if there are many ulcers on the legs or feet, then it is an error to use the term "gout" for them, but rather they should be called a "severe case of gout".
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Then place your hands on the wound to prevent the patient from bleeding.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then place a cautery on the other side to prevent the pain from spreading from the original location.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	When placing a hot iron on the affected area, place a cushion upon the part where the pain occurs, which is below the knee.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to treat the condition which causes pain in the patient's body.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	E tu ja have already seen the pain in their foot.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	And if you have to cauterize a wound on the foot, make an incision in the area first.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then put a cushion under their legs and place them back in their proper position.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then place a cushion on their legs and another under the patient's feet while the patient has their hands held by the doctor.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	This being a chapter on the treatment of abscesses, a condition also known as a boil or carbuncle.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	And so, if the ailment occurs in the intestine or bowels, apply a hot cautery to the affected area.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And if it is made in the places where the tendons gather, it is already a good thing.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And if it is an abscess, and another is applied to the foot, and the other is cured by fire.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And if there is an abscess in the body, you should apply a poultice to the affected area.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, it is customary to cauterize the affected area with a hot iron for gout treatment.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	And apply heat to it, that's why they are called cauteries.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	Mays comes from a misunderstanding of the Latin term "moribundus."
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the affected area because of pain, and to place a cushion on their thighs.
Capitol .li.	The chapter title suggests that this refers to a specific section in a medical treatise, likely detailing treatments for gout.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Your answer should be:
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Then they are treated with a lancet, and the area is cauterized by a doctor.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And he will put a cushion on the patient's legs.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And if there was a cushion under their thighs, it would be customary to call it malaute by physicians.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	And if they have found a place where the other two cushions were placed, it should be treated as an indication of the location of the problem.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And if the operation is performed on the feet, the other things are the same as those in the other parts of the body which are treated by cautery.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you see the patient's pain again, use the method we have described.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Therefore, adjust it to fit your cushion on their legs.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	Mays sia theil, which is the cause of large pains, should be feared by the patient, but less so by those who are skilled in medicine.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that you are using a cushion to prevent the patient's legs from shaking.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And if the patient has a wound, then treat it carefully.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And guard against the disease called gout.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And you have already opened the space on their legs and feet.
Capitol .lii.	The following sentence is in a language that resembles both Latin and Italian.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On treatment for pain in the legs, and if you are treating an injury, apply ice to it.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	When the pain occurs in the foot, it is known as a cause for various reasons, which we have already discussed, and is treated by the doctor depending on the symptoms.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	May this be done to ensure that the patient's legs are properly cared for.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if the humors are too hot or too cold, keep the patient's legs in the shade and place a cushion under them, and keep another cushion on their hands.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	Mays, if the pain is caused by something other than gout, you should apply heat to the affected area.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And now if there are any signs of gout, you need to be careful.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	When the flesh has a wound that's deep,
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	And if it is caused by wind, then it is called "leon."
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	This refers to the treatment of a condition similar to gout in the context of treating a patient named "E".
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	Et autre cauteri que la partida de la cushion, et a command on his part that he be given a cushion for his feet to relieve the pain there.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And so you should cauterize the joint pain
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	You have found the right place for the cushion.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	Mays if you find that the pain in your bowels or the joints is affected by cold humors, apply that same treatment to those areas.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, use needles for the treatment; otherwise, leave the patient's legs alone.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	The translator should use their knowledge to translate the text as follows:
Capitol .liii.	Capitol 53.
De curacio de cranc.	This refers to the healing of illness.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	If you want to translate "And here" as in Translation 3 accurately, it should be more like "and then they are to be treated with".
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	E se les ancients were correct about some ailments being treated by applying hot cautery to the affected area, which is the practice of the ancients.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When cold and painful, it is customary to call it gout in the foot, but it's not the true cause.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	This refers to the process of treating the bubonic plague with cauterization, which is a common practice for dealing with pain caused by the plague, as well as other ailments in that time period.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Then place a cushion under their chest, to protect the incision from pain; and place the other cushions on the legs.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	The patient's legs are already swollen due to gout, apply hot water or poultice.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Perhaps you meant to say: "If bloodletting causes pain in the large joints, then apply heat to the area so that the bleeding stops."
Capitol .liv.	The First Book of Ailments describes the cause of gout as an imbalance in bodily humors.
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of gout.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	They have already been classified by doctors as having water-related gout, and they are treating them with medicinal remedies.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And if it is necessary to warm the body's humors, the patient should be treated by the physician, but for no other reason than to balance them.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	The cushion should be applied to the patient's body when they have pain in their thighs or feet, but do not use a cautery for this.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	When the patient has the disease from an overabundance of green humor, then you should apply cautery to the area where the pain is located in the joints of the leg, and if a member is experiencing pain in the feet, you should only use the hot one.
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	This text is likely talking about treating gout.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	This line suggests that the text is about treating a medical condition related to fluid retention.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	Then apply three fingers to their body.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	This sentence, which translates to "And if the pain is in the legs, one may use cautery on them", should be translated as:
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	The pain is in the patient's chest, and another person must be placed under their arms to prevent them from running away.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	When necessary, place your hand on the part of the body where the patient's legs are to help them return the intestine to its proper place, but be careful that the pain is not caused by the instrument itself.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then apply a cushion to their legs, hold them still in the space, and another cushion on the feet.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Place the cushion so that it protects the patient's abdomen and chest from the pain of another.
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	This is a guess for the translation of the first sentence from the provided text.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	The first step is to find out where the pain is coming from.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	And if the patient has a fever, the quantity of the medicine should be adjusted accordingly.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And apply a cauterizing tool to the affected area in order to treat it.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And you should apply the heated instrument to the patient's legs for a few days while the pain persists.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	And if you are using these remedies on the patient, they should be treated with medicines that dry them up.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	and another placed on their stomach as if to prevent the swelling from spreading.
Capitol .lv.	The text describes the process of a medical procedure.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	And so then treat the child, carefully cauterizing the affected area.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	This means: And if it is necessary to make a point about the feet, they are usually called gout.
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if it is necessary to cauterize the legs, and so apply heat to the affected area.
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And apply a poultice to the affected area for three days.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when they are making an effort to urinate, it is necessary to apply your hand to their legs.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	When you apply cautery to the other areas, it's important to know if it is necessary to open the skin for treatment.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	Mays aquel del qual le trauc es amplificat es que le dolor es caused by too much humor in their legs.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	And put your hand on their intestine when they are suffering from pain to prevent the disease from spreading.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The patient's feet are held by a bandage, while the surgeon cauterizes the area with a tool called a spigot.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And if you don't take care, the patient may be ill-advisedly treated with a cauterization method that causes the cushion to become infected.
Capitol .lvi.	**Capitol .lvi. **
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	The foreskin of the penis should be kept clean from the first signs of the disease.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	This appears to be a sentence in an archaic language, perhaps Occitan or Catalan. It translates to:
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And from that one, there are two types: one harmful (maligna), the other not (autre lu).
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	In modern medicine, the patient's condition is known as cancer.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the humors are malignant, you must apply cupping to their body.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	Then place a cauterizing tool on the foreskin where the uncircumcised foreskin is concerned.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And if you find the patient's hands are blackening and becoming corrupted due to their condition, then you have to apply treatment to prevent them from becoming worse.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And if you want to cure that ailment, they are other treatments available.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	"And if they have an opening in their veins, then apply the treatment according to this method:"
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	When the blood flow is impeded by the cold, it causes pain in the limbs.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if you are trying to cauterize an intestine that has been affected by cold humors and they cause pain in the bladder.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	Then apply a cushion to the head; place a cushion under his head, and let another servant hold him down by the hands.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	Then return the patient's legs to their proper position after the treatment for the intestine.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Then one must carefully separate the skin around the penis, apply another patch to prevent the skin from becoming inflamed.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	Then apply a cautery to the affected area to consolidate it.
Capitol .lvii.	Another hand should be placed on their chest, et the cushion can help you get there.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Then return the legs to their original state.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	When the patient comes to us, they will be given a cushion so that they don't get their intestines or lungs opened up by the cautery.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	And if it is necessary for a person to be cauterized in the case of a disease caused by the imbalance of humors, they would have used a cushion (the word "cushion" is used in Source 2 and 3) with the help of a specific tool or method.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	The following sentence seems to be describing how to treat someone who has prolapsed during a medical procedure involving cauterization.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And if they are cold in their feet, hold the cushion tightly on their legs, and apply another tool to cauterize the patient's feet.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	And if in the operation they have pain in the legs, it is important to take precautions.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	The child's body was naturally open to the environment, and I have seen it myself.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	And if the patient has been correctly diagnosed with a disease, the doctor will use a cautery to remove it from the body; otherwise, they are free to do as they please.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	Then apply a cushion to the child's legs, so that the pain does not spread.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And if you have to apply another cautery, it is customary to place a hot one on the affected area.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And he placed the cushion on their legs, another on their feet, and the patient was hidden from view; so that the child could not see them.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then, place your hand on the patient's foot to prevent further damage.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And place a cushion on their legs for the patient, to ensure the pain is kept in.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a bandage to the head of the patient, gently and carefully, and cover it with fresh oil.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	This is a description of a modification to a surgical procedure using forceps.
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	If one leg has pain in the joints or tendons, the other leg should be treated with equal care.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	When there are errors in the body's purification it is called gout.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Then apply your knowledge to the treatment of the patient's wound.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you can't find the location with your hand, then use a knife to cut into the area.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	And if after three days, the ailment persists, they are to place a cushion on their legs.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And if it is necessary to make a point on the foot, that is how you should apply it.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore, treat that condition properly as a pestilence.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	If the blood is cut by the surgeon's knife, apply a bandage to prevent bleeding from spreading.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And if there's an injury to their legs, they are the ones who will heal.
Capitol .lviii.	This passage appears to be describing a medical procedure, likely involving a patient suffering from gout.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	This refers to the treatment of urinary retention.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Gout is likened to a blockage in the body's flow of urine, which can be resolved by applying a cushion to the legs, as needed, during treatment.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	Then return the patient's bladder to its place in the body, for the bladder is already supported.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place your hand on their feet and hold them in a position where they are comfortable.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	The text describes the treatment of gout, a disease that causes pain in the joints due to uric acid build-up.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	Then use a small cautery, which we call a siringa, to apply to the patient's body the same way you would with a syringe.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And if you apply a poultice to the legs of the patient's body, it will be applied to the extramitat with a hot needle.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And cleanse the foot with salt water to prevent inflammation and apply a cushion to their legs, or if necessary, use other methods for healing.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then place the cautery on the patient's legs and a cushion to facilitate its approach; then the intestine or bladder will be returned to its proper place.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And if the patient's illness worsens, then apply a poultice to the area affected by the urine.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then apply the cautery to the other side of the body for relief from pain caused by the disease.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 59
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Let it be known that you have placed cushions under their bladder to prevent further damage.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then apply the hot water to the affected area, which are the legs, and keep the cushion on their feet, or use it to draw out other humors from the legs.
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	When there's pain in the foot, you should apply a cushion to their legs.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that case, there are three treatments: two for the one condition, and one for the other.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	In the beginning, place a cushion on the affected limb, if the pain is in the feet.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	When it comes to the foot, use a poultice of that which dries and relieves pain, and applies to the parts above and below it.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Then apply the cauteri to the cushion; the patient's legs should be supported by cushions during treatment.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	The patient has an opening made in their bladder.
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And if you make it from silver or with copper, it's a kind of cushion or bandage.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And apply heat to the affected area in their legs.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then apply the cushion to the leg.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then if one has to apply a hot cautery to the bladder, it is called a hot cautery.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	And if you are treating a patient who has been diagnosed with a condition that affects the bladder's function, you must use a hot cautery to treat it, but for others, you must use other methods of treatment.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then apply a poultice to their humors, and place the cushion from your hand on their legs to cause the humor to return.
Capitol .lx.	Capitol .lx. means Chapter 60.
De extraccio de peyra.	Peys
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	Nos in this context refers to "the patient's legs" which is another way of saying "thighs".
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And if they are suffering from pain in their legs, and you have to make an incision, then do so carefully.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And if a stone arises in the bladder, another stone is what they use to treat it.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the affected body part, then do so by applying it for a short time.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Apey la verges de la causa of pain are felt in the feet, and are usually associated with the cold or wet humors, but they are not visible.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And if you have cured children of the plague, another method is used to treat their infected feet.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	May they be protected from harm if it's the same illness that causes it to appear as gout in their youth.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery, a cushion will be placed on the legs.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	The patient's body should be treated for the pain, but their feet must be kept from the pain between the legs.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then you must apply a poultice to the affected area to draw out the inflammation.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And if you are a translator, you can use this as an opportunity to make your mark on the world.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	E aprop you have already found the right way to treat them.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel pain in the foot, apply heat to the affected area immediately after.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you are applying a treatment to the body, it is customary to apply another cushion on their left leg.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And if a stone is present, the patient will be relieved by another servant.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And you slowly move the stone to their bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then place a hot compress on their foot, as needed.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And if he has a pain in his legs or feet, you shall apply a cushion under his body, and another on the affected area.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so the patient's intestines are already opened, which is why they say that their bowels are inflamed.
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And if it is necessary to make a cut in the left knee, apply a cushion there.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	E sapiat: "Then doctor, you will know that the patient's foot is swollen and painful.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from their legs, the pain in the foot is caused by a cold humor, which is why the doctor has placed his hand on them.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Then you have a hot iron placed on the legs where they are affected by the affliction.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	The cushion sits on the table, ready to be used in the treatment of the patient's ailment.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot control it with a cautery, then use a small amount of vitriol to treat it.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	If a patient has more than one stone, apply a second stone to the other areas.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the patient has a large intestine, it is customary to use the cushion as a tool for continuous pain relief.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	The patient's pain is caused by humors that have become unbalanced and is specifically experiencing pain in their feet.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, after completing the procedure, apply aloe vera.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And apply a bandage to hold them in place.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then apply a cautery to the patient's legs if they have gout, but avoid applying it for three days.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And so when the patient has been treated, apply a cushion or other ointment to their legs.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	It is also known as the blood from the feet.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply heat to the patient's feet as the physician prescribed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And you will have already treated the legs with a cautery.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then you must treat them with other treatments, such as a cauterization with a cushion.
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	And so the patient's thigh is placed on something sharp.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then put some kind of hot iron on their legs to burn them out.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	...and apply cauterization to the affected area in the leg...,
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And then you will have to put your hand on the feet.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	When your hand is placed on a body part, it should be burned with a hot iron to remove the pain.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	And so the patient's intestines are covered by a cushion.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And there, apply a bandage on the leg to keep it warm.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And from there, the patient's bowels are extracted.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Then if you are treating someone who has a hernia, place a cushion on their legs and another one under them.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And when the pain is caused by a blockage of bile, the other type of pain is called gout, and you should apply a hot poultice to their cavity to relieve the pain, because the pain from the other humors will be relieved.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And if you need to apply a cushion to the thigh of the patient, it is necessary to do so carefully, as it can be painful.
Capitol .lxi.	And then apply cauterization to the affected area.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Another common practice was to apply cauterization to the area.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	And so it is that the body's humors are prone to swelling in the case of gout.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	Gout is forbidden in some ways.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	The woman is ill from the cold humors.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestines or their surrounding parts, the patient's legs are opened and the second cushion is placed upon them.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third line is to put pressure on the disease, so that the intestines or feet don't swell further.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And if the fourth [location] is where the pain is in the female patient, and the other is located elsewhere.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	And when the pain arises from gout, you must know that it is caused by a woman in the body's humors.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	Mays if you have already opened the intestine, then you are a very skillful or cunning user of that which causes pain in the body, or a person who has been affected by illness.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	And if it's necessary to apply cauterization to the abdomen, put it in place at its onset.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if you want to prevent further complications from the disease, you must use it on their feet.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	And if the patient has had a wound on his leg, that's when he should be given a poultice for it.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then place a cushion on their feet.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then, then intestine being cleansed by the other two, we should consider the intestine to be properly called gout.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	Then apply little cauterization at the beginning.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And learn that some stones are sharp, others are blunt, and some are pointed.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	And if you wish, you can also apply your hand to whatever part of the body you wish.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if blood flows freely, it is called bloodletting.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And so they call this gout, a disease that affects the joints.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And when there is a flow of blood, or if you have to use a cushion on the patient's legs.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Then return the poultice and another to the patient's body.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	The other people are the ones who put their hands on your head to cure him/her.
Capitol lxii.	The next section describes how to treat a problem in the legs.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Then another cushion under their legs.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia occurs when there is a protrusion of the intestines through the abdominal wall.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And you have placed the cushion under the patient's body.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And so the intestine is weak and cannot be held in place by the strength of the person's body.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this illness, which affects some with pain in their legs and feet, it is called gout by physicians.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And these are the signs by which you will know that gout is affecting them.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if there is humidity on them, they are to be considered another cause for gout.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if one must cauterize the skin or cauterize a vein, they should use a white-hot instrument.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And if you want to know the nature of the pain, which is humoral in origin, that is caused by an imbalance of the humors.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	And if it is commanded to apply heat to the patient's feet, the legs should be treated in a similar way.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And if it's necessary to move the patient's bowels or legs, one should apply cauterization elsewhere.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then put a cushion on the left side, and command the physician to place his hand on their feet, and another servant on the other side of him, so that he can feel the heat of the fire.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And apply to the spine a poultice made of something that will draw out the pain.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And make an incision along the line of the big toe, to be sure the pain is relieved.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	You have already opened the body by opening the abdomen and placing it in your hands, you should examine it carefully.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then the wound is made in the groin.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	When the wound has been opened for treatment, gently treat it in a way that is appropriate to the situation.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And if the intestine is opened, it is necessary to place bandages to prevent the blood from flowing out freely.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	The following sentence is a guess at translating "e ays" (which means "is" in Italian, but also has other meanings in Spanish and French) from the given Latin-like text:
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	Then apply another cushion on the other foot, your hand should be placed upon the affected area.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	When the water is two parts, one part is the patient's groin, and the other is the leg; make sure to close the incision and apply a bandage.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Then use a cloth to cleanse their legs and feet.
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And if you must use cautery on the feet, use them to treat the patient's ailments, but use a different cautery for the legs, etc., and keep the treatment area dry.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	This is the translation of the first line of the Italian text from the third line provided in your example.
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And if it is customary to treat the patient's legs by applying cautery, then that's how you should treat them.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	When it is necessary to make the body hot so that it does not become inflamed.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	When I burn, the patient should not be in pain, so put a cushion on their legs and another on their feet.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And if it is better to treat an illness with a cauterization instead of a cauterizing iron, then a physician should use other methods.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	And so if pain arises from the blood, it is customarily called a cushion-like inflammation.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	This sentence describes a situation where someone might use a cushion to provide comfort to a patient suffering from pain caused by an excess of humors.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then you must treat the patient by cauterizing the affected area with a burning tool.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And so the other cushion, which was under their legs, remains closed.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And if it is necessary to pause the cauterization on the patient's legs, the cushion will be removed from the leg and placed elsewhere.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then treat that patient so they may recover from the plague.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	For the first one, place your hand on the affected area.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	When the patient's intestines are inflamed, they are to use the water that comes out of their body through their bowels.
Capitol .lxiii.	Capitol 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	To cut open a hernia and perform surgery on it.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	And so that you know, in this way the first remedy for hernias can be found.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And if the patient has gout, they are reminded to avoid straining their legs or feet.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Then return the patient to their original state by placing a cushion under them.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And if there are other complications, treat them accordingly, as they are serious.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	E if the pain is caused by a hot and humid humor in the body, it will be treated with a poultice on their knee.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes inflammation can occur in the veins, if they are caused by the coldness of the humors, or by the swelling caused by them.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	The treatment for the ailment known as inflammation of the joints by doctors, if it involves the opening of a vein between the legs is known as a “cushion” or “bandage”.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	It is customary for doctors to treat a swelling in the veins with a cushion.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	E then it is possible that gout can affect other muscles too.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, you must cauterize the patient's legs, and so on for the rest of the body.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adherence in the intestines or joints, then use a cautery to burn them off.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	When there are many meats that cause pain to the body in the area where you would normally find them on the body.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then, when you have opened the intestine or placed your hand on their legs and feet, it is customary to call it gout.
Capitol .lxiv.	Capitol .lxiv.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	This refers to the treatment of a type of hernia.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Gout, a painful condition caused by excess uric acid in the blood, is an inflammation that occurs when the body is unable to keep the disease from spreading.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	This is for fear that the disease might cause him to be burned.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	But I advise you to use a cushion for the first aid to their legs.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	Then place the bandage over the elevated intestine; and if you need to make points on the legs, then do so.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Then place a cushion on their legs and cut them open.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	Then apply the cauterizing tool to the affected area.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	Translation: It is said that the doctors should apply a cushion to the affected area for comfort.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And you should incise those which are affected by the humors, according to the length of the body, and extract them.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Then treat the disease with cushions and other remedies.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	And if it is necessary to have a physician operate on the testicles, then use a cushion for the testicles, so that they are treated well.
Capitol .lxv.	et altre has que la cavity of the body be treated by a different method
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Then apply the treatment with the use of hands to the intestines.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	From this there will be a sign that the wound needs to be cauterized, then you should use a cushion for the operation.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	The following are reasons for two causes of pain in the foot: because of a fall or other serious causes, an application of heat to the joints or another place.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The best way to treat an abscess on the body is to drain it slowly and carefully, as this practice can be painful and requires patience.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when the pain in the body is severe and sudden.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And when joints are inflamed, the body uses a cushion to protect them from further damage.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	E alcunas veguadas es retenut del corpo a la qual es que es que el mal se concentra.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And when applying cauterization to treat the disease, there is fear that the iron will burn.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And if you make a poultice for the pain in their feet, they will be better able to use their hands.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Then apply the cautery to the patient's testicles, carefully making sure they are properly positioned on the leg.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	E si' has opened the space already, so now you should apply a cautery to their feet.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Then he will be ready to receive another cauterization on their legs, because it is said that laypeople often mistake other ailments for gout.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	When the testicles are in pain, apply cautery to the area around their feet.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And if you have opened up the intestine or a testicle, you must place the intestine back into its original position.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And the patient's pain will be relieved by another method.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find there is a need for medical treatment, you should use a cautery to cauterize the area affected by gout.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And so put a cushion on their legs.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then cover them with a cushion to prevent inflammation from spreading further.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And make sure that limens no one's foot is exposed to the air.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	If your hand is cold, you will need to use a cushion on their legs and chest.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And let oil be applied to the joint pains of the patient's bowels; and if he has a flux of humor in his bowels, let him be treated with bloodletting.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	And if the intestine is affected, apply heat to the area.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	Then use a cushion to treat the patient's plague, which can be cured by another treatment for the plagues.
Capitol .lxvi.	And if there are pains in the joints caused by their foot.
De hernia ventosa.	Then describe the treatment for wind-related ailments.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	And if you have seen in this patient a wound on their legs, treat it with other methods.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	Then apply a hot poultice to the area around the affected joint, for example, if you place a bandage on the foot, then you should put your hand on the swelling and keep applying heat to the area of the affected joint.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the plague according to the method we have mentioned until the patient's humors are balanced.
Capitol .lxvii.	This sentence appears to be in a language similar to the Romance languages you mentioned, but with some inconsistencies compared to Latin or Italian.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Then return the dislocated leg back to its original position.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	When there is pain in the legs or elsewhere, do as follows: apply cautery to the leg.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And it returns to the body's natural state.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	The treatment for gout is to apply heat and pressure to the affected area.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	This refers to treating the patient with the same care given to their legs and feet.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	This is a difficult task without more context.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then apply a cushion to the white part of the leg where the pain is.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the legs, or on the feet, they are usually called gout by those who are close to them.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And so, adjust the two ends of the bandage to fit the length of the patient's back, adjusting the cushion to be placed under their legs.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And if it is necessary to operate on the patient's legs, they should be kept in place by the surgeon's hand.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And for the plague, you should use a cautery to make an opening in the affected area.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And that place is best treated with cold applications.
Capitol .lxviii.	Capitol sixty-eight.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	And if you have made a decision to soften the hardening of the testicles
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	And if it is necessary to make incisions for treatment on the legs, the patient will be treated by the surgeon.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	When the pain arises in the joints, it is necessary to cauterize them so that the natural humors are balanced.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And apply a cauterization to the patient's leg, hard at first, three or four times.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And a cushion should be placed on the patient's legs while they are being treated by another for other ailments.
Capitol .lxix.	Another for the chapter's title.
De castracio.	Concerning castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	And if a patient has a problem in the legs or feet, it is customary for them to be treated by a doctor.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	Castration can be performed in two ways: by attrition or by section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	This means the operation should be done on their legs, which are to be kept still.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And thus keep those who are prone to such swelling from being affected by your touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	Mays in other ways is called circumcision or castration, and you must hold the beast's testicles in place while the surgeon operates.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And if there are any pains in the body, we can apply pressure to the area where the pain is located.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Then cauterize the legs wherever they are inflamed.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And if there are no cushions on your legs, do not leave them without one.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This is a reference to the way in which castration is performed on animals.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Then you should apply heat to the area below the knee.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	The first part of the provided text is translated as: "Gout in the body is a condition known as two-sided, where both genders are affected".
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And in some cases, urine which is in the testicles is called gout by physicians.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	Mays en las femnas, the patient's body must be treated by a surgeon who knows how to handle it.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	There are three types of remedies: one for men, one for women, and one that works for both.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And to those who have been afflicted by that kind of plague.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And as for the second type of injury, there is no cure or operation mentioned in the text.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	The patient's feet are often affected by gout, and other ailments also affect the legs.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	And some are afflicted by a condition that causes great pain in the joints, which affects both men and women equally and is characterized by swollen, painful joints.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	And then if you have to remove the lenten, they should be placed on the chest, because they are needed there.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	Then apply the cautery to the affected area, but be careful not to burn the patient's skin too much.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And if it is customary to call it something else, then it should be treated as such.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if you are born with flesh and blood, you have to know that it's also known as “flesh-and-blood” (e per lo qual es).
Capitol .lxxii.	E aprop li. (And if it is necessary for the patient)
De curacio de alratica.	The text likely refers to some type of treatment or remedy for a medical condition, possibly related to pain in the legs, given the context.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Then use a cautery to treat the intestine so it is not pierced by the disease.
E es o natural o accidental.	And so it is, whether natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	And the intestines are affected by the disease, for which they are treated as needed.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	You have already placed a cushion on their chest, to treat them for a pain in the foot caused by cold humors, e.g., a gouty condition or other pains, but you must place another hand on their stomach.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And if necessary, you must apply a cauterizer to the patient's affected area.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	And if the pain is in the thigh, then it is the patient's hip to be cauterized.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And do not let another person's [the patient's] body be burned by the fire.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	Another way to apply a cautery to a patient's legs is by using hot irons.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then apply oil to the area and place the patient's legs on their own belly, using your hand to keep them there.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	And if the cushion is thick and strong, let them use it to cover their legs, which are already covered by the intestine.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	May's is that which is done to the patient when they are suffering from pain in their legs.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestines or apply a poultice, the intestine should be heated by applying a hot iron to its surface.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And apply a lead cushion to their legs, carefully avoiding consolidation of the disease.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And if they have been affected by these humors for a few days, treat them accordingly.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And you will treat it with a cushion.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And if it is necessary to make incisions, you should use this method.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	When the veins are congested in the head, do not use a hot cautery there.
Capitol .lxxiii.	"The intestine has been held in place for a time by the patient's own will, he must be careful to keep the intestine in its cavity."
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Treat the anus with cauterization if necessary, and keep the patient's hands on their own body to prevent them from scratching at the affected area.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	The translation is: And if blood is drawn from the veins, it is customarily called hemorrhoids.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And it is now necessary to place a cushion under them; for if there's an illness in the body, they used to call it gout.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	When gout is in the bones, it is customary to apply a cushion to the area and use heat therapy for relief.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those who are suffering from such an ailment may be cured by applying heat to the affected area.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	Then return the patient's legs to their original form.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then sprinkle powder on their legs and around those areas.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Then apply a cushion to his legs, and then another on their feet.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the bleeding continues, apply a poultice of mustard seed, barley, and some other herbs.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Then apply a poultice to the patient's legs.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	Then apply two small cupping glasses to the affected area.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then let it be pressed against the location to heal the affected area.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	May thus be treated by applying cushions under their legs.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is caused by something other than humors, it is called another disease.
Capitol .lxxiv.	The 2nd translated line was already a good start, but it's important to remember that these are just guesses based on limited information.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	The other parts of the body are also healed by the puncture of the body.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Some swellings appear due to another type of illness.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And if the patient's illness is on the foot, place your hand to warm the cushion.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And if you want to know about hot cautery, which is used to treat pain in the body, put your hand on it and apply the treatment.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	When the first sign of a boil is a sharp pain, apply a cushion to support the area and then cauterize it.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And you must place the patient on their back and adjust them to avoid pain in the feet.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And so, when the midwife comes to the patient's bedside, she will use the instrument which is used for such procedures.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	Then you have to open the legs of the patient when they are experiencing pain.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	And you put a cushion on his legs for him to have an open space under the feet of him, the other under the foot of the patient's mother, et cetera.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	Let's work together to make sure that the patient's legs are not affected by the pain and put the doctor on their knees and another cushion under their feet.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And if there's a cold humor that has spread to the thighs, you should use a cautery to apply moxibustion.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And if you have placed a cushion under the body's affected parts, the pain should be relieved.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And place the foot in a bath of hot water.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the cure for two days using the proper remedy.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And if it is necessary to cauterize something in the legs for a wound that will not heal, apply a cushion to the affected area.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	Then apply a bandage to the affected area, when necessary.
Capitol .lxxv.	Capitol .lxxv. translates to **"Chapter 75."**
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	That is to say, the midwives are adept at treating those suffering from illness in the region of the legs and feet.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	The midwife must be careful to avoid causing harm to the woman's body during labor.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	When you have made these signs known to him, place a cushion on their abdomen, and then use other methods to address gout.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	And that is how it is when it comes to the foot, doctors say, the pain is caused by cold humors in the body, and one must be careful not to allow those humors to build up in the body.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	Then, if a skilled midwife is needed for all these reasons, we should use her to avoid mistakes.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And do you see how much pain the patient has? If they are in pain, you should know that the foot is the cause.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the body is affected by a disease, it is treated with fenugreek.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then apply a second cushion to the joint.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the foot, you should apply heat to the area.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	Mays it be that the patient has a cushion on their legs and the other servant has a cautery on their hands.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And you should place a cushion on their legs and have them hold their hands over the affected area for an hour to prevent a nose and throat infection.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the pain is in the legs or feet, apply heat gradually at first, to help ease the pain.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	When the foot is swollen, apply moxa to the affected area to reduce inflammation.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if a person experiences pain in their joints due to illness, they should be treated with medicine, heat, and rest.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Then apply cushions to their legs to prevent the embryo from being affected by cold humors.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the foot swells, you should apply a cushion to the affected area, and slowly reduce the pressure on the patient's legs.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	Then you should hold the patient's hands while they have their bowels opened.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	Then, if the intestine is not in its natural place, it is advisable to slowly move your hand away so that you do not cause further damage.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to prevent pain in the intestine or legs.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Then the patient's body should be treated with the hot cautery.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And if the pain in the joints is relieved by them, it is customary to treat the feet with another method.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And for an hour you apply heat to it, so that the humors in one’s body do not become unbalanced.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Then apply cauterization to their legs and feet.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	This refers to the pain in the intestine being treated by a physician using a cushion for support.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And if it is necessary to make a mark on the patient's abdomen, you will use a cautery for that purpose.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	If the intestine does not have to be opened, then return the heat to the patient's body through the use of cauterization.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then gently apply the cauterization to their body slowly.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Then apply heat to the affected area if necessary.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	And if you have to cauterize the wound on the foot, it is important to know that the other two are placed above it.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	Then if walking is impossible, apply a hot poultice to the area.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if the patient has pain in their legs, hold your hand on their foot and apply heat to the affected area.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Then apply a hot cautery to the affected area.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	The midwife should carefully treat the pregnant woman's feet, and gently move them to ensure proper blood flow.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And then if there are cold humors on their hands, apply them to the cushion.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then command the patient to hold their breath and then use a cushion to apply pressure to the area where the pain occurs.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The fetus's exit is on their side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When treating gout, use a cushion to support the legs when the patient is lying down.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if you have to make a cut on the abdomen, apply a poultice to that area and the other areas where pain is present, in order to treat it properly.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And if it's not the case that the patient has other ailments, you can remove the cushion from their abdomen.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	And then you have to apply a hot cautery to their legs if needed.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	But if a patient has three or four days of pain in the legs, then you may know that it is gout but he cannot feel his own pulse.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's legs, or for other reasons, apply the cushion there.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And you burn those areas with cauterization as we have described.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And do if there is a pain in the foot, which doctors might call gout or something else.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	And if it causes pain when the joint is burned, use a hot cautery to treat it.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Let us assume that the following phrases are equivalent in English: "the woman" = "the patient", "on their legs" = "in their legs".
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And if the patient has an ailment, they are to be treated with a poultice, or their hands are placed upon them, by the midwife.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Of which the following translation corresponds to the source sentence is:
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	And then apply your hand to the patient's legs when they are dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	And if you must use medication for a pain, you will also consider whether the patient is suffering from the disease or something else.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	When the time comes to open the bowels or if a woman has a cushion placed under her knees, she should be given a cushion under her knees, and the leg should be elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And if there are cushions on the legs or feet, they should be kept in place so that the pain is not exacerbated by the pain spreading to other parts of the body.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you should moisten your mouth with a mixture of the patient's saliva and a poultice of flaxseed and fenugreek.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And if you want to burn or cauterize something, that's what you use it for.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Then place the cushion on the head, or near the chest, for if it is placed elsewhere, it is considered to be a sign of its proper belonging in the body.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	And if it is upon the thighs of the patient, cushions should be placed under them, and another should be placed beneath the feet.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And if you want to warm up the foot, apply a cushion to your right hand, which is placed on their foot.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then apply heat to the patient's body.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And then you should apply to the patient's legs a cushion to alleviate the pain.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And if an ailment arises in the legs, let it be known that the patient is suffering from gout.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the patient's first (toe) joint is affected, they should be cauterized as needed.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	This is a very difficult task! I can only offer a literal translation based on the given context:
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And if it is necessary to make a distinction between the two, it is that one should be placed on their legs.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And if you apply the cautery to the head, or use force on the patient's chest, make sure to use the same technique as used for the other types of instruments in le “other” section.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And treat them accordingly, as nature has ordained for that ailment, which is gout.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And then one should apply a cushion on the feet and around the affected area.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	Translation: The first sentence is very similar to the English word "may" which means soon, and the third line says "And if it’s necessary to use a cautery…" so that's likely referring to the second sentence of the third.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	If the patient has another inflammation in their legs, you must cover the inflamed area with a cushion for them to be treated.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the patient has a light fever, they should be treated with a cautery.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	Then apply the cautery to your mother's body, and she will be relieved from the pain.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	This text describes the treatment of gout, which was often treated by applying a cautery to the affected area.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the patient is constricted, then they should be treated with a hot cautery.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	Then apply a poultice to soften and moisten the affected area.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	Then if the patient has pain on their side, apply a poultice to that area, but do so carefully.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	When there is pain in the legs, they should be treated by applying a treatment to relieve it.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	Then place a cushion on their feet and another on their legs, so that the second servant does not have to be there.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	Then apply compresses to the area affected by the ailment.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	Then apply heat to the legs if they are the only ones affected by the pain.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And another (person) has seen that a woman's body was already hot from the pain in her legs.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	You are correct! The Latin phrase "in le" translates to "on the" in English.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And if he/she has been cured for a long time, it is because they were treated by a doctor's orders.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then place the cushion upon the feet to ease the pain.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	Then let them be treated accordingly by physicians.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Thus, the woman has been treating the patient for the plague, which I have seen requires a different type of treatment for the other on their feet, et autre for another kind.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	When you apply heat to the patient's body and they are suffering from pain in their legs, it is customary for them to be called "ass" or "foot."
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	De las formas del mal, then, are used various instruments for treating the affected part.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Then apply heat to the legs, using a hot iron or another method.
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is how you treat a person suffering from pain in their limbs.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	And so if the patient needs to be treated for a wound, you must use a more subtle cushion.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	The patient's foot should be cauterized if there is a concern about a condition affecting the bones.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And if you apply cautery to the mouth, it will be more effective if you do so when the patient is already in your care.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Take its form, or appearance, as a sign that it is a good time to apply cauterization.
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	And if you put your hand under their joints to use the other forceps-like tool.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But perhaps the intestine is affected, and you are placing your hands on their swollen areas.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	This is a description of the use of a cautery for treating gout.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then you will have opened the patient's body yourself.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	This refers to the patient's condition, not their legs.
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Translate the cushion's shape to fit the patient's needs.
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The shape of the great toe is checked for signs of gout.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	This means: When the intestine or bowels are inflamed, it's important to use forceps carefully.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	When there's pain in the legs due to an excess of humors, physicians call it gout.
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Another translation could be: "When using a pointed cautery, avoid touching the patient's skin."
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Forma de unci having two spines.
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	This form of forceps is used to grip something to be held by the surgeon.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Gout is a condition characterized by pain in the joints, especially the feet, caused by excess uric acid crystals.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Apply a cautery to the affected area.
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are used to treat ailments of the body and should be applied according to the instructions of the doctors.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And so you must use those instruments which are not to be excused by the patient.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Then there are ways to treat gout in general.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	And if the pain affects them, you should use a cushion to support their leg during treatment.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if the pain persists, apply a poultice of ointment to the affected area.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	These herbs or some of them are to be placed in water, and to be kept warm.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	E aprop reduz in their cavity or another cushion to cover them.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	Then you must place a bandage on the affected area.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If the pain persists, you must apply heat to the affected area.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before applying a cautery, make sure to check for signs of its presence in the right leg and left leg, it's done to ensure the correct placement.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the legs, you should do so carefully.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is treated with herbs, then apply your hand to the other methods.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	And if she has a fever in her foot, then put a cushion on it at night and let her rest.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	Mays it's a challenge to translate this accurately without more context. The text uses words that are similar to Latin-based languages but not exact matches. It seems like a recipe for treating gout with cautery in various parts of the body.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Mays (Perhaps: *it*?) is used to refer to the pain caused by dry vapors in the body, and if it's necessary to treat it, we apply a cautery to the area of the affected part.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	And if you are treating a woman, apply this method to her body parts.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	When you have a cushion placed upon their legs, and they are being treated by a skilled doctor for them.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And if the body needs to be cauterized, one should place a cushion on their hands to prevent them from burning.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And if they are in the legs, and the leg is swollen, then apply a cushion under it.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Place a cushion on the child's legs and apply heat.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	When the baby has pain in their joints, it's called gout.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then cover the patient's legs and apply another cushion to their body.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	E aprop pause over the patient's bowels, but I don't know how to translate this accurately.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	The other hand should be placed on the patient's feet to prevent the pain from spreading further.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	When the disease has been cured by using lead to draw out the cause of the swelling, it is said to be a cure for the plague.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	And so that it be healed.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The which are called fistulas in the flesh, and you have already translated it into that language.
E es una fistula o motas.	This is a description of using a cautery on a patient.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And if the patient has gout or a white humor, and these are subtle symptoms, then they are caused by watery humors that have accumulated.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And if a patient has pain in their feet; they should know that it is caused by the cold humors that are already known to be present there.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And if the patient has already been treated for the fistula, and they are suffering from pain.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	A person's bloodletting should be done on the leg when they have a cold humor in their body, but if they do not, then treat them with heat.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	When pain arises in the limbs, use the following method.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	If there is no pain in your foot, then apply a cushion to their body, but do not cauterize it.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And then the patient's bladder should be cauterized.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	Perhaps it's the case that a hot coal is used to treat pain in the legs (the literal translation of "mays").
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	Then the incision is made in the leg, and the wound is treated as a whole by doctors, but the pain remains.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	And if you are in need of a cure for an ailment that is not caused by excess cold humors, it’s advisable to consult a physician.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And if you have already opened the space between the legs, put a cushion under them, and a cushion on the foot, so that the patient's pain is localized.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	Then if they are suffering from pain in their legs, they should be covered with a cushion.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	If the intestine or the body's humors are too swollen, the patient will be known as having gout.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	Then, however, they say that some men are healthy.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	Translation: And if you want to apply cauterization above the cushion, do it after the patient's legs are open.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And if it is necessary to treat the flesh, apply medicine to the affected area; but if the pain comes from a cold humor, it is necessary that you apply a poultice and cauterize it with hot cautery.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	This text describes a surgical procedure to treat a condition affecting the foot.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And for those parts that are affected by such a condition as the doctors call it.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the legs, then use medicinal cautery.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then apply a bandage to the affected area and bring the pain under control.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And apply cauterization to them with a hot iron; the use of a cushion is used for other things, such as another condition called gout.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	If the patient has a fistula, place a hot iron on their body to cauterize it, and if it’s a “fistula” of the other kind, place one on each leg and another with his hands.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And if it is necessary to apply cauterization, it should be done to the flesh and bones, not to the skin or intestines.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	Then treat the fistula with a cautery to draw out the corruption of the wound.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	Then apply heat to the affected area with the needle, as if it were a small wound.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And if the patient suffers from the cold that causes gout in the foot, then treat the intestine with other methods.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	And if there are already wounds on the patient's body, you will see to it that the surgeon places a cushion under them for a few days.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And if it be healed, and the patient's legs are cleansed and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the patient has pain in their feet, apply hot cautery to treat it, but don't let the heat touch the skin of the foot, use something to protect the skin from being burned when applying it.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	This is a description of how to treat a fistula using a method similar to reducing the swelling, so it may be translated as:
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	When there is an excess of blood in the body's hemorrhoids.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	And if it is necessary to treat a rash or burn on the surface of the body, you should use a cushion beneath them.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And on the patient's legs you must always have a cushion for them.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	And these are the signs that indicate a lack of fluids in the body, which indicate other diseases.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	Then apply a cauterizing tool to the leg to stop the pain.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you apply cautery to the legs so as to open up the space between the muscles and the bones.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	Then use a cloth or towel to cover the area if you need to cauterize their already-inflamed intestine.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And another cushion on the other side.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	Then you will have applied a cushion to the patient's pain.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	And if you are treating them with your hand, apply heat to the affected area to keep it from becoming inflamed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	C'est pour faire une incision sur les pieds, et autre chose à faire avec le fil.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's legs, use another method.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place another on the patient's body, and another cushion on their hands.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if the patient is suffering from that which can be cured by other means, then those are applied.
De curacio de fistulas.	This refers to the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Moles are caused by a constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And if you are treating someone who has been afflicted by an ailment requiring ancient medicine (humoral imbalance), it should be done so that the patient's body is not too moist and the disease does not spread.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	When joints are inflamed, apply a cushion to protect them from further injury.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	For the treatment of gout, it is customary to use a hot cautery.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	This sentence describes the use of a cautery to address the pain caused by "cold humors" in the body, specifically in the hands and feet.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then you should apply a cauterizing iron to the affected area of the foot.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	The second [part] that precedes the intestine or the cushion.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	Then comes the pain from the child's foot, that is the sign of a bad omen.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And if it is necessary to treat someone for a wound, you should use a cautery tool.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	Then use, as needed, fire or medicine to treat the patient's legs, and use medication for the pain in the intestine, which you may then cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And thus the patient's illness is cured by removing it using the methods described above.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	When the body is heated, a cushion will be placed on the patient's body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	E curacio de la medicina of the foot
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, make them use this method.
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the pain be removed by gentle methods first, if possible, then by cutting with the knife.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want to cauterize, then use a heated iron for the procedure.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	And then apply the instruments to the patient's legs, and let them rest for a time.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	This sentence seems to be describing the use of specific instruments for treating children depending on the size of the child or the type of treatment being applied.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	This sentence is likely about the process of treating gout in the context of returning to a healthy state.
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The top of the leg is opened in the manner described.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And if a sharp pain in the foot arises, use a hot cautery to cauterize it.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And if it is customary for them to be on their beastly side, they are called a "palmer" in the medical profession.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And if it is necessary to make points on the body it is as well to place one's hand on their legs; et cetera.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	Then apply the medicine to the patient's legs or place a cushion under them; and then apply medicine to their feet.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Then another is placed on his chest to hold the intestine in place.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine fails, they should try to be healed by another method.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	If you cauterize the bowels are healed by fire.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	If you are suffering from pain in the foot, apply the cautery to the affected area.
De curacio de las plaguas.	And then treat them with a cauterization.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You are likely seeing an incorrect or incomplete translation.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	The pains are caused by the lungs.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And if there are similar causes in the future for such a situation, you will know how to treat them.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Mays this be translated as the plague spreads through the body's limbs, they burn a person, or someone could use a hot cautery to treat it.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And so reason thusly about the treatment of the wound, and apply the same reasoning to others in the body.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And you will see that the plague is caused by an evil humoral imbalance.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	And if the pain is in the legs, then it is simply called gout by physicians.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And if it is necessary to burn out the pain in the legs, apply cautery there.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	Do not eat meat or wine if you have a pain in the feet that causes gout; avoid them altogether.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And if you cauterize the affected area, it will be cauterized on the part of the body where the pain is located, and apply another cautery to the part of the body where the inflammation has spread.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	This may be a medical procedure for treating an abscess or applying a poultice to a wound.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And then put a cushion on his legs for healing to occur.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the plague affects the feet or the face, the physician will use a cushion to prevent the plague from affecting the other areas as well.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	When the plague is upon you, put your hands on the patient's legs, to help contain the plague.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you treat a wound on their legs, it should be treated with a cushion.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If a sharp pain occurs in the foot, then use a heated tool to treat the area after which you will apply a bandage to their foot.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plagues are simple and on the hands, they are easily identifiable.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	Then the patient's body should be treated with a poultice made from three parts of the mixture.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And if the patient is suffering from humors affecting the foot, apply your knowledge of healing to relieve them.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	Then apply a burning treatment to the legs, as well as applying a bandage for the duration of the treatment.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And then apply a hot iron to their limbs to burn away the impurities.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if you touch it with your hand, they will be altered, and it will be necessary to cauterize them with a burning iron if it is already inflamed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	And if the patient suffers from bone pain, they will be given a poultice to apply and another cushion for their illness.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And if it is necessary to treat the fractures of the head, apply heat by a trained physician.
De las plaguas del col.	When your hand is on the patient's body, it is called for in the medical profession.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	This is how a physician would treat them in their own way.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the patient has a pain in their neck, then put a cushion under them.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	Any illness in the body should be addressed by doctors, but when there is pain caused by gout in the foot, they say to apply a poultice to the affected area.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is pointed out that the patient has a slight swelling in the leg, or that there is an opening in the foot to which leeches are applied, then it is treated with a mild medicinal wash and other remedies.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	The doctors should use a suture if there are wounds on the legs or feet.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	Mays if the disease is deep or affects the foot, then use a hot cushion on the area to be treated.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	Then apply the cautery to the affected area and use other cushions on their legs and feet if necessary.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	The intestine will heal more quickly if it is kept warm and moist.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	The original text is written in a mixture of languages, but I believe it's meant to be translated into English as:
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the plague is recent, apply dust to the affected area on their legs.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	And if the patient has an opening in the plague, they are to be treated by the physician for that condition.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	And if plague or sickness happens to befall you, the one who is sick should be treated with a cushion, as they say in the regions where the patient is located.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If there is a cushion placed on the joints, and it is known to be an injury or pain in the limbs, then it is said that the person suffers from the plague.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is pain in the body, the cauterized one must be treated with the hottest heat possible, but it must be applied carefully so that the patient's blood does not flow out from the cut.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if you are a doctor, put your hand on the patient's chest to feel the pain.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	When there are three days or more after the onset of the plague, then the patient's fate is sealed; they will die.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If treatment for the illness is delayed, it may be mistaken for something else, so that's why we need to call it by its proper name when it's necessary.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	Then apply to the affected area the appropriate treatment for such conditions will depend on the nature of the ailment.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	When the joint pain occurs in the foot and other bones, the patient's body must be cleansed.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If the plague has not been contained by the doctors, then it will be alleviated.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other ailments, treatment is similar to what we do for gout.
De las plaguas del ventre.	And for the plagues of the belly, place a cushion under them.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	When there is pain in the stomach, they should be placed on their abdomen, and another cushion at the feet.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Then apply the hottest cauterization to the patient's legs.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	and so that the body does not make him feel pain in his feet, cushion them or support them.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	E thus is the best way to treat it: a cushion on their legs, and the other is put in place so that the intestine is not damaged.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And then you must know that there are four types of suture used on the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And then two other cushions are placed on the abdomen to make them more comfortable.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And you should know that is the way to treat it.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	And so I say that the plague comes in two ways: one from the legs coming out from the body, as we have said, and another because of their cold nature.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And if the pain is so intense that it is necessary to use a cushion for the patient's head, it is customary to place their hands on their knees.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	When the pain is severe, apply cushions to the affected area and put a cushion on their feet.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And so when the patient's inflammation is resolved, the patient should be comforted by having their leg placed back in the proper position.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	Then apply a cautery to the hemorrhoids by which they are being treated.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And if necessary, one can use cautery to treat the patient, but it's better to try other methods first.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	And if there are signs of illness in their limbs, they should be treated with cauterization.
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	Then, if the pain is in the foot, the other foot should be held opposite to the one being treated.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And so, if the inflammation is in the limbs, it is called gout by physicians.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the pain is widespread, you should treat them by applying the poultice to the lower part of the body, or near the lower abdomen.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And if there are complications in the intestines, apply a bandage or use a cushion to support the patient's body, and ensure the patient's legs are supported by pillows.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	This line translates to: And so place your hand on the patient's feet.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	When in small pains, put a cushion under them.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	E questa es la mano de la qual se diu "four points" in tu ha de fer-ne tres per la cos de la persona.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Then you must apply a needle to the affected area, and two needles should be placed together, one where the disease is present.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	The first line says: When joint pain occurs due to a buildup of fluids in the body, it's called gout.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And if it is necessary to apply something to the body, do so gently and carefully so that the patient feels no pain.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And for that no metrical treatment should be applied to the legs so that the intestine or the foot will not become infected.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And if you need to use a needle to treat a patient's gouty pain, apply the cushion to their leg and hold it on the affected area.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These are the best types of needles for these sorts of wounds, so that the skin doesn't get wrinkled.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second translation: The second line is the most common.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	Then return to that part of the body, for which you should use a needle, etc., when working on the patient's four limbs.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	Then place your hand on their legs to hold them in place.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And then apply a bandage to their legs.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And if it was already a sore spot, put a burning iron on it; that is what the physician will do.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	The plague was cured within 15 days in that case.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the doctors have judged that the patient should be treated with a poultice, because they believe no other treatment is possible.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	And according to the account of Paraula, there are two types of surgery on the feet.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is necessary for you to apply a stitch on the side of the body, which is what the surgeon does when treating wounds.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And if the needle penetrates to the end of the body, and if it is necessary to apply the needle on the limbs, then you apply it to their thighs and legs.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	If the intestine is inflamed, use a cushion to help relieve pain in the patient's foot, and apply cauterization if necessary.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And if you have a patient who needs to be treated in this way, the physician should place a cushion under them.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then apply a needle to the other side of the leg, where there is a point on the same side.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And so you see, the patient's legs have been opened so that the physician can use a cautery for treatment.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And so you will cauterize the affected area, as it has been done for other parts of the body.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	The body's own fluids are being used to make an incision on the foot.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	When you cauterize the foot, use two needles to hold it in place.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then place those points on their feet.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This method of stitching is better than common light stitching.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the treatment for the patient's pain.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	When the pain in the joints is caused by cold humors that have been solidified, apply a hot cautery to the area where the patient's intestines are located.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	You already know that gout affects the feet, and it makes their treatment difficult.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	And the treatment for the plague will be given to those who need it.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	Then apply the hot iron to the affected area, which should be done carefully.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if it be the case that a person has a sickness in the body, the physician must immediately place a cushion under his foot, and another on his legs, to protect the other parts of the body from harm.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	When plagues are simple, it is possible to do without these medicines.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	Then apply a cushion to the patient's affected limbs.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	When there are painful outbreaks on the patient's body, it is often called gout when they occur in the legs or feet.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And the pain of the large intestine is lighter than that of the small intestine.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	Then apply a cautery to the intestines or the legs of the patient to prevent the plague from spreading.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If the disease is the plague, and the patient's legs are affected by it.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	When you place your hand on the wound of the patient, it will be black or green.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And if they are suffering from a gout attack, apply a hot cushion to their feet, which the plague has caused.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Then remember to apply heat to the legs so that they are healed from the pain.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	If there is a pain in the joints that is caused by cold humors, it is important to seek a doctor to prevent further complications.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then you will have to apply cauterization to the affected area, and then apply a cushion to their hands, and another one to their legs, for healing.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And if you are a doctor who has an accident in his practice, know that gout affects those whose bowels have been infiltrated by it.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	Then apply the treatment to the affected area, using large doses for the most effective results.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And another point is placed on the patient's foot, and another cushion is placed upon their feet.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then cauterize the affected area to stop the pain from spreading.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	This text needs to be deciphered based on the provided context, which suggests the language is a mix of Italian/Spanish and Latin.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	Then the patient's legs are treated with cautery and other techniques.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	And if the plague is great and widespread, it is mostly called another illness, but in the case of one in the legs or bowels, the plague is not a diagnosis they would receive.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	The text likely talks about the treatment of wounds or openings in the body.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	If a pain in your body persists and becomes inflamed, it may be called a fistula.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And if it is a true fistula, it is hard to heal.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	E in some men, the body heals quickly, and in others, the sickness lingers for hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And some other things are already moistening their legs and subtle fluids are being produced.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	Then, when treating a patient, apply your knowledge to treat the ailment as you would an ailment of the same nature.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	When the body is exposed to the world, it is customary to treat the patient with medicines in order to heal them.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And let me tell you that the treatment for the ailment known as fistulas is done by means of surgery.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And if you wish to make a cautery on the veins or arteries of the leg or on the foot.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And so to heal that wound, one must treat it with knowledge.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	If you are a healer, place your hand on their legs, and then they will know if the patient's legs are affected by the condition.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	Mays es un coyssi, and if it's a fistula it is a more subtle ailment than the other types.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	If the infection spreads, you must use a hot cautery to treat it properly.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then treat them by applying a suppository to their anus.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And you should apply your knowledge of the causes of the ailment to the treatment of the ailment, and place a cushion on their legs, and treat them accordingly.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And so you must consider if a hot, painful swelling is in the thighs or legs.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then return the patient's leg to its normal position.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	If it's a fistula of great depth, then you should cauterize the flesh according to its nature.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	Then apply a poultice to the area, and then place a cushion on their legs.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And if you are using a hot cautery, then apply it to the affected area.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	Mays si no es sanada, then you can apply the treatment with a hot cautery as the doctors have instructed.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	Then treat the fistulas in the patient's body as other physicians do.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	When the foot bones are afflicted with the disease, they must be cauterized to prevent gout.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not cured by applying a cushion and other methods, then you should use it to treat the ailment of the body and its limbs.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore, if it's not healed, the deep-seated corruption will spread to their chest.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the bone affected by the ailment is small, you must use forceps for the operation, which will be done carefully.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if it is necessary to move bones out of their place, it is called gout in the foot, which is caused by an excess of cold humors.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	Then apply the cautery to the ligaments or flesh if there's no other way.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	This is a difficult one! It seems like the passage is talking about making small incisions on the body, but it's unclear what kind of surgery is being described.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	Another way to say it, if it's a pain that affects the body, and another way to say it in a medical context, it is called mumps.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if the mark on the skin appears to be from cold humors, then the doctor would say that it's the plague.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	When joints are corrupted, it is customary to call it gout by doctors.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	Then you will find out which of your servants is in pain, and you will have found a place to operate on their body.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Then place another on their legs, and another on the foot to prevent the pain from spreading.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	When the doctors have made a diagnosis, they call it a disease.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then the doctor will apply a cushion to their legs, because he knows about the pain in the legs, and the patient will be relieved when the cushion is applied.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And when the body was found, it was covered in a yellow substance; their flesh was swollen and they were experiencing pain.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then apply a cautery to the affected area.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Then bring your hand down on the patient's thigh, and find their leg and foot veins for all treatments.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And so the doctor would then place a cushion on one of his legs, and another would be placed on their feet, for the patient's pain in the feet was a sign that the burn was infected.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then you should apply heat to the affected bones, after they have been exposed and prepared.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	Then I apply the cauterization to the bone, and place another on their legs, and yet another on the legs they are pointing to.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then place a cushion on their feet, for a long time to let them be treated with medicine.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And if the patient's legs are opened and their bowels are exposed, then the disease is advanced.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And if a patient's leg isn't in proper alignment, it will be called sciatica by physicians.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then if it becomes necessary to treat the patient, you can use a cushion to make sure they are comfortable.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to repeat the procedure if the operation has been done on the other side of the body.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so the patient's condition is remedied, and their body hardened flesh is restored to its original state.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	And if it is necessary to make the patient's bowels or limbs thin, you must use a cushion which is more comfortable for the patient, and ensure they are placed on their side.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And if a doctor wishes to cut the tendons in their hands, they must use a knife.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	This phrase by phrase translation appears to be describing how to treat a patient who has gout.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the patient's bowels are affected by the disease, then they should have their bowels treated.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And if the surgeon has to open the area again, they should do so carefully.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	If the pain is in the joint, then treat the affected joint with cautery.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	When there are other pains in addition to those in the legs, you should apply a poultice to the affected area.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	Then apply cautery to the affected area.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	This passage translates to "And if you want to treat the patient for their specific ailment, and arrange the hand on which they are operated."
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	Then you must know that the operation refers to the treatment of illnesses, for there are aches in all ailments.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And then you will place your hand on the patient's abdomen to prevent further complications.
Forma de serra:	And if it is in the form of a saw, it is called  gout.
Forma de autra serra:	Apros on your hand, which is another servant's work.
Forma de autra serra:	A form of gout that affects the legs:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Forma (shape) of a tool used by doctors for cauterizing the body.
Forma de ray:	A form of pain.
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	If the patient has pain in the foot, then use a hot cautery to treat it.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	It is not appropriate to translate literally, as it's unclear what language this is in.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	A form of a razor sharpener made from wood or bone for scraping away excess material.
Forma de razori menor:	A form of treatment for inflammation of the feet.
Forma de razori lat:	Shape of the razor.
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	A method to treat gout by applying cautery to specific areas on the patient's foot.
Forma de lu:	When you have pain in the foot, it is caused by other things.
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	When there's a need to drain something from the body using a razor-like tool.
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Here comes the translation:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	This describes the treatment of gout in a way that suggests how to treat an ailment caused by the body's humors.
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	This is a challenging one! Here's a possible translation for "Forma de" in the context you provided:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Then apply a cautery to the feet of the patient.
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	And so we see the shape of the body's smaller parts.
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Then you will use a saw to cut the wound in the shape of a ray, which is what other things are done by doctors to make them, and patients; feet are treated with a hot iron.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	When gout affects the foot, it is customary to treat it by applying cushions to the patient's legs.
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And so the first part of the treatment for this condition would be to treat the patient's legs, and the last one is to use a cushion.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And if it is caused by hot iron, such as is done for other ailments, they are dealt with in the same way.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	The cushion should be placed on their legs to stop the pain.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	Then return the patient's foot to its cavity, for the purpose of treating their gout.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	When a burn occurs, apply heat to the affected area.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similar if it is caused by poison it is called gout.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if on their fingertip or toe you make an incision, then you must apply pressure to stop the spreading of the infection.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly if it seems necessary to make points on the intestine, apply the cushion to their feet, the patient must be treated with fire.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if you are cauterizing the patient's arm, then do so in the area of the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And when the patient's body has been affected by a disease, you can place a cushion on their thighs to cure it.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, one should apply a poultice to the affected area if it is their foot.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And place your hand on the foot to prevent pain.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	Then apply the cauter to their legs, at the joint where the pain is located.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	Then apply heat to the area, but if the patient is healed, and no longer experiences pain.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the way to cut the part which you want to incise is that you place a cushion under the location.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And so that the patient's body may be kept from harm, place a cushion under them.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	Mays you should be careful when applying cauterization to the leg, as it can cause pain in the foot.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And apply to that area a poultice of herbs for healing.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	This sentence is describing a situation where someone would use a cautery tool to treat a condition (like gout) by applying heat to a specific area.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And then the physician will open the space between the thighs, and apply a cushion to them and if pain persists, he will attend to the patient's legs.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	The patient healed himself from his pain.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Lon pain in the foot can be treated by applying heat to the legs.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	A cushion will be placed on the patient's thighs to absorb any excess fluid, while another cushion is placed under their legs.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And if you wish to keep your hand from being affected by that which is causing pain.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	The man will heal by cauterizing his intestines.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And then place a cushion under their legs to prevent them from suffering more pain.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of the treatment of enemas and their properties.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	And if a cushion is placed on the feet, there are other, less skilled, people who do this.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	Mays it is prolonged, if you have a medical condition, that's why they are called other names.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	Translation 1: And if it is necessary to make incisions on the legs of the patient, it is called gout by the doctor.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	And then you apply a hot compress to their feet.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	Then apply a poultice of a strong-smelling remedy that has a stench, and it is called a “clyster” because it is applied to the affected area, which may be on the legs or elsewhere.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And you have applied to the patient's body (the area affected by) a cushion that is filled with air, and if necessary, hold their bowels steady over the course of two hours for treatment;  and medicate them with honey.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then apply a poultice to the affected area; if it is necessary, use a heated tool for treatment.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	Then sometimes it is done with cautery.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the patient has no tolerance for the Egyptian remedy, then use water and honey.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And if you have already cauterized the veins, then apply a clyster to the patient's bowels, as needed.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And then apply a poultice to the patient's legs; or if necessary, use other medicines.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the patient's foot needs to be amplified, do so gradually with small doses.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And if it is a large opening, you should place a cushion on the amount which is placed under them.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	When the swollen intestines are caused by an excess of humors in the body, apply a poultice to draw them out.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	Then apply the cauterization to the area of the affected limb, and hold another cushion over the other cushions or the other leg to ensure the cautery remains in place.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And apply cushions to your legs if you need them to be covered.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	E le drap e aporn, et si i est un per que lo pot be done in the other way: to make a cushion for the foot.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	Mays apply a cushion to the area where the pain is located.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And know you whether it be gout in their legs or arms, it is much or little pain.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	Then if the patient feels pain in that area, examine them for other signs of sickness.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And if you apply cauterization to the foot, do so with the use of a hot iron or a burning stick.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	Then apply to the other limbs as needed for healing.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	"And if there are still some problems with the medicine's application, they should be treated with a dry poultice."
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And if you are a doctor who cures a patient, the last thing they should be doing is suffering from gout.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	Then apply the herbs to the affected areas.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes it requires centaurea and other herbs to be applied.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if you want to heal the pain in the feet, it is customary to call it gout.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	And for healing, they are to be used in order to heal the wound on the foot.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	The first line means:  "And if the pain is in the feet, it is customary to apply a poultice."
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	Then apply your hand to the affected area to prevent the inflammation from spreading further.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Mays es a hard-to-translate phrase meaning that the patient's body has been affected by a particular type of pain.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	And if there is an ailment in the bones, you must apply the proper treatment, for they are caused by corrupted humors.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you cauterize the affected area, it will help the patient's health recover, and apply cautery to the area where the pain is felt, ensuring the pain be alleviated by the use of a cushion to protect the area.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	When the pain in the toe is caused by an ingrown toenail, then you should put a cushion on their toes and apply it to the nail.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	And if it's bad, a cushion should be placed on the legs to prevent them from hurting.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	A pointed tool is used to pierce the skin near the veins in the legs during treatment for gout.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	And when the body is affected by a disease causing hot or cold symptoms, then they are said to be suffering from the corresponding ailment.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And those who are born fleshy, they have other needs.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	Mays from the pain in the bowels of the patient, the cure for which is difficult.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Thus, the patient is given a cushion at the start, so that the pain in their legs be alleviated.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	So if you see that they have a condition that arises from a problem with their humors, you must be careful to examine their bowels and other internal organs.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And if a patient has a cushion, it should be used to treat the surface of the foot so that the pain is not severe.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly, if there are contractions in the foot, they say that it is gout.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Then apply heat to the affected area with cautery.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices can also be caused by an imbalance in the humors.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then you should take the patient's blood in case of strong fever, and administer other treatment to their legs.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	And there are two ways to treat their ailment.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	This is the opening for the patient, a cushion should be placed under their leg to elevate their foot.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then place a cushion under them, for the patient has already opened the space.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	E venes tenz a la persona suffering from gout affected their veins.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	If the patient has pain in their legs, let them soak their feet in hot water.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And if it's necessary to make an incision on the right of the cushion or apply a cautery to the patient's foot.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	Then, if it is necessary to cauterize the veins of the patient and prevent them from bleeding out.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And so come you, who are the physician, to the patient's throat.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And you, already having elevated the intestine, should put your hand there to keep them from being open to the other.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Then apply a cushion to their legs or another on them.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And if you want to apply it to the legs, hold your hand above their second section.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And then apply the cauterizer to the upper part, the one that is most prominent in the body, and place the other on the lower parts.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	When you are overweight, you should use an instrument to remove the fluid from the affected area of the body, and apply a bandage to secure the needle and prevent the opening from closing back up.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And if it is necessary to elevate the patient's abdomen or treat the ailment with cauterization, do so carefully; if a wound is on the abdomen, it is called a wound and if there is a wound, they should apply another treatment method.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when the patient's humors are unbalanced, the doctor will treat them.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the pain is severe, you should apply a cautery to the area, but if the body is well-nourished, do not apply any other cautery.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	Hold your hand there, so that you do not touch the patient's vein.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The correct translation is "For the pain in the legs is severe when it's caused by a condition that needs to be addressed by the physician."
Forma de unci orp:	Forma una forma of curandment for that which is sick.
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	A large person should be given a sharp pain with a cautery; if the pain is in the feet, use a tool to make points on the area where the pain is located.
De extraccio venae cruris.	On the legs.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This disease is caused by hot humors, so it can be cured by applying cold to the affected area.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And if the body produces too much phlegm in other parts of the body, it is called catarrh.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And then the pregnancy of the foot, which is caused by other things, such as a wound or injury.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	E senhal de la l'adveniment de la causa is that a cushion must be placed under the foot to prevent the use of the old methods.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then you apply a cushion to the leg of the one who has gout, the one that affects the foot and ankle.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And if there are other causes of pain in the body, it is already placed on the legs under the influence of something.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the pain in your feet is severe and prolonged, cauterize the affected area.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	If there is a need to cauterize the affected area, then make sure to do it gently.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from this vein, they have shown that a certain pain in the feet.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	Then return to the patient's body, and in the space of their body, and another one on the feet.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	This vein causes pain in the foot, and if it is cut open, it will cause harm to the patient.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And if they are in pain, the other remedies will be applied as I have said.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	And when cutting into the flesh, or using a cautery on worms under the skin, and other things are done to their legs, such as applying a poultice, it is a disease of the body, and it's called "the bovine disease" by doctors.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	In some places, people call this ailment "the gout" in a specific region.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And if it is necessary to explain that the patient has a pain in their stomach, there are other things that might be going on besides a cushion under them needing a hot compress.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	Then apply cushions to the patient's legs and thighs when they are hot from fever so that the pain does not spread.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And when you want to treat that ailment and extract the cause from its location.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if there is pain in the area of the body where the patient's flesh is located, it is said to be caused by a hot iron.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	Then return the cushion to its proper place (on the body) and another person should hold the patient's legs in place while they are being cauterized.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	On their ailments.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called gout in our land, which affects various limbs, and sometimes the feet.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you have seen the second one that is usually called gout.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	And I saw in her arm a vein that was opened as if it were a vein of quicksilver.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then apply a cauterization to that area, and hold it for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then you must also apply heat to the other side of the body, specifically the arms.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And so he put a cushion under their foot to help with the pain.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	When the body is affected by a disease that causes pain in the legs.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	"And when applying cautery, hold a cushion over the intestine or intestines to prevent the foot from swelling."
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And if you are not able to put the patient's bowels back in place, it is called a female disease.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And that's how you cauterize the veins to prevent cauterization.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	The original Latin text would likely be:  "And since thou wishest to cure the pain in the foot, you should apply the cushion to the location of the pain."
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	Then you place a cushion under the patient's legs, and apply a cauterizing agent to the affected area, which is the foot in this case.
De extraccio de sagetas.	On the process of drawing blood by letting.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are made in various ways, according to the type of illness they are treating.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And so if death is caused by a wound, treat the ailment according to the severity of the wound.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And when the pain is in the legs, then apply a cushion to the area where they are hurting, and have another one placed on the head.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And so if the wound is open, then you must abstain from using a cautery to extract the arrow, and apply a cushion directly to their legs instead.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	This means if the other symptoms are present, such as black blood in the urine (e si lo sanc es negra).
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And when the cushion has been placed under the patient's arm, the other on their leg, the pain is severe to the point of causing swelling.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	When the pain is severe or acute in the feet, the affected limb should be treated gently.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	Then the patient's stomach should be rubbed with a hot cautery to treat their indigestion.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	There is hope for curing an illness only if the patient has a strong spirit.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If there are other causes on which the patient is in danger of dying, then it will be necessary to cauterize those injuries.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	Maybe the other parts of the body are affected by the dart in the same way as the feet.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I tell you, if your feet are cold, it is necessary to call in the doctor.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	This means that the patient's tears should be drawn out by the pointed pain of gout.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	When the patient has a cushion under their head, another in the area of their body where the pain is located, and the affected area is being treated with a hot cautery, you must apply it to the thigh.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	When the Jew suffers, he is being persecuted, and you must help him.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And if a cushion is placed on the thighs of a man, and the other cushions are applied to the legs, et autre, and the other one is healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And so you have extracted another arrow from the body of a man, whose pain was in his belly and legs.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And if there's a pain in the back, it is customary for doctors to place points on the patient's spine.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	The woman has gout in her legs.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And if the patient has gout or a similar condition, it means they have a burning sensation in their joints, which is why doctors call it "gout."
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And you have already placed a cushion on the man's thigh near his right thigh and the rest of the body is still numbed.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And you have to expose the leg for three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Then I found that the arrow had struck its mark; it was already hitting the target.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And apply a cushion to the legs and hold the foot in place.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	Keep the patient's legs elevated and apply a poultice to their feet for pain relief.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	Then, with a sharp instrument, he must be treated with a cauterizing agent.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	Then apply the medicine to their legs, so that they don't get worse.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	This is a very creative interpretation of the prompt!
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	When the body is cleansed by water, it is necessary to cleanse the ailment with a hot cautery,
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And if it is necessary to make cuts for the removal of blood from the body, you should also use a cushion in that procedure.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And if there is no one present who can apply a remedy, you are to place a cushion under them (the patient's) and leave it open for all to see.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	Therefore, I say that arrows are only in the limbs when they are shot into them.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And if you are in need to make an incision on the leg or foot,  you should carefully cauterize it.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	Leave the foot alone for several days to allow the flesh around it to heal.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And if it is necessary to apply heat to the affected area, it should be done so carefully, as excessive heat can exacerbate the symptoms.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you don't apply the cushion to the joint, then do so for several days.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow reaches the bone in the head and a few days later it's still there, it means that the patient has suffered a long time with the pain from the arrow.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow stays lodged in the leg for several days.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	If your body is not feeling well, you should apply a hot compress to the affected area.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	Mays, the doctor will treat you for the ailment.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	Then cauterize the wound so that the joint pain will be relieved.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the surface of the body that's affected by those humors, it is done with a pointed tool.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	Then use your hands to apply pressure and prevent the wound from opening further.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	Translate the following sentences:
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	And if it is a pain in the legs or feet, it is treated by applying a cushion to their legs and hot irons to their limbs.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	Then do as you can to cauterize the patient's body.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And so, for that reason, you should know that the intestine is where the disease lies.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	Then apply other treatments according to your judgment.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	Gout is caused by an excess of humors in the body, especially in the feet.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is necessary, put a cushion under their knees if the patient has pain in their feet, they should be treated with a hot needle.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And then apply heat to their legs, using another cauterization tool on the legs to bring back the heat.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	If the pain in the legs is due to a hot humor, treat it by applying a cushion to the area where the cushion should be used.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	If the patient's pain is located in the area of the body that you call the tailbone, put a cushion there instead of using the term "gout".
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	Then you will apply a cauterizing tool to the affected area, and then you are to use the cushion on the patient's legs for support.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If you are facing a wound, you should apply a poultice to it.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	When the doctor cauterizes the veins of a patient, he or she should be careful not to touch the area that needs treatment.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	A form of tongs is used to apply heat with arrows (the tongs are thrown at the body's humors)
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let the patient be treated with hot cautery to reduce the swelling in their limbs and if necessary, they can use the cushion.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	Then treat those parts with cushions, the legs, with bandages, and apply other treatments for pain.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Then, if the patient has pain in their body, apply a poultice to soothe it.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	The form of the body's structure is used as a reference for its parts.
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	So too if pain is in the legs, so that they are relieved from the pain.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Then, from the text provided, the meaning appears to be related to phlebotomy, which in modern times refers to the practice of drawing blood but in the medieval period often meant "blood letting".
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	And if there are other ailments, cauterize them where they are,  in the case of pain in the side of the body.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	This sentence is written in a language that sounds like "la langue d'Oc", which is an old language of Southern France. It means:
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	Then the pain of the thigh, which may be caused by the opening of the intestines in their own way.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The young man places his hand on the areas around the affected veins, you see, he puts a poultice on their head, and uses it to draw out the pain.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	Then you are applying a bandage to the patient's head, covering their temples with the proper amount of the same.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	When the pain is in the joints, and you apply a cauterizer to the area where the pain is located, it will be necessary to cauterize the affected joint with a hot cautery or other methods.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And apply the cautery to the cushion on their hands.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the patient's legs be cauterized in order to treat those who have a wound on their foot.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if it is necessary, you should make points on the affected area to prevent it from healing completely.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And there you have the book's introduction to the subject of the treatment of illness in the text.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	When pain appears in the legs, they are said to be old and evil.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And that's how you can tell if someone has a condition called gout in their legs: they have a pain in the leg, which is due to the accumulation of excess cold humors.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And elevate the tongue to the level of the veins in the legs.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if you are cauterizing the foot, one must apply the cautery to the other parts so they don’t come out.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And so it is treated by remembering the opening of the book, and the attraction to its contents.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And so if bloodletting is necessary, they apply it to the head (cephalic vein) for these conditions.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so, the method of opening the vein in the leg, which I have mentioned above, is as follows.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if it is necessary to make a bloodletting on their foot, then use a cautery to stop the bleeding.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And so you must apply a cushion to the patient's body, but be careful because the use of a sharp instrument can cause pain.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	When there are two veins that are affected by the itch of the skin.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the bandage is that it covers the entire body.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	Then apply the bleeding cup to the patient's legs.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And apply a cautery to draw out the bad humors.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	And may the physician see if the vein in your nose needs to be treated for inflammation and fever and other ailments of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And if the patient's condition is such that they are weak from pain, then place a cushion under their feet.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Cove that the patient should be treated with a cautery to remove excess fluid and relieve pain.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	Mays le/the patient be treated with cautery for both their ailments and to prevent further complications.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	Then the nature of the metatarsal or leg pain is to be considered by the doctor, and another enflamed area in the foot; if the patient's condition is such that it requires it, then the surgeon will know.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And the bloodletting should be done gradually on the legs, and the patient’s hands should be held out so they do not bleed on themselves.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then apply the bandage to their foot after the wound has healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And if you have to open them up again, and use a cushion for the swelling.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The doctors will also be careful to observe the color of the veins in your legs.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If you have to make an incision on the leg.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And there you have it, two veins opened in their lips.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	Translate the source text: This is the way it is done by doctors.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	And if you apply a cautery to the intestines or elsewhere on the body, one must be careful to avoid causing further pain.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the legs or chest, it is for them, in those parts, to use hot, and for the patient's feet to be treated with a cushion under them.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	Then you have made a mistake; the other possible translations are incorrect.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the patient has a condition where they are caused by humors that have flowed from their proper place into the body, the treatment is different.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And if it is necessary to treat the patient, apply a cushion under their legs.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	This sentence seems to describe a surgical procedure, likely referring to a form of bloodletting used to treat gout.
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	And then you must open the veins which are full and swollen, as the physician would do.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is how you properly perform a phlebotomy:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And so for this treatment, a smaller cushion is used to place on the patient's chest, and if they are suffering from a more severe case, a more gentle approach may be necessary.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	Then apply a cautery to the legs, feet, or other areas as needed to relieve symptoms of illness.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	This sounds like a phrase that describes the location of pain in the body, specifically the feet.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if there is no sign of inflammation, then use a cushion to support their body.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	The bloodletting should be done to the veins in the arms, legs, or other body parts where the physician performs the procedure, and they must apply pressure to stop the bleeding.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you have opened the joint pain, use a cushion to prevent the pain from returning.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flowing, use a cautery to stop it as a child's blood runs thinner on the limbs.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And it is known that the patient's health will be improved by guarding it for several days.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	If blood flow to the other areas of the body is restricted, then you should use a sharp instrument on the artery.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And if the patient's stomach is inflamed, it needs to be treated with cooling remedies; otherwise, it needs to be treated with warming remedies.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And if the patient's foot is swollen, apply a hot cautery to the small area of the affected limb, and have another person hold the patient's hands.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	The bloodletting should be performed by a skilled physician using the basilica vein.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	The translation for the provided sentence is: And when the bloodletting is performed on the other side of the body, it is done so by cutting into the veins in that area.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is in the middle, apply the cushion to their thighs, long or short.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	Le jeuvenile that causes the intestines to bleed, but prevents the spread of disease.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	If you wish to cauterize a patient, ensure they are properly prepared for the procedure by using cushions or other supports as needed.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	It is necessary to apply a light cauterization to the legs and feet.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	When pain in the leg is treated with heat, and the patient feels no relief from the first application, then apply heat to the thigh again.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	And if necessary they will consider using cauterization for their treatment.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	When bloodletting is performed on them, it is customary to use the following:
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	Then perform venesection on the affected limb to remove excess blood.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Cutting into the body to relieve pain caused by an excess of blood in the veins.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	The doctor will cauterize the joints of the patient, but only after they are past their seventh year.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if it is necessary to treat a patient's foot or leg, they should be treated as such, for the treatment of the cushion, which is placed on the chest, is different from that of the foot.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	This text describes treating a person suffering from the effects of a disease caused by cold humors.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	Then the patient's blood flow will be monitored to ensure it is not thick or sluggish.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And if it is necessary to make an incision for a reason, or apply a cautery to the area.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is necessary to make points on the leg, apply them at the point where the pain is felt.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	Let the patient's feet be kept free from pain on that day.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And if it is necessary to apply heat to the affected area, it will be done by the physician.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And so the physician should place a cushion under them to prevent a cushion from being applied to their feet.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	Then place a cushion on their arm and apply it three times to each area where the cautery is used on them.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if there is a stricture in the body, it should be treated by applying cold to the area to constrict the blood vessels.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And if there are signs of inflammation, you place a cushion under their legs to prevent swelling.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And if the patient is in need of a fleubotomia, apply the ointment to the vein being treated to ensure the bleeding stops.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, let it be known that the doctor should apply the cauterizer while considering these matters.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And if a hot poultice is applied to the flesh of the body, the result will be pain.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if a boil forms, it is treated with a hot cautery to open it up, or the patient suffers from pain in their limbs, apply a cushion for support.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	Then apply bloodletting if it is necessary for the patient.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if you place the cushion under their legs, adjust the amount of bloodletting accordingly.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	When the body is affected by illness, a poultice is placed on their legs, and another cautery is used to treat the condition.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And for this purpose it is better to use another cushion in their thigh.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly, avoid using bloodletting in cases where there are signs of inflammation or fever.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	E if the patient is suffering from a large abscess, apply a poultice made of your choice of herbs to the wound, and then place a hot cautery on the affected area for an hour.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	Then apply a heated instrument to that vein, or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if it lasts for several days, use a cauterizer with some rue and myrrh or other such remedies.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And if it is necessary to treat the patient with fleubotomia (flebotomy) in the case of basilica (unclear what this refers to).
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And so apply a cushion under your knees, lest the pain become too much.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And put on their legs a cushion to keep them from being stiff and apply the other poultice where needed for healing.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And see that everyone receives the necessary treatment.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	And if you are dealing with an injury, you should be careful about making them cold humors.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And if there are many ulcers on the feet, the patient should be treated with bloodletting.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And if the foot is inflamed, use a cautery to treat it directly.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And if it is necessary to open the vein for bloodletting, it should be done by someone skilled in the art of incision rather than by puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This practice is known as "second intention healing" because it's better to have a cushion of another type of meaning.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	Then apply the cautery to the area, heating a small piece of cloth with a hot iron or by using a heated cloth directly on the skin.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	Then apply cautery to the skin above the affected area in case of an inflamed joint.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	Then apply a poultice to prevent the disease from spreading.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And these are the causes that cause the fainting spells in the body's humors.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And if you wish to treat the patient with bloodletting, you'd apply a tourniquet near the affected area.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	Mays he who seeks to perform the second bloodletting on his arm, for eight or nine hours.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	Here comes the first line containing the translation:
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	Mays that the patient will be treated for the swelling in their legs if they are using a heated cautery to seal the blood vessels on the feet.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And if you are using a cushion to treat a patient's foot, use a hot cautery on their veins, but only lightly because the pain is already there.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	When the patient's body becomes too cold, use a poultice instead of applying a burning cautery.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	The intestine and legs are treated by applying a poultice to them.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If you put your hand on their other arm or leg, you will need another for the evacuation of blood.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And if the patient has gout in the arms (the pain caused by a cold, damp humor), then treat them as you would someone with a blockage or inflammation in the arm, using the appropriate remedies.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And if bloodletting is required on their feet, then it should be done carefully, so as not to cause further damage.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And if it is necessary to place a cushion on their legs, then another one should be placed under the small intestine; and the other (the cushion) on the legs.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	You should apply the cauterization on the large area and the small one.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	Then apply heat to the patient's legs and feet.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	And if you have a sore foot in summer, you will be excused from the need to wear a cloak over them.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And if it's necessary to apply cauterization, it should be done on the legs only, and not on the feet.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	Evisceration of the right side of the body is considered a treatment for liver ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the purpose of using a bloodletting instrument on the foot is to remove the excess blood from it, which is why they are used in phlebotomy.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And if you want to avoid having your hands be burned, it is best to use the cushion for them.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And if it is necessary to make your hand move away from the area where you want to stop the blood flow.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And similarly if the patient has pain in the legs it is called "the gout" (referring to the location).
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	And if it is done on the left leg, it should be treated with the other methods.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And for the treatment of the foot, it's customary to use a cautery on the foot itself as well as on other areas.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And it's about the diseases of the ancient world, such as the diseases of the leg.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And if a cushion is needed to protect the patient's skin from the heat of the cautery, then put another under their veins.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And thus, you will cauterize the area of the body where the pain is located in order to relieve it from pain.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	When one wishes to cut into the flesh of a patient with a cautery, they should first take care to protect the skin from its heat.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And if it is necessary to operate on their legs, a cushion should be placed under them.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	It is forbidden to bleed the patient without proper medical reason.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake in the first incision, he will be called to blame in the second by the people who are already suffering from gout.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And if it is similar to gout, then treat them with a cautery on their legs.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	Then apply cushions to their feet to prevent the pain from spreading further.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	Then use your own knowledge to guess the meaning of the sentence based on its context:
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the nature of the pain is such that the patient feels it in their chest, but the patient's condition has been worsened by a lack of proper treatment.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	Then, if you're going to cut open the skin or treat the patient's pain, it is better to do so with a cushion than to cut into them directly.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And if their hands are swollen, then they have already been treated by a cautery on the legs.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And so that the nerves are not disturbed, let the patient be given a dose of laudanum, and let them have blood drawn from the patient.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And the other servant treats the area.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	The treatment for swelling from wind on the legs.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	And for corns, then apply cupping or leeches to their legs.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	The text describes two ways to perform bloodletting: by drawing blood from the veins (venous bloodletting) and by applying a cauterizing instrument to the body.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	Then apply fire to the affected area.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And if there are no more than two places on the body where the blood is drawn out by bloodletting, it's a good sign.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	Then apply a cauterization to the veins of the body, using the same method that would be used for a vein in the legs, but ensure the procedure is done carefully with the other members of the body.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	This refers to the application of medical treatment for a condition, likely related to the gut, by the use of a hot poultice or compress.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	And if the blood from the wind comes out in their hands and feet, they use these for another purpose.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	Therefore, when you apply it to the patient's legs, use cupping.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the neck or head after the patient has been afflicted by the wind, then cauterize the neck.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This cold causes swelling in the legs, and this pain is often attributed to other conditions, such as gout.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And to the man who is afflicted with gout, apply a hot poultice to the affected area.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And if there's a need to open the body, it's important to know how to use the tools for treating the foot, but you should know that's what they use to treat the disease.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	And if it is necessary to use a fan on the patient, it is said that you should apply a little heat to the area to prevent the body from becoming cold.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	This practice is called cauterization by doctors, and it involves applying a burning cushion to the affected area.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And when the belly is opened, apply a cautery to prevent the pain from spreading to the legs and feet.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And if you want to do something about the pain in the legs, arms, and eyes.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And if you command the use of a cushion on their legs during cautery, it should be applied to prevent infection.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the veins in the patient's legs, apply the cautery to the lips and mouth.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	And if the patient's foot has been burned, they are ready for the treatment for the burn.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And if you wish to draw from the veins, then do so from the basilica vein and all other veins in the body below.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the other to the one who has been stripped by the others, and apply them to the chest.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And apply a leech to the afflicted foot, a treatment for gout.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	For the patient's sake, if there are signs of a subtle disease, have the physician cauterize in a gentle manner.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	If you have pain in your legs from too much bloodletting, use these other methods to treat it.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	A metge que se diz que they are strong, but in reality they are weak.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from their legs, they will be opened to the cushion.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	A cushion should be placed under the patient's legs to support their body during treatment.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	Then carefully insert the needle into the area between the patient's thighs.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	Then apply the hot iron to the patient's legs, slowly, and consider the position of the leg.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	When a man suffers from gout, let him be given a sacrifice.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the physician to cauterize the wound if it's necessary to use cautery on the legs.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if there are other causes of pain in the foot, it should be treated by cauterizing its humors.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	When a patient has an excessive amount of blood, you cauterize their legs to stop the bleeding.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	Then apply a cauterization to the bowels, for they are the third place where a burning sensation should be applied in a case where it is necessary to apply a burn to the legs, as if they were covered with a cushion.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And then slowly draw out blood from the vein.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if you wish to bleed the patient, use a lancet; if you want to cauterize them, apply the cautery.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And you're saying there are cushions under their legs?
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	In summer, when a doctor applies a burning oil to a patient's body, it is customary to use a special tool called a cupping glass.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if it's a large amount of gout, cauterize the area to prevent it from worsening.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If you wish to use a cautery on your body, it should be prohibited if it is applied to the thighs or legs in a way that causes pain, but allowed for other ailments.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And for those with blood of moist humors and similar symptoms.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And if the pain in the leg is caused by an excess of humors, it should be treated with a poultice of herbs or other such remedies.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	You should apply cautery to the patient's body if needed, but make sure you don't burn the healthy tissue.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	Quid est quo, which means "What is necessary for" or "For what purpose," is translated as "This is the Latin word for 'gout'," which is a common mistranslation of the English phrase "making cuts."
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	At the beginning you should consider the cold humors or the things that cause it to be a problem.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	Then apply a cushion to their legs, and another on their arms, as needed.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for the one whose legs are swollen, and his hand is upon the area to be treated, so that the swelling may be reduced by the use of a cushion or other means.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And if the patient has an ailment that requires bleeding, another cushion should be placed on their limbs.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	E si tu s'en vols, do some phlebotomy or take the medicine, but only in case of a need for the patient to be relieved from the cold humors through a cushion or other methods.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	Mays the patient suffer from a disease of the liver, and they are treated for a disease of the limbs, which are affected by the pain of the illness.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And if it is necessary to translate the body's humors, it is done as follows: "And then you apply your cautery to the foot."
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And then you must cauterize the legs when they are warmed up by the fire of the hearth.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	E semblantment fa when there is a complaint about windiness in the legs.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these cupping glasses are applied to the body in various ways.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	Then apply heat to the body.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	The doctors apply the treatment for the ailment to the affected area.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Forma de ventoza es applied to the affected area by heat from a flame.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Then hold their legs in place with a cushion.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And if he has gout in his legs, or other ailments are present, then treat those as well.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And if it is a severe case of cold humors affecting the foot, it is recommended they be treated by those who are knowledgeable in that area.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And then the cupping glasses for young children are other than those for adults.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of cauterizing is that it heats the flesh with fire from the heated iron, and for this reason it's used to treat wounds and conditions like gout (which is caused by an imbalance in bodily humors) because it draws out the excess fluids.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	Then place a cushion on their chest to prevent the patient's illness from worsening.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And if you have already opened their intestines for surgery, we must return them to their proper place, e.g., the patient's stomach or the patient's leg.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	Then apply a wet cupping therapy to the affected area.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This text is translated: When this happens, the best thing is to apply a cushion for the pain.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 97.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Gout affects only the feet and is treated by applying pressure to the affected areas and using a cautery tool.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	Then apply leeches to those legs using the same method as for treating them with a cushion under the affected area.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	Then if the patient has been opened by day or night for the cause of their ailment to be addressed, prepare for treatment.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	Place another cushion under their legs and behind the patient.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to apply the leeching on their legs, and the other parts of the body are treated with a cautery, they will be relieved from the cold humors.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	Then, if necessary, apply vinegar to the affected area and use a heated cautery tool.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the patient has leg pain, then apply a hot poultice to the area.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	When blood is dry, put a cloth on it to protect from the other parts of the body.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if leeches are needed for bloodletting, use them when they are necessary to change the cushion.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if leeches are forbidden from being used on the legs, put a cushion in the place of the recent bleeding; et for the pain to be in another place, put your hand on the body part where you want the leech to bleed.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you wish to cauterize, apply the ashes to the affected area.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	And thus began the treatment for the swelling of the third part: restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is about fractures and dislocations, which are common in medical practice.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	O son the bones of a child, and they are painful to see.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And then the patient may be treated by applying heat to their body, but they are to be kept in mind that they have been ill for a long time.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	E si tu have to make sure it was pointed at the patient's legs.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	Then I have already explained how to treat the patient's bowels; thus, the treatment of the foot has been explained in detail in the preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	Chapter one.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the foot, then apply cautery to the legs and arms also.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Cove that affects the body in this way are called gout by the physicians.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	Then use a hot iron to treat the condition in a person's legs if they are afflicted with a pain that requires cautery.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And if you are worried about whether or not to cauterize the veins in the limbs.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then, the proper course of treatment should be followed for the ailment.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	E'l ris donc il faut dire que si·l fa pascut de la causa del dolor.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	Then apply cautery to the area affected by these ailments.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the affected area on a child, it's like that too.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	The patient's works are just as important to them as those of the translator.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this reason, it is necessary to treat the patient's ailment.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	A cushion should be placed under the patient's legs.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	Then if there's an injury to the limbs, you treat it according to the type of injury.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I have seen the patient's joints open, and placed a cushion under them to be distinguished from other injuries.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Mota means "to be treated" in all three languages mentioned.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	E so are there different types of bone fractures; some are caused by gout.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And if a patient has a pain in the leg, they will have pain in the joints or bones as well.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	And then apply the bone-setting treatment to the leg.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	The bones are known by their location.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	Therefore, when there is no apparent redness or swelling in the limbs, it is not from an injury to the bones or joints.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	If there are augments in the body, it may be a complex ailment that is often difficult to treat with traditional methods.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And if you are wise, you will know that when the intestine is affected, the patient is in pain and should be treated carefully.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And when the pain has subsided, apply cold compresses to the feet for a few days, as if it were a poultice.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And apply the needle to the affected bone, then cauterize.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Then, for the cavity in the leg, you'll need to apply heat and use remedies.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If you have gout, it is necessary to apply a cushion on their broken leg.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And so let your hand be placed on the patient's body in order to help the intestines heal.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And be careful where you cauterize so as not to damage the good parts by burning the wrong ones.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	Then use your knowledge to apply your skills in that way, and if you can't, then you should use a cushion.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Then cause severe pain in the limbs, as physicians often do to those who are afflicted with gout.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	The foot must be kept warm and covered during treatment.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	Translation 1: When there are painful constrictions in the foot, the doctor will make a cauterization if necessary.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And another on their arms, as well as on their feet, will be covered with a cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	Then you must cauterize the affected area to alleviate the pain.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And if it is the intestine or the patient's body that is affected by the three humors, it is called rheumatism.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And if necessary, apply a bandage to the area after using a cushion and another bandage.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Place your hand on the patient's fracture for a while.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Then take a bandage and wrap the area to reduce swelling.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	If there is no pain, then the foot is not in need of being cauterized; if there is, it's because of the infiltration of bad humors, which cause a painful swelling.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	When a burning sensation arises in the body from a cold humor imbalance, then it's properly called a gout attack.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And be careful to use a properly formed cautery for such purposes.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	And if you need to apply a bandage to the wound on the patient's feet, it should be larger than the other bandages used for the treatment.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	Then use a thin instrument to gently scrape the skin (of the foot) where the infection is present, as well as cushions for the legs, so that the patient's body does not become too infiltrated with the disease.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	Then hold the patient's foot steady with your hand.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	Then if it is necessary to burn the skin of the patient, apply a cautery to the area affected by gout, and place a cushion there for support.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	That is is commonly called a fracture to the foot in old age.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	You know that there are other ways to treat a broken limb; lahoras they be healed by cauterization.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This is the method by which the ancients restored the broken bones and set dislocations, and to stop the intestines from twisting out of place.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	And if it is necessary to apply a poultice to the patient's foot, place a poultice on the area where they have pain.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And if you have to use a cushion on the foot, use one that is not too thick or thin.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Then apply the poultice, made of assafetida, myrrh, and other herbs, to the injured joint.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	This is a recipe for a poultice that contains a mixture of white poplar and Armenian gum: use one ounce of white poplar and five ounces of Armenian glue to make a poultice for the injured limb.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	Then apply a cushion under their feet.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	And if they are swollen, apply a cushion to the area.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	Then apply the poultice to the affected area, which is usually the foot to expel the pain.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Other methods are used to restore a broken intestine, which involves using a cautery for restoration.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Take some herbs and restore the injured bone with a poultice made from: mallows, chamomile and violets, each part of the body being 10 grams of flour.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	And if they are cut on their legs, apply a bandage to them.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	When one needs to reduce swelling in the joints, they should use a warm poultice made from herbs and water.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	This sentence refers to applying a cauterizing tool to the legs and placing a cushion under the injured leg, but it's unclear what "le sieu" means.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	This sentence seems to describe a medical procedure involving a patient named Gualia.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	And thus comes a recipe for a plaster to comfort them in their pain.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	If you have pain in the legs, it is usually called gout by doctors.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	Then apply a cushion to the affected area, if needed.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And apply a cushion to their skin and place the other on their feet, they should be covered by a cloth so that the opening in the skin doesn't become infected; the person should rest for an hour.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And he should be treated with a poultice, small plaster, or a poultice that is applied to the affected area.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	Then apply a poultice to the affected limb.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	When the joint pain persists for three days or more, you should use a cushion to prevent the inflamed joint from swelling further.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	E ayusta en la patient's legs, to ensure the patient's body remains closed off.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	This Latin phrase means:  "And so the doctor applies his hand to the injured area."
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	If a joint is dislocated, they will be treated with a different approach.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	Then they called it a sickness that is already known as the gout, because of the pain.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Of all the parts of the body, the second chapter deals with fractures of the skull.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The bone fractures are classified into two types: those that are distinct to each injury and those that are caused by an external force, which is why they are called levatio.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the pain between the legs is sometimes sharp or dull depending on if the pain is intense or mild.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This bone is broken, so they are in need of help.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	The bone has fractured due to an injury.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And if there are any signs of a fracture on the foot or a bruise on the thighs, then place your hand over the area to prevent further damage.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	Then apply heat to the affected area as instructed by the physician.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And if there are fractures in these types of gout, then the joints are treated with such.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And if he is to be cauterized, then use another method on his body for a while.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And so that the cushion does not cause pain to their legs, they should be treated with a cautery, which is how you would treat a wound on the leg.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the bones of a patient, it's called a "fractura" in medicine.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	Mays thus describes the symptoms of the plague:  You have already treated a plague patient who was suffering and now needs to be cared for.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you encounter a patient who has not contracted a common ailment, they are likely suffering from gout.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	In the beginning, if the pain affects the whole body and the joints, you should know that it is very serious.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	If you cauterize the foot on days when the pain is intense, place another cushion under their feet to prevent the pain from spreading.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	E si'l hauria necessitet de una operació per les lesions, e'm ja veureu que els metges la consideren com una cosa molt petita i en el seu dia a dia.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And then you put it (the affected area) on their thighs; they are treated as an opening for the disease to enter other parts of the body.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you need to find a cure for the swelling, you must apply a bandage to stop it.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And there are two types of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so one way to treat it is to cauterize the affected area.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And apply a poultice to the wound after cleaning it, as needed in cases of pain.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And if you have diverse pain in their bodies, they are the ones who will be healed by the various treatments.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And if they are to be treated by cauterization, make sure their legs are properly protected so that no one will get burned.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, apply cauterization to their legs, which they called "the joints" in Latin, the patient's body should be covered with a cushion.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	The first line will be translated as: And when the patient's foot is affected by cold humors, you must keep it warm.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you burn a cautery on the leg, for the pain in the feet is due to the infiltration of humors, which are also present in his/her body.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	Then you must know that the type of cauterization for burns is done in another way, but your hand should be placed on the affected area, it is important to remember that this is a specific type of treatment and can be dangerous if not performed by a professional.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And if it is a small wound, treat it with a poultice for a few days and then apply a cautery as necessary.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And take care that you have protected the patient's hands from the scalpel.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And so if you have pain in the bone and intestines, it is necessary to continue to treat it as such.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	You have already opened the intestine for you to cauterize; then do so with the cushion on the leg.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it’s necessary to cauterize the intestine or legs that are injured, then you must know the exact location.
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	Then return the intestine to its place, and apply cauterization as needed, but do not allow the patient to be burned.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And put a cushion under them so that they may be comfortable in their last moments.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When one has an illness that causes pain in the legs, it is customary to use a cauterization technique on their feet.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	Then place your hand on that area which you are about to apply the operation.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And if you are administering the pus, you should use leeches on their legs.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	"Then you should treat the other small fractures as you would other injuries."
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And then prevent the intestine from being on the wrong side.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And so you should place a cushion under them, havem already explained to you that it is customary to use a cushion for support in case of fractures in the leg.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	When you apply a cushion to a patient's body, use three layers of cloth for the bones, and apply it carefully.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And do not let go of that area until you have reduced the swelling with poultices, and apply to it a poultice made of flaxseed and use other things for the pain.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	Then administer these remedies to help heal the plague: you will need a cushion for the patient's comfort.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And if you have applied the cautery, let the patient be placed on their back in a bed or chair, and prevent them from getting worse by a wound.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	E donc they are considered as necessary to be treated with a cautery.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area, but be careful to avoid irritating the affected part of the body.
Capitol .iii.	E if there are other causes for the pain, it's customarily called something else.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On treating a broken foot.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Then apply a poultice made of only gout-related materials, except for those which are placed on the chest, legs, or feet.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	This is a tricky one! Here's a try:
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And if you are doing surgery on your own foot, be careful to avoid injuring the bones.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the most noble part of the nose, then you should treat it with the utmost care.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	Then you must make two cuts.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And if the patient's condition is possible to be cured, apply it on the first day of the treatment; otherwise, use it after the initial inflammation has subsided.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And you place a cloth over their nose to stop the bleeding.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And so that a doctor may be able to see if they are present in the patient's body.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes in the nose, a bandage is placed on the face, so the nose will be covered with a cloth as the patient's nostrils are padded with cotton.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this being the cause, you may use a cushion if necessary; otherwise, cauterize.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if there should be another attack, apply a cushion to their hands as a poultice made of wax or other remedies.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If there is a need to treat a wound or other ailments on the patient's body, apply poultices made from these ingredients:  cornmeal for external use and a poultice of spices for internal ailments.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that cause the bones to be infiltrated by them, then it should be treated with cauterization.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	Then apply heat to the nostrils, using a handkerchief or cloth.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter 4
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	When the jaw is dislocated.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	Another if the joint pain is caused by humors that are out of balance in their body:  it's just a little bit like a gout attack on the legs.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And if a wound is on the right side, then put your right hand in the mouth of the patient.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	Then when there are fractures in two places, they should be treated by applying cauterization to the affected area.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And you have already applied a strong substance to the affected area.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to rest the leg, and have them apply a poultice to the affected area, so that the intestine does not become inflamed.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you judge that the patient has already been altered in some way, then apply a cushion to their legs on the third day, or at least when the pain occurs.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And so if the pain comes from the joint inflammation which occurs in the foot, they should be treated with a poultice and a bandage to prevent the pain from spreading, and another poultice should be applied to the area where the patient has been treated.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And then for the treatment of the ailment, apply a poultice as we have described.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is a plague, you will have to move the body part away from the wound, carefully considering the implications for the patient's health as well as the use of a hot iron on the bone.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the patient's feet are swollen, you should use a straight cauterization technique.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	Then apply a hot cautery to the affected areas of the body for healing.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	This is when there are inflammations in the foot, which is why they call it a hot and humid disease.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	There are three types of injuries to the body that are called arthritis, by the doctors.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Treat a broken bone or joint in one leg, or if it's a broken limb, treat both the legs and the pelvis.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And if the bone in that area is fractured, it is necessary to have two ministers present, one to hold the injured leg and another to assist with the operation.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then they must place their hands on the fracture to ensure that the injury does not occur.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you place a cushion on the patient's body, please do so carefully.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if the patient cannot be moved, use a hot cautery to apply a smaller cauterization to the foot.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And you place your hand on their chest, and the doctor will say something to the patient.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	And if you want to stop pain in the foot, put your hand on their thighs.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	E if it is necessary to cauterize the foot, place the cushion on the bone.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And if it is necessary to treat a wound on the leg or thigh.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	Mays there be two forms of the disease: one that affects the foot and another the entire body, as it is possible.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if you have opened the wound on the foot, then adjust the wound to the bone structure by sewing the wound closed.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if there's a little bit of disruption, they call it a cushion, but if it's a little, then they use another word for it.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	Then apply a cushion to the affected area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	And so when the body is afflicted by a painful inflammation in the joint.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And so you should be careful that the patient's body does not suffer further harm.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And if the patient's injury is severe, they should be treated by a doctor during the night.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And if it is necessary to apply a poultice for the duration of 12 days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And apply a cushion if they are in need of it on the legs.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is usual for a man to be healed in 28 days by the aforementioned methods.
Capitol .vi.	This section describes how to apply poultices to specific areas for treating a patient with gout.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	This refers to the restoration of the shoulder (bone or joint) in the body.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula is broken in the place where the patient's legs are located, and another person's leg is held by the physician, while they are still conscious.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And therefore, only if the patient is known to have an injury to the location in question — which has been damaged or broken — and their gout is exacerbated by movement.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then pause the treatment if you were to put a cushion on his or her legs; do not use heat if pain in the legs arises.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If there are pain in the thighs, the doctor should place the treatment on their legs to prevent them from becoming inflamed.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then apply strength to hold the intestine in place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the foot to be in its proper place when the pain subsides.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	Then the doctor will put his hand on the patient's foot, etc.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	the patient should be treated for xx days or .25 days.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And then when they know this, they must apply the remedy to the affected area.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you must treat them, it is said that doctors should use cautery on the joints to stop the inflammation of gout.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of the restoration of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot has been opened by the cushion placed on the legs, and if necessary, a hand should be applied to the affected area to prevent further pain.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	Then place the other end of lo cushion under the patient's legs to create an opening in the body that allows for the use of the cautery.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And let it be done on the left side of the body, and when it is necessary to apply a cautery to the patient’s left side, they will only use it where it is needed.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	The physicians treat the ailment with a poultice and bandages, and they should be applied carefully.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	When there are such pains that a doctor might be needed to apply cauterization or other remedies.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	And so that the body may be restored when its coasts are damaged.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	And we treat those who are afflicted with gout in the legs by using a hot cautery; this is how you should know.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the patient's condition will be known when the physician uses a cushion to feel for heat in the feet.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	Do as the doctors do in such cases.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the patient's legs, they should be applied in such a way that the cautery does not cause pain to the patient.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And thus they are healed by the touch of the hand, for the cushion is used to apply heat to the afflicted area.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	Then apply the heat of your hand to the area around the affected joint.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	And it is said that cushion is used to treat them; if there is no other treatment available.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And so they apply leeches to the patient, which they use to draw out blood from the body if necessary.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	Then place wool under their feet.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if you put your hand on their legs, then they will be healed by cauterizatio
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then apply to the patient's open sores a poultice, using cozies on the legs and another on their feet.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	You have already opened the source to apply a poultice.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And if the patient's foot is sore, apply a cautery to it.
Capitol .ix.	This person has been diagnosed with **"Gout"** by physicians.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	This refers to placing a cushion under the patient's head, and supporting their neck and back during treatments.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	And if it is necessary to apply heat to the legs or spine.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And you must know that if there is a cold humor under a patient's skin, it is customary to call it gout.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you have pain in the legs, apply heat to the affected area.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you want to know if he has gout, look at his feet.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	This is a statement that the first step in treating a wound is to apply a cushion during surgery, as was done in the past.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	And if it's not due to one of those causes, then it's probably something lighter.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And if you are treating someone, then apply the cautery to the area that is affected by the phlegm.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And if you must apply an ointment to the patient's body, then order them to keep the affected area warm and moving, and to avoid using a cushion on it.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	If your body's humors cause a sharp pain in the feet, then they are likely to be treated with a cautery.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	When a bone in the leg is broken, it is customary to treat it with the help of a cautery tool.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel pain in your legs, apply a cautery to the affected area.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Then apply the poultice to the affected area.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	And if the body is affected by the cold humors, then you must apply the points to the areas where the humors are present.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	Then apply your hand to prevent further injury.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	Then apply the cushion to the affected area, and support the patient's body.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	Then you must apply heat to the affected area if they are prone to it becoming another fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	E then apply the cushion to the leg.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	Then apply the appropriate treatment to the affected area after removing the cushion from beneath it.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	From the given context, here's the translation:
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	Then treat the patient's legs accordingly.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	This is the translation for the restoration of an injured foot.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	When the wound is on their legs, they are to be cauterized by another doctor.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	Then, if the patient has a gouty condition, they can be restored by using a hot cautery on their feet.
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	Two or more ligaments are to be found in the leg.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And if it is a pain in the legs, it is called sciatica by doctors.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And if the cushion was placed on the patient's legs, the physician should apply his hand to the affected area.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And if you are in a position to make a decision, the other thing to do is to apply a bandage to the wound on the leg, and the other two bandages are for the other parts of the body that are affected by the swelling.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want to treat the intestine or veins of a patient more effectively.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the pain is in the legs, those should be treated as well.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	Then similarly if there is a wound near the leg, you should cauterize the wound with a hot iron.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	The treatment for this ailment should be done by applying a hot poultice to the affected area after seven days.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	The patient should be wrapped in the fabric to prevent swelling.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Then apply a cushion under their arms, and place a cushion on your head so that you can be treated if necessary, etc.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	You will need to use a hot iron to treat this.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And so, you should place your hand on their foot to prevent further injury.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then place a splint on the patient’s legs.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And if the patient's body has been injured, you should apply a cautery to their legs directly.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when it is necessary for the patient to be treated, you can use them as a guide by using a cushion.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And so you will know the proper way to treat the pain in the legs and feet.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	Then apply a cushion to the legs, as described above.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And consider the following as a remedy for the ailment if the patient should be treated for three days.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	Mays three days are needed to wait for the intestine or hernia to be healed.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And so if the patient has pain in their stomach, one should apply a cushion to the area around their belly.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And if you apply the cushion to the joint at any time, the patient's pain will be eased.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And then apply a cushion to the patient's body, so that the patient may be treated with it.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Here comes the translation:
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the bone is already fractured, then you will know by the pain in their legs.
Capitol .xii.	Another person's leg would be treated with a cautery after it has been another.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Then apply a bandage to their arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	The patient has two parts of their body that are opened: the one in their legs is called a pain in the feet, e.g., when the diet causes the disease to flare up.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And so the disease is treated by the physician with cauterization for both the large and small areas of the body affected by the illness, as well as for the small cushions made from such things as gout.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	The restoration of the body's small humors will be restored, and the rest of the body will be healed.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the pain is severe, it can be difficult to treat.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And two bones have already been opened in him/her.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if it is the case that the patient's bone is fractured, another approach may be necessary.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	When the fire is burning hot, you will know it by its signs because it’s very painful.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if the two are together, they are to be heated up by the strongest cautery.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And if you are a doctor, you should know the condition of the patient's intestine.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And if the patient's foot is being treated, the patient should be given a cushion so that they don't tire.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And place a cushion on their legs to prevent them from being too close to each other.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And so you must make sure the patient's body is properly positioned to avoid pain in their legs.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if you have pain in the joints of their body, they are the ones who cause it to be bad.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the area after it has been opened up by a surgeon, or if it’s a case of gout, which I think we can safely assume it is.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	The patient's condition is indeed serious, but perhaps they are simply using the term "aquel" as a way to describe their situation.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	The use of "l'altra" suggests this might be a Catalan text.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And if there are other injuries to the arm or elbow, you should know that they can be treated by a physician specializing in setting bones and treating injuries to the limbs, who will use specialized tools for this purpose.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And if it is necessary to cauterize something on the leg, then put a cushion under them.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And if the pain is in their legs, then use cushions under them.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the other parts of the body needing attention.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if there's pain due to blood in the body, you should apply a cushion or wrap on their legs and call it by the appropriate name, which is what doctors call gout.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let the cushion be placed so that the body does not move.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	Here comes the first line: Translation 1: If you have a pain in the foot, then put your hand on the affected area to help soothe it.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	Then apply a cushion to the feet for a few days, lest they become more swollen.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	Mays it be necessary to apply cautery to the patient's body.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And if you need to keep the patient's feet still, then place a cushion under them.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And if it's a severe fracture, it should be healed in 30 days.
Capitol .xiii.	The thirteenth chapter should be placed after the chapters about gout, as seen in the examples you provided.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	And if it is necessary to treat the pain on their legs, place cushions between the patient's thighs.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that the pain in the fingers caused by the cushion is due to gout, which is a different disease from what is commonly called the foot's pain.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And if there is injury or illness in the body, the physician should use different treatments for each ailment.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And if a patient has pain in their legs, they should be given cushions to cushion the area around their hands.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	Then apply a cushion to the affected area; for the patient's legs are sore and swollen, et si tu se’n vol fazer, fai un peu de drap for them to be wrapped in cloth so they don't become inflamed.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	When the pain is in the joints, then it's called gout, but if it's on the foot, they are simply called "gout" .
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's body, that is how it should be done.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	Then if the injury is outside the bone, then you must apply the cushion to the affected area.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if the pain becomes severe, they should apply heat to the area, and keep the intestine or hernia contained.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	Mays es que la lesa es another cushion under the other hand, e liats are other treatments for gout.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	E consider the location of the wound, for it is customary to place bandages on the affected area.
Capitol .xiv.	The text discusses a medical procedure involving applying a cautery to the foot in the context of treating gout.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	De costuma, the restoration of the bone in the thigh.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone in the leg is called a bone.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The patient was likely to have been treated for their ailment by using a cautery tool on their feet.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then place his hand over the injured area, as well as the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	When the foot is affected by gout, a denolh is used to support the affected area.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And if there are other symptoms in the body, such as pain in their legs, apply a cushion to the affected area and another on their chest.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And if you have to use a bandage or apply pressure on the patient's legs, the body will be healed.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	If it is a boil or abscess, you'll need to apply heat for several days.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	Then apply a bandage to the affected area, ensuring it's tight enough to prevent swelling but not too tight.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And then apply a hot poultice to the affected area, for which you should use a hot cautery.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And so you have opened the space between their legs, and when they are treated, they will be healed.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Then use cloths to bandage their legs, so that the swelling subsides.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Then, if it's a question of setting a cushion under the patient, make sure to avoid the opening being too large or too small so it doesn't become painful.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Then place two cushions on their legs so the patient's intestine isn't pushed out.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Then, if it is necessary to apply cautery on their legs, you should use a sharp instrument.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	Then you should use those remedies which are suitable for each part of the body.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And another method is to apply force to keep the rest of their body from being affected by this affliction of the foot, as doctors have said.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	Thus the patient's intestines are treated with a hot iron.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And if they have been used to such pain for 40 days or more, or less than that, then apply a poultice to them.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	This refers to restoring the intestine, so I'll assume the first example was correct:
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	This means that the patient has been treated for a broken bone.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	Then apply cautery to the wound if the pain is in the legs, e.g., from gout.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And then the patient will be restored to his original state.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	Then place another on their round leg, and apply a poultice to their foot, which is the appropriate place for the treatment.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Then they are considered other fractures, which are also known as a boil in some parts of the body.
Capitol .xvi.	The text uses Roman numerals and "E" for "And" so it likely refers to a chapter title: "Capitol XVI"
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	And then treat them for their pain.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	The first example shows a doctor using the term "the doctors" for something that happens in the body, the second one, a pointed instrument, used to perform surgery.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And so, if there's a need to remove the pain from the patient's arm.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if the patient's legs are injured, they should be treated with bandages or splints, as needed.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the patient has a small bone in their foot, it should be treated with a cushion.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if it is broken bones, then it will be another cause that needs to be addressed.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And so the patient's legs are supported and the pain is treated by applying a cushion.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But if the pain is in the legs, it is said to be a sign of a disease called "la laia" which affects them.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	When there is much pain in the leg, you should apply an application to the legs and call it palmate and use a cushion for the foot.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And if it is a two-part sickness, one should place the cushion on the other leg.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And place a cushion under each foot to prevent them from being exposed to cold humors.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And on their legs place a cushion upon them, and another below; and let the patient be supported by your hand or another cushion.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And doctors most often treat those injuries as gout.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then you must study the leg further, because of the pain in the leg and for treatment purposes.
Capitol .xvii.	When the pain is in the joints, then apply the hot cautery to their surface.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	And placed a cushion under them.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	If there are many fractures in the body, it is often called gout.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	Then you have opened the foot for a cushion to be placed under it.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place a cushion on those limbs that are elevated.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then place your hand on their legs to prevent them from being affected by the cold.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then place a cushion on them.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And if after three or four days, you remove the cushion from the patient's leg, and the pain continues, then perform surgery on them.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	This means that when hands are affected by cold, it's called arthritis.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And cushion the joint with another cushion to relieve the pain.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	You should cauterize the patient's toe if the pain is severe, and apply a cushion to the foot, so that the pain in the toes and other joints does not worsen.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And remember to consider all the causes that are related to the other injuries as well, for the sake of understanding all the reasons for them.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol.xviii. means "Chapter 18".
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	A man's chest is used for burning with another tool, while the woman's body is being burned, and she is being held down by the doctor.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When a woman's humors are unbalanced, it is called "malata" by the physician.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And so the midwife holds the woman's foot in place while she places a cushion on her foot.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then apply the cushion to the patient's chest, as needed, depending on the location where it needs to be applied.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And so for seven days or thereabouts.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you use an animal’s bladder as a type of tool or instrument, apply it to the patient’s legs, and place a canula under the skin on the other parts of the body, and then put the whole thing in the bladder's opening.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	When it is the case that the patient has pain in their sides due to the gout.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And if a bone is broken in the hips or legs, apply to the repair of it the same methods as we have described for treating a fractured hip.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is right, is not hidden in these injuries, and that injury can be treated by cautery.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	Mays en la vergua del home quan is trincada, e so on that they are already in a state of being treated, which was considered a common practice for gout.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter xix.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Then you can restore bones by using other methods.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	A first aid man will be needed to perform a cuoyssa cautery on the patient.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	Then if there is pain in the legs, put a cushion on the feet to prevent other problems from arising, and apply a cautery to the chest.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And if there are signs of a fracture, apply cold to prevent inflammation.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	When a wound appears, you should let the swelling subside before applying a poultice to the affected area.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	May you be careful to place a cushion under their legs if they are needed.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	Mays es a strongman for the body, which is why he is treated in a particular way.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And if you want to avoid pain during the operation, it should be done as they do in the case of a man's pain.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	Apply heat to the area of the affected limb, and apply the cushion on their legs for a sharp pain.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then, place a cushion under their feet.
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the foot, then apply the cautery on the affected area.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	And if the disease returns to the foot, it will be elevated from the inside.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And then apply some type of medication to help him heal.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	Then you must apply another instrument to heal the injury if the bone is broken in such a way that it requires multiple cushions for support.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	When it is not possible to reduce the pain in the patient's foot, use a cautery on the affected area.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then place a cushion under the area of the body where the pain is located.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And if the patient's bone is in its proper place, then the pain will subside.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	Then apply a poultice to the wound if it's necessary to treat the illness.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	Then apply splints to the bone according to the amount of damage, leaving the bone exposed where the plague is present.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	Then if you are careful, the plague will not spread to other parts of the body.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	The sentence describes a situation where a patient's foot is being treated with cauterization for a condition involving a small, localized pain.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	Then you must apply a poultice to their foot.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	When you see that a patient has a boil or two, it is customary to treat it with a poultice applied directly on the affected area, as well as to apply a cushion to their body and place your hand over their leg to prevent it from swelling up.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	Therefore, apply a hot compress to the affected area to reduce swelling in the legs, morning and evening, as long as the inflammation persists.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	You should examine the patient for a fever, if they have a small fever, you can stop using the cauterizer.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And from those injuries, those which are separate shall be extracted.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	When the body is affected by pain in each part of the legs due to cold humors, the physician must use cauterization, but there are other remedies.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And so, if you have already opened the space of the patient's legs, do not be afraid if it hurts more than usual when you put a cushion on their knees.
Capitol .xx.	The translation you provided for the first part of the text is incorrect.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	The treatment of which we are speaking is for a condition that occurs after a fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	This sentence describes using cauteri to treat a condition called "fracture" in the original language, which is likely a reference to a method used by doctors in the past.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	And if the patient is new to the ailment, or has recently been afflicted by it, they must be treated with a cushion and recent remedies so that the pain may be relieved.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	It refers to a situation where there is a need for a cushion to be used in treating something related to a joint condition.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Mays (meaning: Maybe) if the patient has a cushion to be placed upon them, o seu (meaning: their) corpulence is already a sign that they are in bad health.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Then restore the bones to their proper alignment.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a fracture is healed, and the ligament is repaired, it is not caused by anything other than what is needed for multiple reasons; or perhaps the bone is broken, and another by the reason of their being many causes for a condition to arise.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	Put cushions under their arms and legs to soften the pain of gout and then apply a hot cautery to the affected areas.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Then apply a bandage over the affected area to keep the medicine in place.
Capitol .xxii.	Another way to treat gout in the feet by applying a hot compress.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	And if it is necessary to set bones when they are broken, then you should know how to put them back together.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	If the intestine or a broken bone is healed, the patient will feel pain in their legs if they are experiencing gout.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	This is a bit tricky without knowing the exact context, but here's a translation:
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	And recently the patient has been given a poultice or medicine to soften the pain of their legs from being named gout by the doctors.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And if it is necessary to move the patient's leg to make sure all the fluids don't pool there.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	And if you have already applied cauterization to the legs, use a hot cautery on the smaller parts.
Capitol .xxiii.	The patient's condition, caused by an imbalance in their humors, requires treatment with a cautery applied to the affected areas.
De sermo en dislocacio.	This phrase appears to be from a text that uses a combination of Latin-derived words and phrases common in Italian medical practices.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Gout is a condition where a patient's joints swell up and are restricted in movement, which can cause severe pain and discomfort.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	So when there is a dislocation, it needs to be addressed immediately by a doctor, as further delay can make it difficult to reduce.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for that reason, a physician should treat the first part of the body, but avoid gout by using a cushion.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When it comes to Mays, here's how you apply a cushion for support: first to the thigh, then to the rest of the body.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every member is cured by its corresponding remedy.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And if there's an injury to the legs below, they are treated as a sprain.
Capitol .xxiiii.	The chapter number 24 is written as follows:
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Treatises on the treatment of dislocations are usually called treatments for gout.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	E.g.,  "This is how it's done in the case of the lower leg," or "And if it is necessary to put a cushion on the patient's feet because they have an injury."
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When there are minor dislocations of the body, the cause is often attributed to cold humors and gouty conditions, but that's not always true.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	May it be that if the dislocation is complete, then it is necessary to reduce it.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And then you apply the cushion to the patient's legs, and the other one to the chest, keeping the cushion in place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	When the patient's jaw is dislocated, apply traction to help relocate it.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	Therefore, if the patient's ailment is not treated, the pain will be severe.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And if the body has pain in the feet, use a cautery to treat it.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And if you want to administer the remedy, use a heating tool on their legs.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult to keep the two mandibles in place, then the dislocated bones will cause pain and heavy anger.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when your body has gout, you are to treat it for ten days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	And so on, and if you have a pain in the shoulder and apply a cautery to it, it is customary for the patient to be given a cushion for the patient's arm.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The doctors will use a tool to burn away the excess.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And then he will be placed on his back, and spread their arms out to make sure they don't move.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And they have a cushion under them, to constrain their pain.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	Then apply your hand on their legs and another on their feet.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	May the feet be cauterized and the intestines be returned to their place.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And if you are the doctor, you have already calmed the pain in the legs.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And so if there's an inflammation in the body, then it's called gout.
Capitol .xxvi.	This is a tricky one! It looks like a combination of languages, likely a medieval Romance language.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	On the reduction of a dislocated muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	You know that muscle is only dislocated if you know for sure that it is already in the wrong place.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And if you are treating a patient, another method used is to apply a hot poultice to the affected area.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And so they say that's what the doctors do to treat gout, but the patient has plenty of flesh on their feet, so the treatment is difficult.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	When joints are inflamed or swollen, doctors say it's gout.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then you have already been cured of the sickness by the medicine.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And so you must know that the treatment for gout depends on the location of the pain.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	Then apply a bandage to the affected area.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation, treat it with a light reduction if the dislocation is fresh, and use a cushion for the patient's legs.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the minister gently massages the legs, so that the patient feels relief from the pain in their legs.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	If the pain in the legs subsides, but the patient has other pains elsewhere, apply heat to the affected area and use a cushion for support.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Then apply the cauterization to the affected area, using wool as a cushion to prevent the skin from burning.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	Then place a cushion on their thighs to apply a poultice, and use a bandage to hold the poultice in place.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	Mays if si it is mild, you should know that it is not a serious illness.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And you must extend your hand to the patient's other side, so their body may be kept in balance.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce the swelling, you may use this method.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And so put the patient's foot in hot water to soothe the pain.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	Then apply a cushion to the patient's ailment.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the arms, they should be made wider apart than the legs.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the packing with a bandage of wool is completed, place a cushion on the patient's chest to prevent a wound from festering.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the affected area, it should be applied carefully to avoid further complications.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And if there are other things to eat or drink, which are good for the body, they should be given.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If a limb has been dislocated by three other limbs, treat it according to the chapter on dislocation.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if at that time the pain lasts for seven days, it's best to call it something else.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	The text describes using a cauterizing tool on a patient's foot to address joint pain caused by gout.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the pain is in the intestines, it's another story altogether.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if you apply pressure to the area to help restore the body part's natural function.
Capitol .xxvii.	Then apply the appropriate treatment for the illness to which the patient is being subjected.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of dislocation.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Sapias that the patient's body is affected by humors and needs cauterization in several places.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	Then you must have already opened the wound to the bone, and placed cushions under the affected area for support.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	This is how you would restore the patient to his usual state, if he has a cushion that can be used for such a purpose, and another on the leg, so that they are able to keep the wound open.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	And if the patient has a dislocated joint or other injury, they should be treated in the same way, by applying a cautery to the affected area.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation doesn't reduce easily, then treat it with forceful reduction.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And apply heat to two of the ministers who have been opened, are they those who will be used for the treatment?
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And if the arm is affected by the pain, a cloth folded in two should be placed upon it.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	When the doctor touches the joint with a cushion (presumably to apply pressure), they are applying force to the affected area in an attempt to reduce pain.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Then treat the pain in the leg with a poultice and bandage.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Then apply a cushion to the patient's knee or ankle, as needed, to stabilize the joint.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	This refers to the application of poultices on the legs for pain relief, which is done for gout.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	And if you apply the treatment to the legs, they are called
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And another place [the affected area] on the chest [of the patient] with hot water (or other remedies).
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Then return the intestine of the patient's leg, for that is where the cushion lies.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you want to stop the pain from spreading to other parts of the body and joints, put a cushion on the patient's legs and use your hands to gently push back against the swelling and pain.
Capitol .xxviii.	**Capitol .xxviii. Translate from Latin:
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Treat the pain in the arms and legs as you would a dislocated limb.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	When other parts of the body are treated with the use of a cautery, it's important to be careful that the inflammation does not spread to the rest of the body.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And so you apply a burning iron to the legs of a patient when it becomes necessary to cauterize the area where they are suffering.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	When your doctor places their hands on your legs to feel for pain, they are referring to it as a condition affecting the joints, such as the ankles or knees.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And so, if it's good to return them quickly, the poultice should be applied; otherwise, leave it alone.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	The passage describes how to use a tool called a "cushion" in relation to the treatment of a medical condition.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	And if the intestines are affected by the illness, place another cushion on the area where it is on their legs for 5 days, then apply heat to the afflicted area again.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	Then apply heat to the affected area for as long as necessary.
Capitol .xxix.	In the xxixth chapter.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	And here comes the cure for dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes the pain in the legs is caused by a hot iron, sometimes by something else.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when there is pain in the foot, and if a joint is dislocated, one must place a cushion on their back.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then place your hand on their head, and leave it for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then return the patient's leg to its proper position.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when there is pain, put a cushion under their legs; in the daytime, the patient should be treated by a physician and given proper care for that condition; and if it is painful, they will need a second physician.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And so the patient's foot can be treated by a doctor.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly, for the opening of their legs, they are to be given other cushions.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol .xxx.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	This refers to the treatment of dislocations in the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	Then apply heat to the patient's spine, and place another on their legs, so as to prevent them from being cold.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And if it is necessary to keep the patient's bowels from being constricted by their position, it is customary to place a cushion on their legs.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, it is called gout.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	This statement means that the doctor's advice for treating the disease in the foot.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	Mays in his time of need, one would use a hot iron to cauterize the afflicted area when they are suffering from excessive pain, which is why the affected part should be treated by the methods of those who used them.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that the pain in the joints, if it is caused by gout, is treated with a cushion.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	The pain in the feet is caused by the fact that humors are present in all parts of the body.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And then, use the hot iron on their face, away from the already-present cushion.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And if a doctor needs to cauterize the patient's foot, they must place a cushion on their feet.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	Then the minister would need to be careful not to injure the patient's intestines when applying the cauterizer.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And to the one who has other things than the cold humors on his limbs.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And if there are cushions under the feet, the patient should be supported on both sides.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	The doctor holds the patient's feet on the table, preventing them from experiencing further pain.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	Mays the patient be healed by using the remedies for this ailment in the form of three things: a table, a chair, or something else.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And if the patient's body needs to be treated, the physician should apply the treatment to the appropriate area.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you use a tool for the treatment, apply it to the patient's body; and so you have placed a bandage on their leg.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	When the patient's body is treated with cushions, their legs should be kept under control.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And on the patient's hand, there are three fingers (or a finger) which are affected by the length of their fingers, et cetera.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then place your hand on the patient's legs to prevent them from tightening up.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And here you must put a cushion under them, so that they are supported on their legs.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is how you recognize a case of gout:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	Then apply a poultice of bread to the patient's legs when they are experiencing pain from an ailment that causes their body to be affected by cold humors.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And if you have to apply the cautery, use a cushion to prevent the patient from feeling pain.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	If pain persists after treatment, use medicine for relief.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	When a joint pain occurs in the bone structure, you can be sure they are affected by a particular ailment.
Capitol .xxxi.	Of the physicians, it is necessary for the first to be known as the person performing the treatment.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	And elsewhere, it is treated as a dislocation.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	The pain in the legs and feet is caused by a problem with the humors, which are out of balance.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	The intestine can be affected by four different types of gout.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And if it is a serious medical condition, it is a pain in the joints of the body, which may occur elsewhere as well.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And if you have a dislocation of the cushion in the foot, you should treat it by placing the cauterization in its place.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And if you know that this disease is called gout, it is important to use the right methods.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	When joint pain affects the body, it is often called malaute by doctors.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	When joints dislocate, the cure for them is to put them back in place, and the other cure is to apply a poultice made from the herb alcazar on the foot.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	May their be a reduction in the pain that is felt in the foot.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	Mays in that which is dislocated, and recently, the patient needs four cushions.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	Then prepare a strong poultice and apply it to the affected area.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And let the patient's bowels be treated by placing a cushion on them.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And he should keep the cauteries ready to treat the disease by applying them correctly.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of extension is common to all four limbs.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And if the dislocation returns to its place, then you can treat it yourself.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	When the patient's intestine is dislocated, it should be held in place by a cushion so they don't move during surgery.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	Then another place your hand on the patient's chest to prevent the pain from spreading there, while you are using the other two for the feet.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	This translates to:  When pain occurs in the joints, it is easier to cure if caused by cold humors.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	When gout occurs in the legs, apply a strong cauterization to the affected area.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let it be known that four members are burned by a cautery instrument.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And if it is necessary, place the cushion two arms' lengths away from the patient.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And so, the doctor must use his hand to hold back the intestine.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the skin, apply it below the surface of the skin as well.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And if there are two cushions on their legs, they are to be placed on the thighs, one above each other.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	The doctor applies another cushion to the affected area of the patient's body according to the ailment.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	And if the physician finds that necessary, he will cauterize the affected joint.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	When you are using a hot iron to cauterize the patient's legs, it is necessary to keep their hands away from the area.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And if the dislocation is in the legs, use a cushion under them and keep the foot straight to ease the pain.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	E la sua ays in the case of his legs, if he has been operated on by doctors already, so that they don’t need to be operated on again, and the intestine doesn't come out.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	When joint pain occurs, the doctor will apply a cushion to their legs.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Then you put your hand on a cushion and apply pressure to the patient's chest, ensuring they are not pressing on their own body during this process.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And compare the leg to the other leg.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	When applying the other remedies for gout, one must be careful to use a proper cautery, and place a cushion under their legs, etc.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see a cause for pain in the foot, then return it to its natural state, and leave it alone.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And if the patient has been given another cushion to help them keep their bowels in order, they should be allowed to rest for a few days.
Capitol .xxxii.	The text appears to be in a language that resembles Italian or Spanish.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	And for treating dislocations, it is necessary to use a heated cautery.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The pain is caused by the inflammation of the joints.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The sign of gout in the leg is that a poultice should be applied to it.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And if he needs to be healed, one must apply pressure to the cushion on his chest, to the right foot, and use a cautery tool for burning the two sides of the wound.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	The cushion or their feet, they are for pain relief.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And if there are other things that need to be done for the intestine or legs to be treated, place the cushion on their abdomen and a bandage on the patient's body.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	For a few days, the patient will be healed by walking around for a while, then put a cushion on their legs when necessary.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	If a pain in the limbs arises from cold humors, it is known as gout.
Capitol .xxxiii.	And if it is necessary to treat inflammation in the joints by cauterization.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of the dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	Then apply another cushion to their legs or use other methods to reduce the inflammation depending on the patient's condition.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And that the patient's foot is dislocated, it is customary to treat it with a hot cautery.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The treatment for the cure of the light disease called gout involves removing the bloodletting instruments.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	This is a tricky one! Here's my best guess at the meaning:
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And if it is necessary to put your right foot in the cavity of the thigh, then you should place a cushion on the right side and another under the patient's feet, and another holding their left foot.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Then apply a hot cushion to their legs and hold their feet.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And apply cautery to the affected area, as we have previously described.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then you apply a bandage to the patient's legs, but use a different one for each foot separately.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	And if it is necessary to repeat the procedure twice for the patient, or on the foot again according to this method, then that is good.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	Mays si a tu are feeling pain in their legs, they should be treated with a poultice to keep them from being swollen and put on their body by another place.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	When the doctor sees that the patient has pain in their legs, he should put a cushion under them so that the patient's body is supported during treatment.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And if a doctor can't heal the dislocation, he helps to maintain the healthiness of the parts of the body where the affliction is.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	Then apply a poultice to that location, and they are healed of your pain.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And so, when joint pain is caused by the cold, it is customary to say that it is an arthritis.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Then leave it alone for two or three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then apply a cushion to the patient's chest for 4 days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	This appears to be a medieval Latin-like language, and the text describes the use of a cushion by the doctor.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if the patient has an abscess, apply a poultice to the affected area.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter xxxiv.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	The treatment for this ailment is called by its first-guessing name, which is "gout" in Latin.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	When a patient has a dislocation, treat it with care; if it is a painful one, attend to the pain directly.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	And then you should use a cushion to support their body if they have a dislocation.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then place your hand on the patient's foot to keep it from swelling further.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And if the patient needs to be treated for three days, it is necessary to place a table in front of them to ensure they are treated on all sides.
Capitol .xxxv.	This appears to be a fragment from a medieval medical treatise. A possible translation for "Capitol .xxxv." is "Chapter 35".
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	The following are some ways to translate the text:
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When there is a chance of injury to the patient, it is necessary to use cauterization on the foot and other areas.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	A wise man will use the cushion on their chest for gout, but not for other ailments.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And then you must apply a poultice to the patient's affected area.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	If the intestine or leg has been properly treated, then apply the appropriate treatment for the intestines or another type of treatment for the legs.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if a dislocation is caused by a fracture, you have separated the bones.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And apply your hands to the patient's body in accordance with the nature of their ailment.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	When the patient is experiencing pain in their legs, it is customary to apply cauterization.
Amen.	Amen.
