Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	Thus begin the words of Albucasim.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	Oh, sons, because I have completed this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, by the fulfillment of it, its end is achieved in it, and by its expositions and declarations, it is my view that you complete it with this treatise, which is a part of the operation with me, so it is surgery.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	Because the operation with me is spread in our region and in our time completely private, while many risk the science of it, and its vestiges are held hostage; and there remain of it only some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which muddle the most and lead to those errors and uncertainties because their clauses are understood and the force of it and the art are lengthened.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And it is seen to me that you bring to life that with the order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and for that it may come with the forms of the tools of cautery and the other instruments of the work as it is for the addition of the declaration, and for the preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	But the cause for which no good artificer with his hand is found in this our time, is that the art of medicine is long, and that it compels its actor to be exercised before that in the science of anatomy, which reconciles Gualia because it knows the movements of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and to have the knowledge of the bones, nerves and arteries, the number of them, and the egress of them; and of the pulsatile and quiet veins, and the places of the emission of them.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	And for that reason, Hippocrates says that in a name is little, but in the work much, and most of all in the art of the hand.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	But now we have already said that in the introduction of this book; because whoever is not aware of what we have said of anatomy, is not evacuated that he does not fall into error for which many men die, so as I have seen many of those, some are formed in this science and cast themselves away from that science and their experiments.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	Because I saw a foolish and inexperienced physician who had incised a scrophulous abscess in the neck of a woman, and incised some arteries of the neck so that much blood flowed while the woman died among the hands of him.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And I saw another physician who prescribed that the patient swallow a stone from a man who had processed in his state, and the stone was large, and it came to him and extracted that stone with a piece of the bladder, so that the man on the third day died.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I had already been called to extract that, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the disposition of the patient, I knew above him that he would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	And I saw another physician who was taking a stipend from a duke of our land for surgery, and he was given a black crutch who was broken in his thigh; and prepared the physician with his ignorance, I extracted the fracture, on the wound, with splints and splints with strong structure, and did not leave the wound to breathe.
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And then he set it according to his desires, and he reattached it, and then he left it for some days and commanded that we untie the ligament; and it was so that the thigh and the foot became festered, and it came to ruin.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	And I was called to him, and I appeased him to untie the ligament, and achieved tranquility and then eased his pains.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But however, the corruption had already been confirmed in the limb, so that I could not restrain it, and it did not cease to wander the corruption in the limb until the patient perished.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And I saw another physician who perforated a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated after some days, until the malice of it was magnified to its lord.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	The cause of which is that the cancerous caut is pure of melancholic humor, so that it does not come to it with iron of all, but that it be in a limb the one which suffers that of all it be held hostage.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And therefore, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation with me be devised in two divisions: so it is in the operation which is associated with health, and in the work with which there is peril in the major dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And I have already established this in every place of this book in which I present an operation in which there is error and fear; because it is necessary for you to guard this and leave that, so that the foolish do not find a way to speak and to dishonor you.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And therefore, take your arms with diligence and with the protection of God, and your patients with facility and with firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And use the best way by the grace of God, pursuing health and praiseworthy success, and leave the terrible illnesses of difficult healing, and hold your arms from that which makes you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and in your name does not escape you: because more remains to your glory, and more in the world and in the end to your sanctities.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Gualia already says in some of his monitions:
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	"Do not treat a bad illness, so that you are not called bad physicians."
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	And I have already divided this book according to three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	Begins the division of the book, and the first of the first part.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	The first chapter, ordered by the head, about the forms of instruments and the tools of cauteries, and what is necessary in the operation.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	The division of the second part.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter, of suction and perforation, and of cupping glasses, and of poultices, and of the extraction of arrows and of things similar to those, all chaptered and ordered by the forms of the instruments.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	Division of the third part.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, of restoration and dislocation, and of the cure of sprains and things similar to those; chapter ordered by the head, and of the forms of the instruments.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	Of cauterization with fire and with sharp medicine and remembrance of the operation.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	In this begins the treatment of the whole book.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	Know that you should say the quality of the judgments of that cautery and its harms, and in what completion cauterization should be prohibited.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	Therefore I say that the sermon of the quality of the judgment of cauterization and its harm is a long and prolix sermon, and subtle by science, and secretly hidden; and already many wise men have spoken of it, and they have disagreed about it, and to me a little of their sermons suffices, fearing prolixity.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And therefore I say that cauterization agrees with every universal composition, whether it is of matter or of its matter, except for two compositions, which are compositions of matter that is cauda.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	In the composition that is dry and of matter, they disagree; because some say that cauterization is beneficial to that, and others say the contrary, that cauterization is not convenient in illness that is by quality and by dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that illness that is dry and by dryness, with that which is caut and dry, be cured.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	And I say to those who say the contrary, that by cauterization is done benefit in all dry and  illnesses that come in the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of a man and its humors to the composition of fire, you find the body of man to be cold.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And I say for the sermon of this, that experience has already revealed to me on some occasions.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	But however, it should not come upon this that which is already exploited and exercised in the chapter of cauterization by the previous exercise, and who has known the diversity of the composition of men and the disposition of the illnesses in their own bodies, and the causes of those, and their accidents, and the duration of those.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	But in the other compositions, there is no fear over you, and most of all in the cold and humid illnesses, because all the physicians have agreed upon those, and they are not disagreed about the judgment with cauterization in those.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And know, sons, that of the secret of cure by cauterization with fire and of its goodness, it is because fire is simple, the action of which does not reach beyond the member that is cauterized and not to the other member attached to it, except for a small harm.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	But the action of burning medicine reaches that in the members that are far from it, and forcefully makes them bring illness of difficult healing and forcefully a great pain.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	But fire, by its sublimity and of its substance goodness, does not do so except that it is superfluous. And already it is known to us by experience and by the length of service of study in the art about the truth of the causes; and for that reason, I am excused for the length of the sermon, and if it were not that it is not written in my book in this pause to you, the secret hidden with fire, and the quality of its operation in the bodies, and its expulsion by which it expels the illnesses, with a philosophical and demonstrative sermon, which would be acute in your minds.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	And know, sons, that they disagree about the time in which it is convenient to do cauterization and they pause the best time of spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And I say that cauterization is convenient at all times, because so that the harm from the accidental time is submerged in the benefit of that which is cauterized, and most of all if the cauterization is for pains or of necessary pains, strong and fistulous, which do not suffer delay because it is feared that those that come malice, which is greater than a small harm entering by time.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And therefore do not catch in your minds, or, sons, that this is not esteemed by the vulgar people and the foolish physicians, so it is that to that illness that is cured by cauterization is not reduced at all times, and they pause that consequence.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	And the cause is not at all so as they care about that, because cauterization is nothing more than in place of medicine that alters the composition and dries up the humors which are the cause for which pains come.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	But however, cauterization is superfluous over medicine by the will of its validity and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	And it is possible that its illness may return at any time, according to the composition of the patient and the location of their illness, and the virtue of it, and what is prepared in the body of it of the aggregation of superfluities in it, and what has been received to it in its acquisition in foods and things similar to those causes; unless that illness in which cauterization is administered is a subtle illness in a member of few superfluities and humors, as cauterization of teeth for pain and things similar to that, it is possible that in it that pain does not return, but that it is made in small amounts.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	And more commonly it is said that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is rightly said, for those who understand it, because they believe that it is not a cure that benefits with medicine nor with any other cause except cautery.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	And the cause is the opposite of that; and the understanding that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when they administer the ways of healing in some illnesses, and those medicines do not confer, and then at the end of the cause they administer cautery, and it benefits to that.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And therefore, it is said that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the understanding which the common people and many foolish doctors understand.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And they said that the place of cautery does not make a scar, as it is not absolutely true, because I have already seen that and I have found that this does not do so except in some bodies, and cautery with this is good and better than with iron as they said; however, when you do cautery with fire with gold, it is not declared to you, because it is ignited according to the quantity that you want by the roar of the gold, and that it prepares to receive the burning; and if you adjust over it, the gold melts by the fire, and in the fire some plates so that the artisan catches for the occupation of that.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	And for this reason, cautery with iron must be done more lightly and more carefully to the rectitude of operation.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And I have already ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head within the feet, so that later the demander asks for what he wants from it.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	Of cautery for headache due to cold and humidity.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	This cauterization confers to the humidity and coldness over the nerves affected by the cause of which there are two, so it is the cause of soda and multitude of rheumatic flux, called corissa, from the head to the parts of the ears and the auricles flow, and multitude of sleep, and pain of teeth and of the throat, and universally of all illness that comes by coldness, as well as paralytically, soda and apoplexy, and similar in those illnesses.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	The form of this cauterization is this, that first you command the patient to be evacuated with laxative medicine the head modifying, for three or for four nights, according to that you require the virtue of the illness and the age of him and his custom.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	And then command him to shave his head, and then do that seizure between your hands on a low bench and that he place his hands on his feet.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place the razor of your palm near the nose between his eyebrows.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But however, as the tie of the middle place has been reached, sign that place with a tenta, and then ignite the cautery olive of which this is the form:
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And then place that upon the spot marked with the tenta, in the manner that descends, with which your hand be constricted little by little, and you revolve that.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	And then lift your hand slightly and look at the place, and if you see already of the bone being discovered some quantity of the head, as well as the quantity of a grain of errs, then elevate your hand, and if not turn your hand with that iron, with another of that, if it is cooled, until that which I have told you is seen of the bone.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then take a little salt and dissolve that on the place and leave that for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then place on it a cloth soaked in butter and leave that on it until the scar of the fire is destroyed.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the place with anguent tetrafarmacon until it is healed.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And already they said that when the plague remains open, so much better it gets the scar, for that it is better and more useful.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And they said some of them that it be cauterized the spine within the bone, and it be held the cautery until it is burned any part of the appearance of the bone.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And then be scraped that which is burned of the bone, and then be cured.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And they said others that with the cautery arrive to the back, until it presses in the bone strongly until the bone breaks, and this is the form of alphecati small:
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they estimate of that place expire the vapors of the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	And it be kept the wound open for long time, and then be cured until it is consolidated.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	But to me, these two kinds of cautery have not been seen at all, except in some men according to way of fear; and leaving that, to me, it is better for health, when it is; because the head is devitalized by solution of continuity of it as we have testified in the other members, and more so when the head of the patient is of a cold nature.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And the species of cautery first is more safe and better to me; and of that I use and with that work with health.
Capitol segon.	Second chapter.
Del cauteri del cap.	Of the cautery of the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs throughout the head and it is prolonged in the patient, and they use herbs, and potions, and purgatives, and plasters, and guats, and cadels, and gualinas, and semblants, and mostly if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that they recount and does not benefit them in any of those causes, then consider that if the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and it is not frail and finds a great deal of heat, then cauterize it with another cautery besides that one a little.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	Then cauterize that one on the horn of their head with a cautery until the bone is parted.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Incise the bone and uncover the quantity which we have recounted, and cauterize that one with a cautery in the back part of the head in the location which is called vas, — and that is the location in which a cupping glass is placed.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And alleviate your hand in this, and do not uncover the bone, because the patient through this finds a great deal of pain different from the pain of all the other cauterizations of the head.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	And you say this cautery in its location, because whoever cauterizes with the cautery with which the horns of the head and the occiput are cauterized is more subtle cautery than that with which the middle location of the head is cauterized; and this is the form of it.
Capitol ters.	Chapter Three.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	Of cauterization of old-fashioned migraine.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	When pain is felt in the side of the head, or pain is extended into the eye, it should be evacuated with medications that modify the head, and another cure should be administered, which I have said in the divisions of the illnesses; and if nothing benefits, then cauterization in it is in two ways: either cauterization with acute and burning medicine, or with iron.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	But cauterization with burning medicine is that you take a piece of alum, and you cut and separate the extremities of it from both ends.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	And then you incise the location of the pain in the temple with a lancet until there is a location made there below the bone, until it is hidden.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	And then you strengthen over it with a stopper by descending constriction, and leave it for the space of three hours; and then you untie it and take out the alum, and leave the wound for two or three days, and then you place over it a poultice submerged in butter until the location makes a scab.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure this with an enema until it is healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if you want to, do this with some burning medicines which I have written in the two treatises of burning medicines.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	But the cauterization with iron according to this manner: ignite a cautery of which this is the form:
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	and it is called a clavilh cautery, because the head of it is as the form of a clove in which there is some curvature, and in the middle location of it is a small eminence.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then place it over the location of the pain, and hold your hand — so that the artery which is below is not burned — and revolve the iron little by little with speed.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the quantity of it which is burned by the proximity of the bone is so much that the majority of it, then lift your hand so that the artery which is below is not burned, so that there does not come a flow of blood.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then imbibe a poultice in salt water and place that over the location, and leave it for three days; and then place a poultice mashed with butter, and then cure with an enema until it is healed.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you want to, cauterize with the extremity of the knife-like cautery, and guard yourself from incision of the artery in this migraine properly old-fashioned.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Of cauterization of old migraine.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you cure migraine with what we have said of the previous cure, and what we have said in the divisions of the illnesses, and if it does not benefit the cure, and sometimes because of the illness that does not suffice to it what we have said of the first cauterization with medicine or of the cauterization with fire, then you must ignite the knife-like cautery until it is white-hot, because you signify over the location of the pain with a line of length of which the majority of it is said, or that which it is; and hold your hand for one time and strengthen it until you incise the artery and it reaches into the bone.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	However, it is necessary to you that you guard against the continuation of the jawbone, which is bad for chewing, and that the lacert is not burned and the nerve which feels that, and that it does not become a spasm.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	And if it is about the custody and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is incised, because in the incision of it there is fear, and mostly to that one who ignores what it does and is not studious and experienced; and leaves the operation in it at the beginning.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And I will come with remembrance of the regiment of the flow of blood accident of the artery according to its manner, in its location of this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And if you see of this illness that this cauterization does not suffice and you see the body of the patient tolerable, cauterize that in the middle location of the head as we have recounted, and cure the wound until it is healed.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you are going to administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on the cauterization of the artery, use a cautery with two handles, and this is a better cauterization and more convenient.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	Of cauterization of ear pains.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the ear there is pain due to heat and it is cured with laxative causes and with the other cure which I have mentioned in the division, and the pain is not relieved, then apply the cautery, and this is the one which has a point, of which this is the form:
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	And when you point it to the ignition, and it is moved around the entire ear like a wheel is rotated, or in the circuit of whichever side if the pain is on whichever side.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Lengthen the cautery from the root of the ear little by little as much as you feel the location with your finger.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	And if the cautery of ten points in the whole ear, and that one, and then cure the places while they are healing.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	Of cauterization of tumors.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	The tumor which is cured and by cauterization is only of the kinds which come from phlegm, according to what we have said in the divisions of the diseases.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	Avoid cauterization of the kind that comes from dryness or spasm of the nerve.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you cure that kind of tumor with poultices and purges and washings, and if you do not find your cure convenient, then you must cauterize the tumor with three cauteries: the first at the root of the ear, the second a little below its temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And pause your cautery for the opposite of the diseased part, because softening does not come except in the part that is healthy.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And the form of cauterization is that you cauterize that with the cautery in the right of the extremity of the ear, as sovereign a little above the corner of the head, and in the temple another, the length of which should be according to the length of the finger, and pause your hand with the cautery until the quantity of the majority of the species of the cord is burned.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	And this is the form of the cautery, and it is a kind of cutlery, the form of which is shown opposite.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But however more subtle is that one a little as you see; and where the handle in it of superfluous thickness a little.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the place with that which is shown opposite until it is healed.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	Of cauterization of old apoplexy.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	When apoplexy is old and you cure that with the water which we have said and you do not find your medication convenient and the ailment does not have fever, then cauterize that with four cauteries: over all the horns of its head; and with the cautery and the middle place of the head, as we have said; and with the cautery in the cheekbone.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the manner of the cautery is made according to what has been said before.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	And it is already cauterized over the mouth of the stomach; and it is more behind; and then it is cured with the water which proceeds.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	Of cauterization of oblivion made by phlegm.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	When it is necessary to give the patient at the beginning large poultices and pills of the kind that are modified.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And then shave the head of the patient and place on the cheekbone of him a plaster of the kind described in the treatise of plasters.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	And place that several times, for that is the manner of cauterization.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And do that according to that same order which I have already said.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	And therefore if by those he is healed, well; and if not, then make to him three cauteries in the rear part of his head, which are descending from the most sovereign part of the head into the part more below the neck.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And pause between each cautery the thickness of the finger, and then cure the cautery with the water which proceeds.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	But if you add it and the ailment is water tolerant, then make to him a cautery in the middle place; and if you want more addition, then cauterize that over the two horns.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	Then cure that until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive according to the form given before.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	Of cauterization of paralysis and of softening of the whole body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	When you must process in softening of the head with poultices and with the water which we have said; and then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle place of the head, and with a cautery over all the horns of the head, and with a cautery over the rear part of him, and with three cauteries over the vertebrae of the neck.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary in the ailment of softening of the body of too much that and the ailments tolerant and the ailment is strong, then cauterize that with four cauteries over the vertebrae of the loins, and carefully with the cautery until it is burned of the cord of him, and raise your hand.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And then carefully treat the one who is being healed, and this cautery olive.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	Of cauterization of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	An epileptic is not cauterized, unless that epilepsy is due to phlegm.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	And therefore, if you modify the brain of him at the beginning with years and with the other cure which we have said in the division when the patient is great and tolerates the excess of medicines.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not tolerate the medicines, then administer guarguarissmes and mastiguatoris to the brain, before that for a few days, with the blessing of the foods.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize him with a cautery in the middle location of the head according to the previous manner, and with another cautery in the occiput of him, and on each horn of his head cauterize.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize him with the cauteries which I have said, having paralytically and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And this olive cautery according to what has been preceded.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	But if the patient is a child, then pause a subtle cautery according to this manner.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	Of cauterization of melancholy.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are humidities corrupted and thick phlegm, then cauterize him with the cauteries which we have said in the having paralysis.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	And if the cause of melancholy is superfluity declining to melancholy, and the body of the patient is humid, then give him to drink water that purifies the brain of him according to what has preceded in the division.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And then shave the head of the patient, and then make a decent tortiora of him over the circle, and then place that in the middle location of the head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And the patient be sitting straight, and be held from all parts.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply liniment; and it is more worthy to border with wool fat of sheep.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And warm that over the fire for temperate heating by measure, which the said one suffers when it is most in him.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	And then put that in the middle location of the head of him in the circle, and let him inside that it be cooled.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	And do this water with the patient every week once, with the other regimen of him well inside that he be healed; or if you will, cauterize this making small points according to the most of him, unless you have the hand with a cautery so ordered: this is a species of cautery which moistens the brain with equality.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then apply that coated in wool fat or in grease of quail.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter XII.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	Of cauterization of water descending in the heel.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	When to you is declared the beginning of water in the heel by the signs which I have said in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient water that purifies the head of him, and guard that from all humidities.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And make that to sweat in a bath in some days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize him with a cautery in the middle location of the head; and then cauterize him with two cauteries over two temples if it is the beginning of the ailment of water in two heels, or of one side if it is the beginning of the water in one heel.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	Incise with cautery all the veins and arteries which are left in the codena; and let the cauteries be in that length in the latitude of the temples.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And guard yourself from blood flow when it is cauterized; and if you see blood flow from him, stop it with some medicine, which is to you possible.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And you will come with the wisdom which is in the extraction of arteries and in the abscessing of those and caution of blood flow.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And some times it is cauterized in the neck below two bones with two cauteries deliberately produced.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	Of cauterization of old tears.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	When tears of the heels are old by accumulation and through the veins and arteries which are in the manifest location of the head outside and it is verified that this is superfluous phlegmatic, then cauterize him with the cautery which we have recounted in the chapter of the beginning of water ailment in the heels, and with a cautery in the middle location of the head and with two cauteries in the neck below two temples, and with two cauteries in the neck below two bones.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you are in need of addition, then cauterize him in all the length of the heel's tail above the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter XIV.
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	Of cauterization of nasal stench.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	When you medicate him with the water which we have said in the division and it does not profit your medication, then you equip and give to drink to the patient the concoctions for three nights; and then shave the head of him, and cauterize him with a middle cautery with olive cautery.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then cauterize that with a pointed cautery with two cauteries on the two eyebrows leaving the hair a little.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And guard yourself from the arc that you do not burn that.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And of the pointed cautery this is the form.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter .xv.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Of cautery for softening eyelids of the wheels.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When the eyelid of the wheel is softened by sickness or by humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery with this lunar cautery; and this is the form of it:
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you, cauterize that above the two eyebrows a little with two cauteries in all part, and they are elongated from the temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	And do not press too hard your hand with the cautery, but according to the quantity that the third part of the eyelid be cauterized.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter .xvi.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Of cautery of the eyelid of the wheel when the hairs are converted to the parts of it and prick the wheel.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When the hairs of the wheel are converted to the parts of it so that prick the wheel, cauterize in those in two manners, whether cauterize or is with burning or is with medicine burning.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If with cautery of it with fire, command the patient in front of it that he pluck his hairs as those which they pluck them, until they are prolonged and equal; and if prick that, then you strengthen the wheels of it with a bandage so that it not be bad until the hairs are born.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	Therefore, as soon as they are born and equal, then pause the head of the patient in your self, and then send over the eyelid of the wheels of it with tent, with a sign which be according to the figure of a leaf of myrtle, and be the beginning of the sign near the hairs.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And then pause a poultice embedded in album of how or in a mucilage of ptilli on the wheel.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form of it.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize over the figure which you have senhaled, little by little, in many times, until it be burned the surface of the codena which is as fuelha of myrtle, all apparent properly.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And sign of health of your work is that you see the eyelid of the wheel already be contracted and the hairs of it be elevated above the puncture of the wheel.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And therefore elevate your hand and leave it for three days, and then pause over it a poultice with border until it be healed the scabra.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with an enguent until it be healed.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	But if return for the hairs any cause to their prickling and the eyelid is softened, then do another time the cautery over that as well as you had done first.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	But if the hairs so in the eyelid, then cauterize that until it be elevated to its natural place and be equal and that the hairs do not prick the wheel.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	But the cautery with burning medicine this is that you command the patient that he pluck the hairs until they are prolonged and equal, and then be made of cloth the form of a myrtle leaf.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. .i., o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And then take of known soap and of live cause one. i., that is,
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	And pause the said over the medicine and press it a little and not the bads until the patient feels the biting of the medicine, for biting is in it as of fire.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	And therefore as it will perceive that the other biting, then leave the medicine and wash it with your said; therefore as it ceases the biting, then remove the medicine and wash the wheel with water; and then consider if times the eyelid already is lifted as it is washed above the constriction with fire or with incision, for then it is well; and if not return over that of the medicine over the place in which it has not used the medicine and do not degrade until it be equal your operation and be contracted the wheel.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And then pause over it a poultice with border until it be eradicated the scabra of the adhustio, and then cure that with an enguent deafinicon or with another until it be healed.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	And it is necessary to you, above your operation that you guard with pervigil diligence that in the wheel does not fall re of the medicine, and if the eyelid aprop some days is softened and any cause of the hairs prick in the wheel, then iterate your medicine over that place the which of the eyelid is softened, and properly as you have done at the beginning, and then enaviro it until it be healed.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the form of a myrtle leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And know that the wheels of men are diversified according to the magnitude and the smallness, and therefore according to that is made your constriction.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	And no one will be able to hide the path of rectum to him who is studying this art.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	Of cauterization of fistula that is in the lacrimal of the heel.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you cure a fistula with what we have said in the divisions of the diseases and do not confer your cure, then you must cauterize it according to this manner: command the patient to place his head on your knee, and hold the head of him some minister between your hands in such a manner that it is not disturbed nor agitated with his head.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And then place a cloth infused in oil or in a poultice of ptilli on the heel of him.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	Which is concave, as is the shape of a reed or a vulture's feather, from one extremity of which the cautery is made.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	And if you wish, it should penetrate into the other extremity.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you wish, it should be shaped as a tentacle.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But however, the one that is concave is better for your work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out of it pus and dry it out.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And then place on it the cautery which is well ignited, and hold it with your hand a little from the cautery of the heel to the part of the nose, so that it does not burn your hand or the patient be agitated, and then place the cautery in the grooves of the heel and corrupt it.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And therefore if at the beginning of your cauterizing it penetrates into the bone, it is good; and if not, then iterate the cautery once or twice, if it is necessary; and leave it so for three days, and then place on it a cloth with border and envelop it with an exsiccating enguent until it is healed.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	But if ten days had passed and it is not healed, then place on it an acute corrosive medicine until the bone is uncovered and scraped according to what you have ordained in your chapter.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	And there is another manner of cauterizing a fistula which some first said:  Enter into the place of the fistula and cut it, and then place in that fissure a fine thread of which is the shape of it: And put into it the quantity of one ounce of molten lead; and hold your hand with a good grip, and do not disturb the patient so that the molten lead does not reach the heel of him; and cover the heel of the patient with a cloth infused in oil or in water, for the lead will burn the place of the fistula and heal it by a marvelous healing.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if the fistula is healed with what we have said of the cauterization and the cure, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a traction of the nose and reduce the fistula to the course of the nose according to what will come in its place proper.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter XVIII.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Of cauterization of the fissure of the anus.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Many times fissures happen in the lips, and mostly in the lips of children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	Therefore, as you cure those fissures with what we have said in the divisions and do not profit from your cure, then ignite the small cautery knife according to this form which is:
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	And let its concavity be according to the fineness of a needle.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	Then place that init carefully in those fissures until the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with cerotz until it is healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	Of cauterization of a fistula in the mouth.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	When in the root of the uvula or in the palate or in the roots of the teeth there happens an abscess and then it breaks, and then it is ancient, and pus flows and a fistula is made, and then you cure that and your cure does not profit, then you must ignite the cautery according to the quantity that is received in the fistula, and then put that ignited into the tract of the fistula, and hold your hand so that it reaches the iron ignited to the bottom of it, and at the back of it make it so once or twice; and then cure that with the water that we have said of the cure until it is healed.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	And therefore if the pus is abscindita and is healed, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and host the corrupted bone according to what will come in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter XX.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Of cauterization of the teeth and of softening of the blood vessels.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the blood vessels are softened by humidity and the teeth are bad, and you cure those with medicines and do not confer, then place the head of the patient on your knee, and then ignite the cautery the shape of which will come soon, so that you place the nozzle on the tooth and introduce into it the ignited cautery quickly, and hold your hand a little so that the patient feels the heat of the fire at the root of the tooth to be reached.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then remove your hand, and then iterate the cautery several times according to what you want.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	And then the patient gargles with salt water and keeps it in their mouth for an hour, and then spits it out, because the bad tooth is stopped, the softened gums are tightened, and the corrupted moisture is dried.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of cauterization of tooth pain.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	When tooth pain is due to cold, or a worm is in it, or it does not respond to treatment with medicine, then cauterization is done in that tooth in two ways: cauterization with a cow's horn, or cauterization with fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Cauterization with horn is that you take a cow's horn and heat it in a blacksmith's forge, and then take a handle and wrap it around the tip of the horn, and then dip that in the heated horn, and place it on the painful tooth firmly while it is heated.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And then repeat this several times until the virtue of the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	And if you wish, dip wool or a stick in the heated horn below, and place it on the painful tooth, and place a heated iron over it until the iron reaches the bottom of the tooth's cavity.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	But however, cauterization with fire is that you attend to the channel of iron or of fire, and it be in the heart of it some thickness and the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	And then ignite the cauterizer, the shape of which will come, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand over it while the cauterizer is heated; and do this several times because the pain will be relieved either that day or the next.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	And because of the impression of that cauterizer, the patient gargles with good broth and keeps it in their mouth for an hour and then spits it out; and this is the shape of the cauterizer.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And cauterize with whichever extremity you wish according to what is possible for you.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the shape of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	Of cauterization of fistulas.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When fistulas are of phlegm and cold humors and do not respond to digestion by medicines and you wish to digest those slightly, then you ignite the cauterizer whose shape is this following, having two open extremities so that the smoke of the cauterizer escapes from the other extremity, and place it on that abscess once, and another if you judge it necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, then place the cauterizer according to the amount of the abscess, and then leave it for three days and place a stick soaked in broth over it until that which the fire has burned is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	And then cure this with gargles and compresses and bandages until it is healed.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And the shape of the cannula or two cauterizers is as conveyed.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter XXIII.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	Of cauterization of throat ailments and constriction of the neck.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	When the humors come upon the canal of the lung, and especially when that is with cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize that below the root of the larynx in the depressed area.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And guard yourself that you do not reach with the cauterizer to the larynx nor burn the cartilage of it except a little.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize that with another cauterizer below the junction of the neck in the last vertebra of it.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And the cauterizer of it be  shaped like the one before.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And then cure this with water that is preceded until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Of cauterization of lung ailments and cough.
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	When cough and lung ailments are of cold humors and the patient has no fever or phlegm and it is an old ailment, then cauterize that with two cauterizers on the breastbone in the depressed areas of the left and right; and with another cauterizer in the middle of the foot between the two malleoli; and let the cauterizers be shaped like the one before.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, let your cauterization be pointed with the cauterizers that are called points, the shape of which you have seen before in the cauterization of ear pain.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	And make points within those; and then cure this with the water that is preceded until it is healed.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And let the cauterizer have three ramps because cauterization is done with it: in one time you can make three cauterizations according to this form:
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Of cauterization of the tic that is the head of the helper.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the head of the helper is dislocated because of lubric humors and it is not fixed at the time of its return to its place, and because of a slight movement it is dislocated again as we have testified, then it is necessary that first you reduce the dislocation, and then the patient lie on his back or on his side; and then elevate the cartilage which is in the front part of the tic to the upper parts with the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated to the front part.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then ignite the cautery having two heads; and this is the form of it:
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And then cauterize the groin so that it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of cauterization will then be of four cauteries.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so it is subtle according to the quantity of the tension; and this is the form of it:
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and for that reason are the cauteries eight.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	And then place on the cautery porys cuytz am sal, and then make adhere the patient to tranquility, and the limb not be harmed for any time until it is comforted.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the dislocation is at the parts above and tart is done, then cauterize above the muscle with a cautery clavilh or with pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed and the humidity is removed and the patient is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De cauterizacio del stomac.	Of cauterization of the stomach.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	When there comes in the stomach burning and many humidities that that extract from its complexion and so multiply sores to it, and if you continue the ways of cure and do not confirm it, then when the patient is upon his two sides, and extends his arms and his legs, and then cauterize it with three cauteries: one cautery is left the foot for the quantity of a finger with a cautery clavilh, and with two cauteries left the two sides of the cautery, until the triangular figure of cauterization comes; and elongate between those that are not adjusted that they will make a poyredura.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the cautery the quantity of the two thirds of the thickness of the groin.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And be the figure of the cautery according to this form addition, And if you will, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle location of the stomach according to this form; and this be a cautery according to the form of a circle according to this form:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And be cauterized the stomach punctan ad that one who of this cautery is frightened: and it is that you senses upon the stomach point according to the quantity that you want with tension, and then cauterize it with a cautery in the points; and then cure it with the cure that is preceded until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Of cauterization of the liver.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When it comes in the liver pain for coldness or for humidity or for great windiness that from its normal complexion be cast by superfluous egress, and it is cured the patient with that which we have said and do not confirm it, then when the patient is upon his back upon his neck, and senses with tension three cauteries according to this form and this quantity placed upon the liver below the ipocondres, the honor perceives the decubit of man.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And be the space which is between each cautery according to the thickness of the finger, and be the cautery according to the length of the straight body.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not compress your with the cautery mot.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the quantity of that which is adhered the quantity of the majority of the species of the groin, and there not be more adjusted; and if the patient standing upon his feet of him; and if it is not standing, then be lying, the one which already has extended his legs, and elevate his arms.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cautery:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And it is to you possible that cauterize these cauteries with a cautery cutellar, when it is with your subtlety and prudence in the art.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	And guard yourself that too much you process in the cauterization, and be adhered the species of all the groin for that it be adhered all the body and reach within to the bowels, for the groin here is subtle; and know this.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	Of perforation of abscess of the liver with a cautery.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	When it comes an abscess in the liver and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its tunic, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient atrobo gravity and pain its acuteness.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the tunic of the liver, with the pain is acuteness great and times that already fatigued the physicians the cure of it.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Therefore, when the patient is turned upon his neck; and then senses the location of the abscess with tension; and then ignite the cautery which is assembled to rag, the form of which precedes in the other page.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize with that i cautery until all the groin be cauterized, until it reaches the ciphrac, until in yesca sania.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with the cure of the other abscesses until it is healed.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And do not cove that of this form of cautery use sino that of which the study in the art of medicine is prolonged, and in the most of which many diseases have been known; mays this with experiment some times be ardit upon this operation, mays however leyssa that deves nos, and is miels.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	Of cauterization of pleurisy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	They said the ancients cauteries of the roots of aristologia to pleurisy burning according to this manner esser fazedor, and is this that you prenguas of the roots of aristologia long dry a root pun long that is found, and be of the thickness of the finger.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	And then submerge that in oil and put it in the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery in that place which is between the continuation of the collarbone and the neck; and with two small cauteries, let them guide, one slightly sloping towards the side that is below the beard, and with two cauteries in that which is sloping between the fifth rib and the shoulder blade, sloping a little towards the back; and another cautery in the middle of the foot; and another on the stomach, and three cauteries on the back; and one cautery in that place which is between the two shoulder blades, and two cauteries on the two sides of the foot, besides the cautery which is between the two shoulder blades.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	And no cover that which you understand your hand with the cautery, unless it is in the manifest of the chain in work.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	And already some ancients said that some of the men who use a cautery of iron similar to a ray and ignite that, and put that in that place which is between the ribs, until they reach that abscess and it be healed, thus as we have said in the abscess of the thigh.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	But in this perforation with cautery there is no fear, because it soon happens in the place fistula to which there is no healing.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .xxx.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cauterization of the spleen.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you cure the illness of the spleen with what we have said of the cure in the division and do not confer your cure, then cauterize in it is according to three manners, all of which are right, of which one is that you make three cauteries or four lines according to the length of the spleen according to the figure of the cauteries of the thigh, the figure of which has preceded.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	And let there be between each cautery the thickness of a finger or a little more, and the manner of the cautery be the manner which we have said in the cautery of the thigh equally.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And do not cover your hand with the cautery; and the patient be raised on their two.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And there is another manner of cauterizing, so it is that you ignite the cautery having two verticents, the cause of which we have said in the chapter of dislocation of the muscle, and elevate the chain which is in the right of the spleen, the one that reaches the lying of the left patient.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And let your elevation be with which you elevate the chain according to the length of the body, so that cauteries be made according to the width of the body.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	And then, having entered the two verticents, ignite them, in that place where with those you penetrate the chain from the other part.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And then, having extracted the cautery; and then four cauteries are made.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three verticents.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	And then you cure the cautery as if it had been laid aside for too many days, because it is more convenient than the other causes preceding in the cure.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter .xxx.i.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	Of cauterization of hydrops.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Cauterize not in hydrops but in alcinte3 properly.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	When you cure the hydrops with the manners of cure which we have said in the division and do not confer your cure, then cover that which you cauterize with four cauteries in the circuit of the umbilicus and one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the thigh, and another cautery on the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery in the right of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And the quantity of the depth of the cautery be proportionate to the thickness of the chain.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And then leave the cautery open so that it gets laid aside for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And do not evacuate the patient from cure after the cautery with what cover so that two understandings be added to it, and it be festinated to it with auxiliary healing.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	The form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized be clave as according to the form of that is used precedent, and it is that with which the back is cauterized olive as it is precedent to its form.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter .xxxii.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Of cauterization of feet and of the thighs.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the feet are festering in hydrops and are full of pus, cover that you cauterize the feet on the back of the foot in nocrati that is between the auricular and the annular, and elevate your hand with the cautery and do not twist that; and then elevate your hand, and do not return that of all, because the pus will remain.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	It is the cautery according to this form: And then make on the two thighs two cauteries, and in each thigh be made cauteries with the extremity of the cautery cutellar.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh; and one below and the other below the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh two cauteries.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	And leave the wound open after cure for a long time so that no water remains from it.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	And then take care of those causes which we have mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Of cauterization of the belly.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	When the belly is due to coldness and humidity that infiltrates the viscera, so it is the digestive and retentive virtue, which are in the stomach and intestines, and it is cured by these ways of healing and not by confusions, and sometimes the patient suffers cauterization to exhibit virtue, then cauterize it with a large cautery on the belly according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with the cautery of the circle and with four cauteries in the circuit of the navel subtle, with a subtle cautery; and with cauteries on the skin above the navel large, or with two cauteries.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if sometimes the humors are exuberant and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize it on the peritoneum and on the intestines, and firmly adjust two cauteries on the stomach and near the inguinal regions, for it is a perfect cure of benefit of which you will not err.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter .xxxiv.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Of cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	When they are in the nature of old hemorrhoids or one of thick humors cold or of corrupted humors, and they are cured by what we have said in the division and not by confusions of your cure, then cauterize with three cauteries on the pus left spongy of the small and small triangular spine, and with a cautery below the navel, cuts for two fingers.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you suppose that the stomach of him be cold and his food not digested, and the face of him sometimes pale, then cauterize it on the stomach with a large cautery according to what precedes; and with a cautery on the liver, and with another cautery on the spleen with a subtle cautery, and leave the cautery for some time open, and then take care of him while he is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	Of cauterization of the boil near the abscess of it.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you abscess a boil, then you ignite the cautery that is assembled to a ray.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	And put that ignited one in that abscessed boil, and end your hand until the cautery reaches the orifice of the vein from which the blood comes.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And do this once or twice, for if the boils are too many, then cauterize each one according to what we have recounted, and then take care of them with what you confer to them of the ointments until they are healed.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	And if you cauterize with a large cautery on the skin, it is more beneficial in benefit.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter .xxxvi.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	Of cauterization of fistulas that are made in the nature of those in the parts of him.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not obey the work that we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by it, he is healed with a cautery.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when someone has a fistula in the nature of those, and it is old, corrodes with pus and corrupted humors, and therefore that which is most worthy that cove is that probes it with a subtle tentacle, and then knows the quantity of the depth of it with the aforementioned tentacle.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	Then ignite the cautery that is similar to a ray.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	And put that ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which the tenta enters.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And iterate over that cautery until those corrupted humors are burned once or twice or three times, according to the quantity of your need.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	And guard yourself from burning of nerves and of veins; or if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder or to the body of the intestine, then guard yourself from all those places; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think that it is not penetrating.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	And then take care of the place until it is healed.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	And if the place is sealed, and the materials are abscessed from it, and remain so for a long time, then you know that it is healed entirely.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if the materials are not from it, then you know that it is penetrating or in the preon of it the corrupted, or falls that from those causes of which will come remembrance in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter .xxxvii.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Of cauterization of the boils.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When in the boils it is necessary to have pain due to cold or thick wind, and therefore the patient's body is inflamed, then it is necessary that you cauterize it over the boils with a cautery on each boil with a subtle cautery of which I have previously mentioned the remembrance.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And firmly you cauterize with the second one a little, so that they will come three cauteries lined, and then they are more beneficial in benefit.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter .xxxviii.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Of cauterization of the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	When there is weakness and softening in the bladder due to cold and humidity so that the patient does not retain urine, then cauterize it in the part below the bladder, the one that begins the hairs of the peritoneum, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and with another on the left side of him.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	And the length of each cautery shall be according to the quantity of the knots of the thread; and cauterize that with a cautery in the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And the cautery shall be shaped according to what is being processed.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter XXXIX.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	Of the cauterization of the uterus.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	When there comes in the uterus heat and humidity, and therefore pregnancy is prohibited, and the menses of her are corrupted, and the bringing on of them is delayed, and pain occurs in the region of their coming, then it is necessary that the place be cauterized with three cauteries in the circle of the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery over the place below the back, or with two cauteries, and the cautery shall be shaped like a club.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter XL.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	Of the cauterization of the dislocation of the hip.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When moist humors are poured into the region of the hip, and are caused by the swelling of their place, and the sign of it is that the thigh is prolonged over the other when they are compared between them.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the place of the dislocation is felt in that which is boyt.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Therefore, it is necessary that you cauterize the patient on the region of the hip with a cautery in a circle shape, as you will have felt with your finger in the circuit of the region as it is turned, and so that the region falls in the middle of the circle.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And the cautery of which precedes the form in the cauterization of the stomach.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if this cautery is not present to you, then cauterize that with three cauteries with a large olive cautery.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And make the cautery according to the quantity of the thickness of the whole bone; and take care of that so that it be healed.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter XLI.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	Of the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	When pain comes in the region of the hip, and it is caused by heat and humidity, the patient is cured with that which we have said and do not confer, and this is ancient, therefore when you lance the patient of gross humors with fetid pills or with artificial pills or similar, and then cauterize that.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	And the manner of the cautery in that is according to two manners: the cautery with burning medicines, or the cautery with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	It is according to two scientific manners, of which one is that you cauterize that on the region of the hip of him with three triangular cauteries according to this form; and make with those a good depth.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	And be the spaces the which is between each cautery the quantity of the thickness of the finger and if the olive cautery or great.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Sometimes, however, the cautery is on the middle of the top of the hip so that there are four cauteries.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish, cauterize with the circle of which the form is preceded in the cauterization of the dislocation of the hip, that is, a circle containing and burning the thickness of the whole bone.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the manner of cauterizing in sciatica when pain is adherent to the hip and is not extended into the thigh.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	But if it is extended into the thigh, then cauterize that with two cauteries on the thigh on the location where you feel the pain of the patient; and with one cautery on the groin for four fingers a little below the pubic region.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the cautery is a knife-like one, and the depth of the cautery is according to the quantity of the thickness of the bone.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if the patient feels that the pain is extended into the location near the toes, then cauterize that here where you feel it with a cautery for three points or four or more if it is necessary of that.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	And if the patient feels pain being below the groin and the thigh, then cauterize that here with a knife-like cautery.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And guard yourself in all cauterizations that you do not end with the cautery as much as you burn nerves or large arteries, and that by this to you is upon the patient no harm or contraction.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	And I have already seen one and another of those who cauterized on the groin and ended in the cauterization, and the leg fire inflated until the tumor reached the foot, and fire pierced and corrupted the whole foot.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then strong acid solution of the belly, and by that death.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each one according to this manner.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And the wise said in the cauterization of the hip, the cautery of which this is the manner: make it like a circle of iron, of which the circuit is the majority of a palm; and be its orifice according to the thickness of a finger bone or a little less.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And from within that circle, make another third; and be the spaces the which is between them the quantity of the thread of the needle; and be those circles opened in two parts; and be the length of those cais one thread or two threads, and make in those marks of iron decently adorned in the circles; and this is the form of it:
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	Then it should be ignited in the fire until it glows red and throws sparks, and then it should be placed on the patient's back, the patient lying on his side.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And therefore cauterize that with three round cauteries at once.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then leave that for three days; then plaster that with a poultice and leave the wound open for too many days; and then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	Says Albucasis: or, children, of this kind of cautery we have used little because of the terror of looking at it, and because we have found few who guard over it.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	May the cautery be to him who suffers it, and may it be found in that place of him.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	May cauteries with medicinal ointments be that you make two circles having a perforated arm in which they put the iron handle of the door; let the length of the sides in the navy be two hazelnuts or as those.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	And if the spaces which are between each one are the quantity of the thickness of the finger; and they be open below and above, and they contain themselves between each other according to this form:
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	And then place upon the patient's back, the patient lying on his side, and comprehend your hand over the area of the back; and then take some water and pour it between the two circles, and the quality of that be with the small fire little by little, and keep that for the quantity of an hour, and suffer the patient the bite and the adhesion of it — for that biting is as if of fire — until the bite ceases.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then raise your hand with the instrument and wipe away the hot water from all of the back with sweet water.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And then leave that for three days and place on that poultice until the blackness of the adhesion is removed, and leave that for some days, and it will run from it pus; this is called in healing.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is extended into the thigh or the leg, make to him a statue in it that contains water as it is made in the back equally.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	And this is the manner of hot water, and you already have I written that in the treatise of the rectification of medicines.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	Take of alkali and of quicklime of both a half part, and mix them and place them in a new pot of which the lower part is perforated by a small hole, according to the quantity that enters into it ray.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And place below the bottom of the pot another pot inverted, and pour over that alkali and quicklime hot water which takes those by a finger, and as soon as you comprehend those with your hand by good compression, and leave the pot that descends from it hot water in the lower part to the inverted pot.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And then adjust all that water, and pour it over other quicklime and other alkali renewed, for that which is then called a strong heat, which is administered in many operations of medicine and in cauterization of the other members, for operation does of fire.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And so of the medicines some with which is cauterized much, as tezixic and honey anacrat and quicklime with sabio in such a way that they are mixed.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And Gualia recounts of an ancient man the operation and cure with which is cured pain of back and sciatica, and magnifies much to be of that, and says that there is no need of other cure, and that it is healed by one time as he recounts, for fort leu that entrec in bath and eysic already knows of that.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And it is that it be taken of green fig, and if it is not found green, be taken recent fig; and much be trissada with a little of gray and be placed upon the back in which is the pain, or in the thigh, or in the leg, and be tied.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And be left for the quantity of three hours or for the quantity that the patient feels cessation of the adhesion.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And then put that in a bath and when the body of him be red, introduce that in the sun, for the pain ceases and it is healed.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	And know that it is not good that anyone use cauteries with these medicines unless after the evacuation of the body.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	May already Escorides diysec that when with the fenda of goat the sciatic vein is cauterized, it profits to him very well; and be the cautery with him according to this manner: be taken wool and be soaked in old oil, and be placed between the toes of the foot and between the fossils.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	And then take dried goat's fenda and inflame that with fire until it be made charcoal; and place it upon the wool and leave it until it is extended.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And then iterate that, and do not cease to do that until the feeling of the bite reaches into the back and repauses the pain.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And this manner of cautery is called cautery of goats.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter .xlii.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of cauterization of pain of the two.
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Sometimes pain is in the two for many causes, such as by blows or by percussion or by superfluous evacuation, and for causes ad those similar, by infusion of matter cold and humid.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And cauterize not except in this single species which is made by effusion of cold matter.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	Therefore, after evacuation of the patient with pills and similar to them, which are made on the two sides where the pain is, three lines according to the width of the patient, because you have to cauterize each line with the cautery or more, according to the quantity that comes from the tolerance of the patient and the virtue of him.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And make cauterization with a pointed cautery.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or four with a medial cautery, according to this form:
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter .xliii.
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	Of cauterization at the beginning of redness.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Many times this disease happens to small children; and the sign of its beginning in children is that they ache on their structure in the leg and the elevation and movement of it.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And it hurts in the last vertebra of the back and the nerves of it that already begins to rise above the other vertebrae.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And therefore when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize it with a cautery that is circular according to this form:
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	which presses the cautery over the whole part of the vertebra evenly.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cauterize in the circuit of the vertebra with the pointed cautery two or three lines.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	And let the points be close to each other.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	And after curing the place until it is healed with what we have said.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	But beware that cauterization is not administered in redness that is made by spasm of a nerve.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter .xliv.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	Of cauterization of gout and joint pain.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customary for doctors to call this gout.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore, since gout caused by cold is cured with this method of cure and not only the pains are removed, then the pains are removed by cauterizing.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And it is that you cauterize that after evacuation in the circuit of the joint of the foot with many cauteries.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And let it be an olive cautery, of which this is the form:
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if the pains rise into the ankles or to the other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize that over each joint with three or four cauteries of the whole part with this olive cautery.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if many cauteries are necessary, then cauterize that and do not press too hard your hand with the cautery beforehand, let it be only around the outline of the bone.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the pains rise into the ankle and the back, then administer the cautery which we have said in its chapter.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	And if the pains are in the toes only, and it is called bunions, then puncture in the circuit of the bones as it revolves, puncture in those two lines.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	And if the pains remain in the toes, then puncture in the circuit of the bones over each nerve and over the pin of the hand.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the pains rise near the joints in the elbows or to the muscles, then cauterize the joints of the whole part of the helpers.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	And do not evacuate the patient of good regimen and reception of medicines, because if it is done with good regimen and the flux is evacuated with this cautery it will be healed, God help.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter .xlv.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	Of cauterization of fractures.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	When a fracture occurs in the joints and the intestines are protruding in front of the hernia, and this is beginning to happen, then you command the patient to leave his food in his day and to use of gentle causes so that the wound descends from his belly.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And after, follow the patient between your hands over his back, and command him to keep his leg inside until it is thrown or the hernia or intestines appear.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And after, return that with your fingers and feel with your hand the rupture over the bones of the penile with a sign that the extremity of it is similar to the majority of the circle in the upper parts of the body.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And after ignite the cautery of which this is the form of it:
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	Until it is hot and throws sparks.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area so that the intestine does not come out.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their legs, and another on their chest, holding their hands.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And after, pause the cautery over that sign with your hand with the cautery standing straight, and take that inside so that with it you can feel the bones of the penis inside the middle of the wound; and iterate with that another time if with that you have not achieved in the first time inside the bone.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	And observe carefully the position of the intestine during the cauterization, so that you do not burn that intestine so that on the patient does not come death or another great evil.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	And know that when you have the cautery do not touch the bone, do not interfere with your operation.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And know that the cautery of children should be subtle according to the size and measure of them.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	And after care the location of the cautery for three days with a border until the scar of the fire is healed.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And after care that with the other ointments until it is healed.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And the patient be lying on their back for 40 days until the location and the plague are sealed.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And know that you pause the nourishment of him according to the length of time of the cure of him the one that lines his belly, and that the intestine does not come out because of the effort of healing.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And after when he wants to rise, after 40 days, then administer him decent food, and keep that for another 40 days.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And be moderate of work and repletion of food and drink, and of voice vehemently, for when he uses this regimen of healing entirely he will be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And you say the cure of ruptures in the other parts of the belly, and so at the beginning, and you want that they do not pull, then cauterize the rupture of that with a round cautery according to the quantity of it, and it is that which is exhumed from the code as if the third part of it; and after care that with what we have said, and it is not adjusted.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And already some first ones say that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is marked with a tent:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And it is placed a line that goes by the latitude in the widest part of the rupture, and another line below; and place your hand with a pointed cautery, but the first cautery is lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter .xlvi.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Of cauterization of torsion.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	When in some members by chance or by percussion pain and that pain persists for a long time and does not confer to the cure with medicines, then know that you cauterize with a pointed cautery.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And be the cautery of every member according to the magnitude and smallness of it, and virtue and weakness of it, and location of torsion and pain of it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	Therefore if it is healed by the first cautery, well is; and if not, then repeat over it the cautery; for of custom of those pains is that they are pointed of member to that member the one that approaches to it, for that know that you cauterize those within that the patient is healed.
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter .xlvii.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Of cauterization of leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Leprosy some times with cautery for great help, and more so if the kind of leprosy that is made by putrefaction of flame and melancholy.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	And therefore as you want to cauterize that, consider if the leprosy is common and has that cured with what we have said in the division and no say, nor is, and fears over the patient that the corruption comprehends the whole body of it and the whole complexion of it, then cauterize that over the head with 5 cauteries: one in the middle location of the head, and the second further below it, even the front to the end of the hairs; and two on two horns; and one behind, on the nape of the neck or service.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And lastly your hand with the cautery a little while before it presses in the bone a small impression, and from it the scabs be displaced, so that the expiration of thick vapors be relieved from it; and cauterize over the flesh according to what is necessary.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if the leprosy is already expanded over the patient and appears manifestly, then know that you cauterize that with those cauteries the ones that we have said in the head; and with a cautery over the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries over the two cheekbones, and with two cauteries over two vertebrae of the neck, and with six cauteries over the vertebrae of the back, and one great one over the vertebrae near the hip, and one over the rib, and with two over the knees, and one over each knee, and with two over the elbows, and with two over the muscles, and with two over the toes of his feet; and cauterize that over all the joints of the fingers of the hands and of the feet, and over each heel of his feet, and over the hollows of his hands.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And guard yourself from the nerves the ones that are over the heel that you do not burn those.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery over the bone of the palate and with another over the mouth of the stomach, and another over the liver.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And know that as more you adjust cauteries, so much is more helpful and more conferrable; and know that the patient does not have in the cautery pain, as if they have their own, for that the body of it already is stupefied.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And know that the cauteries be great or few according to the members and the joints according to what is preceded of the kinds of the instruments.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then carefully apply the cautery with flour of wormwood mixed with honey and the other cure while it is healing.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Of the Cauterization of Stupor.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	When some member is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, and it is not healed, then you cauterize that numb member with cauteries according to what merits the size of the member or its smallness.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And let your cautery enter the thickness of the  bone a little.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then carefully treat it with an enema while it is healing.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And sometimes, some stupor is cauterized which extends to the legs and feet, and to the vertebrae of the lower back, and by cauterizing the nerves which lead to that member, the stupor is removed.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	Do not presume about this, but only he who is wise in the anatomy of the members and the egress of the nerves throughout the whole body moving.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter XLIX.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	Of the Cauterization of  Ulcers That Are Morbid.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	When an ulcer is old and does not respond to any of the medicinal enema, then you cauterize over it with a cautery, a little one, according to the quantity of the thickness of the bone, until the whiteness and color of it are removed, and its color is changed.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And then carefully treat it with flour of wormwood and lentils mixed with rose oil and leaves of arnica, and with the blood of a dove or the blood of a round, of each one a part, and all mixed together, and then put a linen cloth and place it over the area until it is healed.
Capitol .l.	Chapter L.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	Of the Cauterization of  Cancer.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	When cancer begins and you want to stop it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference as it is revolted.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the back cautery in the middle location; but to me, this is not seen, because I fear that it will be ulcerated, and I have already seen this some times.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And it is more right that it be cauterized in its circumference with a circle as we have said, or with moving cauteries.
Capitol .li.	Chapter LI.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	Of the Cauterization of  Abscesses.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	When some abscess is delayed in maturation, and thus it is due to the superfluity of making it, or due to the state of the patient, because he is old or decrepit, of little blood, or due to time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the abscess; then cauterize it in its circumference with small moving cauteries; and then let it be released as it hastens in maturation.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	But if you want the perforation of it with a cautery, then you ignite the cautery of which this is the form: and pause it in the middle location of the abscess until it penetrates the bone.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the cautery in that location that is farthest, so that the body of the arm be relieved; and then carefully treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter LII.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	Of the Cauterization of  Corrosion.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	Corrosion is a walking corruption in the member, which corrodes it as a fire consumes dry wood.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, if you see that corrosion in a place that suffers cauterization with fire, then you ignite small, moving cauteries, and large ones according to what is convenient in that place where the corrosion is.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	And then cauterize it from all sides until you eradicate all the corrosion and no cause of it remains.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	And then let it be released for three days, and place over the cauterized places a poultice mixed with oil until all the scars are eradicated and all the corruption.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And then treat it with enema flesh-generating.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	But if after three days you see that the flesh grows healthy in which there is no corruption, good; but if not, then repeat the cautery over what is raw in the corrupted places.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And corrosion is medicated some times with sharp medicine, because that is placed in the place of cautery.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	But however, cauterization with fire is of more light help.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And I have already said the cure of it with sharp medicine in the division, and therefore take that when you have need of it.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter LIII.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	Of the Cauterization of Claws and of Other Similar Things.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Many times there is a disease in the parts of the foot that is called a claw, and it is a large, deep cause, which bends the foot; and cauterize them in two ways, so it is cauterization with fire and cauterization with boiling water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	But cauterization with fire is that you ignite the concave cautery resembling a vulture's beak, which is made of iron according to the quantity which contains the claw from all sides, and be of subtle margins.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then pause that ignited one on the claw, and then revolve your hand with the cautery in the circuit of the claw until the cautery reaches the depth of the claw.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And let him rest for three days before he begins to wear a brace.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	And apply a plaster to it with wild herbs crushed with salt, and leave the plaster on it for one night, for this will be eradicated from its roots.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And treat the area with a rinse of generative meat until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if it is not converted, and many times it happens on the surface of the body, mostly in the arms and feet, then you must administer a cautery to those with water, and you take a small piece of lead or iron or a vulture's bone, and place it over the wound; and then pour a small quantity of water into the piece, and hold your hand, and you turn that with a compression of your hand, and press the edge of the piece into the root of the wound, and the water will flow slowly to the bottom of the root of the wound; and wait for the patient a little while for the bite of the water for an hour, and then remove that, for the wound with its roots will be eradicated.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And thus do it to those and the other until you come upon all of those on their body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And treat those pus that the roots of the wounds are eradicated with this of the rinses which the flesh generates.
Capitol .liiii.	Chapter .liiii.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	Of cauterization of tremor.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	When someone has a tremor due to a fire in the nerve or from a fever of fiery cause, or from another similar cause, then you must cauterize that with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra with a cautery; and with a cautery on the feet of him, and on his stomach, with an olive cautery.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And the tremor of him is rested and hastened the health of the fiery sickness.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter .lv.
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Of cauterization of white accidents on the body.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When on the body are spots white, and are pustules that are made of coarse corrupted materials; therefore, at the beginning when it appears, it must be cauterized over all the head of the fistula with a subtle cautery with myrtle twigs, the extremity of which is extended with fire; or with roots of erestologia long; or with a lentil cautery.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	And sometimes it is cauterized additionally at the beginning of its expulsion in this manner; and they are not believed, and the superfluity is broken and those, and they heal from those.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	But however, this must be done after evacuation with phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.	Chapter lvi.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	Of cauterization of flux of blood accident by incision of artery.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	Often times there is a flux of artery that is incised, the plague which must be for, or from the incision of abscesses or cauterization of the member, and then similar, and it is difficult to remove that.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	Therefore, when it happens to someone, then you must cover with your hand the orifice of the artery, and place over that your finger, and press that many times until it stops the flux of the blood from your finger, and that it does not come out.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And place in the fire the olive cauteries few and large, by number few, and exhale over those while they are hot.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then take from those one small or one large according to the place and the plague in which the artery is broken, over that vein, quickly press that which you have removed your finger, and put the cautery until it is abcised and restricted that blood.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And if the blood is expelled from the orifice of the artery when you remove your finger and extract the cautery, then take another cautery well covered with the cauteries which in the fire are prepared, and then do not cease to do this one after another until the blood is restricted.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	And guard yourself that you do not burn the nerve that is here, and that it comes upon the patient another malice.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	And know that when from the artery flows blood, then it is not possible in those to restrict the blood, and especially when the artery is large, if not with one of four ways: or with cautery as we have said, or with extraction when it is not extracted, for when it is extracted the extremities of him are much burned and the blood is restricted, or that it be tied with a rope or with a ligature for strong structure, or that medicines be placed upon him of which the virtue is to restrict the blood; and be strengthened with a cushion with decent constriction.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	But that one who administers decent constriction of him with a ligature and with structure with cloths or by position of causes comburents and similar, do not confer but briefly.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	But if this happens to someone and the physician is not present nor medicine, then open with the placement of the finger indicated on the orifice of that vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction of it until the blood is stopped from the sovereign part of the plague, and over the artery the finger is not removed; and over the artery be sprinkled with cold water of much great coldness until the blood is congealed and thickened; and more, sew in which one must cauterize or of medicine necessity.
Comensa la segonda partida.	Begins the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Of incisions and perforations and ventoses and of phlebotomy and of poultices and of their likenesses.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	We have already said in the first chapter all the illnesses in which the cauterization with fire is convenient and with medicine comburent, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments in those necessary with the forms of the cauteries; and I have arranged the chapters of the subordination of the head within the feet.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	And I proceed in this chapter in that same manner, so that the one who wants it may be helped, for that which he will have demanded.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	And before that you begin this, know, son, that in this chapter is terror that is in the first chapter of cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	And for that, know that there should be great caution in it, because in the operation which is in this chapter, many times the evacuation of blood occurs, which is with the blood which is the life of the body, the sprinkling of the vein or incision on the abscess or opening of the wound or purification of the ulcer or extraction of the arrow or incision of the stone and their likenesses.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And of all those, fear and tremor accompany, and in the hands of them, the death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And I admonish you that upon you may not fall that in which you are situated, because sometimes it befalls you manners of men with many manners of illnesses.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	And of them there are some who will go away with their illness and it will be easier for them death, and thus because of the vehemence of that which they find of their illness, and because of the length of their illness, and with the illness is fear which signifies death.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And of those is the one who gives to you his trust and said, you expecting with that health, and his illness is pernicious.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	And therefore, know that you should not consent to that one who comes to you of whom is this manner; and your caution should be greater than covetousness and your greed; and do not presume any cause on that except with certain knowledge which verifies that to you, and to which by the succession praiseworthy.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use in the cure of all your illnesses of prognosis and indication of them to which is health converted, because in that is to you an assistant over the acquisition of fame and of memory, of the praise and of glory.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, sons, God in you inspire his understanding and no os to direction and protection, because that is in his hand.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And I have ordered this chapter distinguishing by chapters second as that which preceded in the chapter of cauteries, of the cure of the head within the feet, so that it may be to you alleviated that which you demand of that and of which you have need.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	Of the cure of the water which is contained in the head of the children.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Know that this illness many times befalls the children of the childbirth and when the nurse tightens the head of the child, his vitality.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	And sometimes it befalls because of a hidden cause which is not known.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	But I have not seen this illness except in children; and to all those whom I have seen, the death has come, and thus it is to me seen laid work in those.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of him was always thus magnified until he could not cease upon himself for the greatness of his head, and more than the humidity increased until fire death.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And this humidity or is added between the bone and the bone, or is added below the bone upon the skull.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	Because the operation in that if the humidity is between the bone and the bone and the abscess is small, then know that you should do in the middle of the head with a fissure in the latitude, and be the length of the fissure two nights until the humidity runs, and this is the form of the spatula:
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And therefore if the humidity is more augmented and the abscess is major, then are here two fissures according to this manner:
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the humidity is below the bone, the sign of it is that you see the sutures of the head open from all parts and the water is squeezed when you compress that with your hand to the parts of the head and it is not that to you hidden.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Know that you should do in the middle of the head with three fissures according to this manner:
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And then the incision extrates all the humidity; and then strengthen the fissures with cloths and feathers; and then embroca that over with wine and oil within the fifth day, and then untie the ligature and cure the wound with tents and unguents, and strengthen the head with equality; and feed the patient with dry food of little humidity until the member be comforted and healed.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	And there is another manner of incision, that you consider honor to appear the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of the water, because sometimes it is more in the occiput, or in the front part, or in the right, or in the left; and therefore attend to the incision where appears the abscess and the repletion of the water, and do that according to what is best to you.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And observe that you do not cut the artery and cause blood to flow and the patient die by that flow of blood by evacuation of humidity.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter II.
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	Of the incision of the arteries which are near the ears, called hilasseysse.
Capitol segon.	Chapter Second.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When a catarrh or wound occurs in the nostrils or foot, and it does not improve with treatment, and the cure does not come from medicines, then the posterior cure in this is the incision of those two arteries.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	And therefore, when you want to cut those arteries, the patient raises their head, and you press the area with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and you tighten the patient's neck with some cloth; and consider where the vein lies; and the places of each on the places which are near the ears are depressed, and they are so hidden unless in some men.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	And then, you press on the artery with your finger, and you cut each one with the sharp edge of the spatula, making the incision go into the bone, and this is by the width of the head.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want, you put the spatula under the artery and break it at the incisions on the upper parts.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And the length of the incision is two fingers wide, because when any vein is cut, the blood is released with a pulsating exit, which jumps out for frequent jumping.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	But if the artery does not appear to the touch, then you measure from the ear the quantity of space of three fingers, and then press with your finger, and make it into the bone.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And this that you must get out of the blood is the quantity of one ounce. And for less or more, and all of this is according to the quantity which appears of the virtue of the patient and the repletion of the artery of him.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then consider the plague, and therefore if there remains on the bone any cause of the chip, then cut it so that it does not cause a cautery abscess.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen the wound with cotton and bandages of cloth, and cure it with ointments until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter Third.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	Of the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When a certain acute migraine or catarrh occurs, due to humors of the body and the quality in the temples, or a sudden violent headache and similar to those, and it is treated with the ways of medical treatment and this does not improve, then we have resorted to these ailments the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those as we have shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	And the way of the operation and extraction of those is that the patient raises their hair where they are in the temples; and understand the artery appears in the temple because it is shown by its pulse, and it is hidden unless in few men by the vehemence of the flesh.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is hidden from you, then the patient's neck is tightened with some cloth; and then press the area with rough cloth or evaporate the area with warm water until the artery appears clearly.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then you take the spatula which this shape is:
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	And then you cut the bone with that with ease until you reach the artery; and then you put it on and extract that at the sovereign parts until you extract that from the bone and discover that of the tunics which are below that, of all parts.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	But if the artery is subtle, then you wrap that with the end of the onion, and then cut it from that one part according to the quantity by which the extremities of it are elongated and contracted, and it will not cause a flow of blood, because if it is not cut it will not raise the blood at all.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then evacuate the blood of one ounce. within three.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if the artery is large, then you must tie that in two places with a double strong thread of each or with long cords, and do not allow it to putrefy before the consolidation of the wound and cause a flow of blood.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then cut the superfluity which is between the two ligaments; and do this in that hour or another hour.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you want, cauterize that with a cauterizer into the bone with a cauter knife until the extremities of it are cut, and stay in the place of that same work.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And it is better work if the patient has a fever or is of a hot complexion; because cauterization is of those causes that help the final humors, and therefore it is better in judgment.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And cover after the extraction of the arteries that you have made the place of the incision, and have placed on it poultices decently made, and then cure it with dry medicines that make the flesh grow and with ointments until it is healed.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if while you are working another bleeding occurs from the artery, then you must take care to stop that blood, either with cauterization, or by placing a poultice on the wound, and tighten your hand until the blood is stopped.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if for any of those causes it is not at your present, then pause your finger on the wound until the blood is coagulated, and soak the wound with water of vehement coldness until the sharpness rests, and tighten it according to what is needed.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And that which is lighter in the extraction of artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two handles, because you have marked the two places with the probe, and after a pause, a little, until they reach the bone and cut the vein in two places, so that it may be elongated that which is between the extremities of it, because they are not consolidated altogether with this cautery.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And the sharpness of the two handles is at the same time.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	However, if it is less sharp than two handles, it is better, because if it is sharp with two handles, it approaches each burn, and does not cut the flesh with velocity.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, as in those, there is some thickness, the heat of the fire is held in those, and the flesh is slightly cut off.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this work is better than all works and lighter.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	And the spaces which are between the two handles are the quantity of the thickness of the finger.
Capitol quart.	Chapter Four.
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	Of the cure of the bodies of acute and sour rheums of the heels.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	When the rheums are sour, and are the bodies of those veins which are on the test of the head, and do not confer in that any cause of the cure of medicine, and sometimes the face of the patient already reddens and feels in his forehead a walking as if it were walking of ants, and the heels of that are exhausted, humid so that already the hairs of them are known, and the eyelids are scalded by the sharpness of the tears, the ancient agro mixed in the cure of those of this operation, and numbered that cure with space.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And it is that you command the patient to shave the hairs which are on his forehead, and then cut three fissures equally distant according to the length of the forehead.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the length of the fissure is two fingers: one fissure be equally distant to the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little of the movement of the lachrymals which are in the lacrimal, and the third on the other part.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And guard yourself from the incision of the arteries which are in two places, and lengthen your hand from the continuation of both the mandibles.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three fingers adjusted.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if you a piece of sponge apparelled or cloths dried well with which you dry the blood.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	And then insert the spatula of two sharp extremities, of which this is the shape of the incision of it:
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	which is from the part of the temples into the second incision.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Excoriate with that all the flesh which is between the two incisions with the ciph, which is on the bone, and then make that of the middle incision into the second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then straz in this spatula and insert into the first incision another time an instrument which is called a cutellar, sharp on one part and on the other not sharp.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	And pause the side of that sharp deves the flesh annexed deves the flesh, and the side of it lean between the bone, and push that until it reaches the middle fissure, and cut with that all the vessels that descend from the head to the heels.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	But that the incision be continued to that which appears of the flesh, and then make that in the middle fissure into the other fissure.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	And because it runs of the blood quantity equal, express the places of the pieces of the coagulated blood.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then pause in each fissure calgua of old cloth, and pause on those powders steeped in wine and oil and wine vinegar, and vegas that it does not become an abscess caut.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	And on the third day untie the bandage and administer a great infusion of boiled water or tea, and then cure that with an enguent of basilicon with rose oil and others until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	Of the cure of rheums by catartz and in the heels descending from the parts between the head.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When there comes to some vein catartz sharp and continuous, and sometimes the heels of the patient exhausted small, and already the regard of them is debilitated, and the eyelids ulcerated and of their case the hairs, and in the preon of the head is acute pain leading and exhaustion consequent, then you know by these accidents that the matters and catartz do not come but of many veins of the parts between the head.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	And the best cure in those is this: that you command the patient to shave his forehead, and then cut into it a fissure in the middle of the forehead, a little by the latitude (and begin with the fissure of the left temple into the right temple; and be incision into the bone; and lengthen your hand from the lachrymals of the temples which are bad deves the mastication), until it be the bone uncovered.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Exsicca all the blood with sponge or with dry cloth and then repleys between the two lips of the fissure with old cloth or with cloths of linen.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And then strengthen it above with powders steeped in wine and oil so that it does not become an abscess caut.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	And when you untie it and see that the abscess has already decreased, then cover the bone that begins to grow flesh there, and then take care of it with a drying regimen that makes the flesh grow, just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix it, and make a poultice of it and administer it on these wounds at the birth of the flesh.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	Of the cure of that which catches in the ears.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	Every cause that catches in the ears is one of four species, for it is either mineral or a cause similar to mineral, such as iron and lead, or it is of plant, such as celery or bean, or it is a fluid cause such as water and sour wine and their likes, or some beast.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And therefore when lead catches in the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not fit nor grow in the ear, and put the ear in the sun, and if you see the lead, then distill in it some cause of violet oil or sesame, and then administer the extract of it, and make the patient swallow it with a condiment, and plug the nostrils to prevent the occurrence of vomiting.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And then put in the circuit of the ear some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear to the parts above, for many times it is cured with these causes.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not cured, then administer the extract of it with the instrument called the "gesti epicicarios subtil" of which this is the form:
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	And if it is cured with the gesti, well is it; and if not, then administer the extract of it with a fine onci of little duplication.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And therefore if it is not cured by this, then make a cannula of silver and insert the extremity of the cannula into the tract of the ear and close around the cannula with wax and softened oil so that it is not open except the cannula.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	And then extract with your wind with a strong traction, for many times like the water that we have recounted.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	But if it is not cured in this manner, then take of a halka illuminated or of a vecz apparelled with which birds are taken a small quantity, and put that on the extremity of a ray, and then envelop over that well-placed cot.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then insert that into the tract of the ear with facility, and then dry the ear of the humidity.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	And therefore if it is not cured with all the causes which we have recounted, then you ought to cut that before it becomes an abscess or spasm.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	And the manner of cutting that is that you at the beginning lances the patient from the cephalic vein and extract the blood according to the manner of the virtue of it, and then make that cezure between your hands and turn the ear to the parts above, and make a small fissure in the root of the ear, leaving the grey of it in the place well pressed of it.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And let the fissure be of a lunar figure until it reaches the lead, and, the lead being found, remove it with appropriate instruments; and then close the fissure in that hour with velocity, and cure that while it is healing.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if the cause catching in the ear is one of the fats that grows and swells, then administer the cure and the extract of it; but if it does not obey your advice and thus, then you take a spatula thin and subtle according to this form:
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	and administer with that the abscess of that fat which is caught in the ear.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and put that in many pieces, and prop extract them with the onces or with a subtle gesti, or with the incision as we have said, for the extraction of it is alleviated.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	But in the water which is introduced into the ear, cover that the patient uses of sneezing with a condiment at the beginning, and fill his ear with some old cot, and pour over that ear in which is the water, and if by this it is cured, well is it; and if not, then take many leaden and leaden weights according to the length of the finger, and calve those in the fire a little, and the patient inserts one of those into the tract of his ear and jumps on one foot of that part and percussion with another leaden weight on the leaden weight which is inside the ear.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore do not cease this with lead until all the water is cured.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc .i., e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	And already the water is cured, so that you take paper or of gonc, i., and put one extremity of it in the ear and extend the other extremity with fire until it is burned most of it.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And then put another gonc and do this so many times until all the water is cured, and strach that with a cannula as it is said of the lead extractor.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	But in the extraction of beasts entering into that ear, if it is a small thing, as big as it seems, cure it as we have said in the division; but if it is of a large thing which causes the appearance in the part of the vessel, then administer the extract of it with gesti and oncis, and the cause of it is lighter of all the other causes that catch in the ear.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	But in the extraction of worms generated in the ear, when you cure that with what we have said in the division and in the treatment of distillations and do not compare your cure, then you must watch the ear in the sun.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if there is any cause of worms here, then extract them with a gesture or with a subtle instrument, but if there is no cause, then take a cannula that is narrow at the top and wide at the bottom, which is the shape of it:
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And introduce the subtle extremity into the ear according to the quantity which the patient can suffer; and then suck with it by strong suction, and do this many times, until all the worms are expelled.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	But if you do not obey in this way, then you plug and close the circuit of the cannula with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already been proven in the cure of worms, and you will find this in the treatise of distillations.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the effusion with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument of which this is the shape:
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	And make it of silver or of brass, narrow at the top, with a small hole, and flat at the bottom.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And therefore it is as if it were in the concavity of the cannula of which we are speaking here where it is necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want, take the ray and wrap it in the extremity of it decently with cotton, and then pour oil into the concavity of the hearing, or juice of some herb, or water that you want of these medicines into the cannula — and that is in the ear — and then introduce the ray with cotton underneath and express with your hand that with moderate compression of it until the oil is expelled into the concavity of the hearing and the patient feels the oil inside.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And what is infused in the ear is already scalded with fire a little.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And guard yourself that the cause which you distill into the ear is not too cold, because the medicines of the ear do not tolerate that.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	Of the cure of ear opacities.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Sometimes babies are born from the wombs of their mothers unperforated, and this happens to some men, opacity in the flesh of the ear due to plague or to flesh that has nothing to do with it; and this opacity sometimes is made in the preon of the tragus of the ear which does not allow the vision, and sometimes it is in the outer parts.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	And that which happens in the preon of it, which does not allow the vision, is in the greatest dispositions of difficult healing.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	And in that one in which you can see, then you must place the ear of the patient in the sun and watch it.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And therefore if you see opacity appearing, open it with a subtle spatula of which this is the shape:
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	If the extremity of it in which there is little width, of which one part is sharp and the other not; and the spatula is of two lengths so that it does not make a hole in the ear.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	And therefore if the opacity is due to flesh born in the ear or in the flesh of it, then take that with subtle instruments and incision it with great facility until all the flesh is removed.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	And if the opacity is in the preon of the ear, then take a subtle ray long and scalded that with fire a little, and then put that in the flesh of the ear.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	And therefore if you have felt opacity with the water that the patient finds with facility, by the gravity of the auscultation, you will increase the oppression of it with facility; and guard yourself that you do not plague the nerves of the ear.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then place in the ear a cloth according to the quantity of the width of the tragus which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for some days until you are sure of the consolidation of the plague; or that you take some and put it in water and pulverize it on it, following the tristis, and use it; and if you see the ear already being suppurated, then you must extract the pus and replace it with another one which you wrap in cerot that is made with rose oil, until the pus cauterizes; and then cure it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	But if there is a flow of blood, then immerse a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use the other cure which you restrict the flow of blood, which is said in the treatise of distillations.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	Of the cure of atheroma which develops in the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Atheroma which develops in the eyelids of men sometimes is humid, sometimes it is dry.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Therefore, when you have those with tweezers or with a scalpel, and incision them with a spatula of their roots, and then place on the places according to the trissatis.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	But if there is pain with a flow of blood, then you cauterize those with a subtle lancet cauter.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	And the best cauterization is to the incisions and several times return when there is some cause of their roots; and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	Cure of a large swelling that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	Many ailments happen in the eyelids of the eyes, some cause a swelling which is assembled to greatness in its firmness and hardness, and by its greatness it is called.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	And it is an accumulation of thick humidity in the eyelid below and above.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	Therefore, the operation on them is that you consider if the swelling is coming from there, that is, apart from the eyelid and is bad to all parts; and the cause of it is light.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, make a cut on it along its width, and then drain it entirely as easily as possible, and then suspend it with a bandage and cut it off.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	But if you are not prepared for the incision of it, but rather penetrate the eyelid with a small incision, then you will not notice it in any way.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the figure is large, then you adjust it with sutures; and cure it until it is healed.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if it is small, it will not harm you for that, because the ointment of it restores it and heals it.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the swelling is declining to the inner parts of the eyelid, you must scrape the surface of the inner parts, then you will see the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a bandage, which you did not make an incision for, and press it from all sides, and if the eyelid by incision is elongated, you will not notice it in any way.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And after the incision, wash the eyes with salt water; and cure the place with water that heals until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	Of the cure of the abscess in the upper eyelid of the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	An abscess is a boil that is generated in the tunics of the upper eyelid, and mostly happens to children, it aggravates the eyes of those and accedes to their cataracts the most; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears are collected in those.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And because of this, those times they rub on their faces all the time, and on their faces they sleep; and on the eyelids of their below the eyebrows are humid, those which already have covered inflammation, and the imminence of a boil appears in the eye; and that when you press the place with your fingers, you feel the boil within those.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And some manner of operation is in that one who the patient puts their head in your lap, and then put a cloth on them and make a poultice, and make of it a circle according to the quantity which contains the boil entirely, and then put that on it and press with your fingers from all sides so that it may be pressed into the middle of the circle, and then make in the middle of that humidity with a spatula incision along its width, and the incision is not larger than the incision made in a flap.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	But in the pressing cover that you make the incision entirely until you reach the boil, because in the most favorable processes the boil is processed by incision according to the form of a white boil.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, extract it with cloths which you have enveloped between your fingers to the sides of the boil and roll between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	And guard yourself that you do not adjust in the incision so that with the spatula you do not reach the eye and scrape it.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	But if you do not see the boil at the beginning of the incision, but rather that you adjust in the incision a little with ease until it processes the boil; and then extract it as we have said; and then submerge cloths of it in water and honey and put them on the place and tighten them with powders.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And if some that put salt and put it in the cavity of the incision so that what is left of that humidity.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	But if it happens in the place abscess caut, then cure it with cauterized plasters until it is healed.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of manners of touching the eye.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids of the eyes there are hairs that are natural and are antiquated by the adjustment below the hairs, then those annoy the eye and make become manners of illnesses such as continuous tears and softening of the eyelids and film until that is a cause of destruction of the eye that is called touching of the eye, and cure is done in four manners: or by cauterization with fire; or with acute medicine according to what was said before in the chapter of cauterization; or it is done touching by incision and suture; or by canes according to what I have said.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	And therefore, when you put the head of the patient in your lap; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned, it is good; and if not, insert a needle into it where it is thickest from the bottom of the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with thread below, and that be— near the edge of the eyelid where there grow the hairs— near the hairs, and pull the thread to the bottom with the eyelid, and turn it with the ray.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And then make in the inner part of the eyelid below the hairs adjusted with a spatula incision from the lacrimal major into the lacrimal minor; and then extract the thread and put below the eyelid small powders of cotton or of cloth, and then send over the eyelid with a tent, and be as such as the figure of a myrtle leaf.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	But however, the figure must be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, because this is already diversified in men, because some are those who are indigenous that it should be incised of the eyelid a large quantity according to the amount by which the eyelid is softened.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	And then bring the spatula over the two lines which you have drawn, and begin from the larger lacrimal duct into the smaller lacrimal duct.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And if your fissure is near the natural hairs as well as the thickness of the king.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	And then put the ounce in one of the two angles of the chain, and then scrape that whole thing, and then adjust with the incision the two lips with a wool or silk thread, and wipe away the blood, and make it adhere what superflues of the threads on two eyebrows with some viscous causes, if you want to do this, and otherwise, don't worry.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And then remove the suture of the threads within three days or four, and then take care of it.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if you want, leave the patch with its suture, and take care of it with something that dries and constricts, because the eyelid is elevated, it needs the sealing of the patch and its adhesion; but suturing is better, and therefore I say this as the ancients did.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	But however, there should be solicitude over the patient, and it is a good operation, and there is no fear in it.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And there is another way in taxmir, and it is that you shape on the eyelid like a myrtle leaf, and then elevate the eyelid with three separate and congregated hooks according to this form:
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	But if it is not possible to do this, take the hooks, and this is not equal, then take a needle which has thread and put it in the middle of the figure, and introduce the other thread near the larger lacrimal duct, and the other thread near the smaller lacrimal duct, and adjust between your fingers the threads with equality, and then with those elevate your hand with equal elevation, elevate the whole chain on which it is drawn as we have recounted.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips of the patch with suture, and take care of it until it is healed.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	But if an abscess occurs because of your incision or your fissure,  treat that abscess with cerot and similar things, and with poultices.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And some times it becomes necessary to the eyelid that its hairs are converted, then it is necessary to use in that what we have said of incision; but suturing in some is more artificial.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	To taxinir with canes is according to this form:
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	And it is that you convert the eyelid and split the figure which is described according to what I have recounted; and then by art make two canes or two subtle splints of which length is according to the length of the eyelid and the width of them is less than the width of the spatula.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you have already incised at the extremities of each part, where you have the threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	And then add each one subtly over what superflues of the eyelid of the eye, and constrict the canes of each part with a strong stricture, and leave it for some days, because the chain by the stricture will die and be denied and will be able to return within itself.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	But if it is delayed, then break it with the pliers, and then take care of the patch until it is healed.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, as it is solidified, the eyelid is elevated and the hairs do not poke.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And this is the form of two canes which you will make according to this form:
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	And have the quantity of the length and width neither more nor less.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter .xii.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	Of elevation of poking hairs in the eye with a needle when the hair is hard.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	When the hairs are non-natural, hard and rough and poking the eyes, then the operation in it is that you take a subtle needle and put in it a subtle thread of cedar and linen, and then you adjust the extremities of it and knot it in a way most subtle.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	And let the length of the threads be the quantity of a palm.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And then you compose another subtle thread from it in short, and knot the extremities of it if you want to.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And then place the patient their head in your lap, and be near the sun so that your work be declared, because it is a subtle and delicate operation.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then introduce the needle into the root of the hair that has need of engineering, and make it penetrate the eyelid carefully until you extract it out of the natural hair.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then pull the hair out and introduce it into the alixati, and let the hairs be one or two or three and no more.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And then pull your hand with it so that the hair be soaked with alixati in the eyelid with the natural hair.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	But if the alixalati is thrown and the hair is not soaked, you will throw alixati to the parts below with the thread which you have composed with it, until it be soaked with the alixati from the top.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And keep that with the vision of the eye, because then you will throw alixati and the thread, and groat some and close the eye, and leave the closures for two days or three, until the hair adheres to its place and grows on that good flesh.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And if the skin is too short, then you adjust a long skin from the natural hairs, and it is elevated with that, or that you let it enter so that it is lengthened to a certain space, and then you elevate that.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter .xiii.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	Of the cure of the cataract which comes in the eyelid above.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When it comes in the eye cataract, and is contraction of the eyelid when it is contracted above, or on the right or left side, by bad consolidation of plague or of cautery, and is called leporina, and this cataract or is natural or accidental, and is made by consolidation of plague or of cautery, or by resemblance to their malcuratz.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	The manner of the operation in it is that you make that consolidation and that you separate the lips of it, and you put in it in that which is between those a piece of cloth of linen, and you tie those together until they are healed.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And no cover that you use of cure of it of the causes the ones which exsiccate, constrict; because if you do that return cataract worse than no time no have you.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Use in that of causes that mollify as is fenugreek, and embroca with the water in which they are cooked  altea and seed of it, or enguent dyaquilon, the one which is liquefied with some of the oils, and submergeys in that the cloth, and cure with that.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treasure of your cure is that you perforate with all engine that is not consolidated according to the form that you have at the beginning.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And this operation the one which we have said, is not sino any rectification of cataract that does not return the form of the place according to that you had before.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter .xiv.
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Of the cure of cataract which is made in the eyelid below.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This cataract which is made in the eyelid below, the one which is named truly cataract; and it is of it some natural, other accidental.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	More accidental is made by plague or by scissura or by cautery or by other resemblances.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And the way of the operation of it is that you take a needle in which make double thread, and fix that in the flesh, and that you make it pass from the lacrimal of left into the lacrimal right, until that the thread arrives in the two extremities of the flesh.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	And then extend the flesh to the parts above with the needle and sew that with the needle, and insciseys with spatula ample.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And therefore if it returns the figure of the eyelid according to that cover, good is; and if not, take the ray and pause that in the figure wounded, and with that converteys the eyelid, and finish the two fissures in the latz of the eyelid below.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	And be the extremities of the two fissures of two angles of the incision, the one which you have made until they concur, and be of their fayt angle until when they congregate be made figure of their.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And this figure is Greek letter: the lambda.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	And then oppose the flesh that for the quantity that is the latz of it acute below of it, that which seizes the eyelid.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the separated parts and sew those with the thread of wool; and then cure those with that which we have said of the mollifying medicines and of the poultices until that it be healed.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if cataract must be due to fissure or suture or cautery, then cover that you make with fissure plane over the hairs of the eyelid according to that is preceded.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then separate with the poultice between two lips according to that we have said.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	In the sum of the sermon of the cure of cataract when it is above or below, that run in it the operation, according to that is prepared of the form of cataract, and that is in form of motas diversity.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And the artificers wise all times prepare engine in each manner the one which is possible to it until that make return the figure to the natural form, or near that, and that patient according to that to him convenes of the operation and of the instruments in the major dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter .xv.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	When accidies this consolidation to many men in such a way that be solidified the eyelid more above with the album of the eye, and be prohibited of the facility of the movement and of its natural works, therefore cover that you enter the extremity of the ray below the eyelid, and elevate in up that, or extend that with the unci.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And then you insciseys the adhesion with spatula subtle, the one which not be with acuteness of the incisions, have obtus a little for so that the patient not be inquietated during the operation, and remove the spatula that not lead the eye with its acuteness.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	And be your incision that excorjan that adhesion with facility until that be returned the eyelid according to its natural form and that be healed all the adhesion.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	And then you put in the eye salted water with which you wash it; or distill in it of zunia dissolved in the water.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then separate between the eyelid and the eye with poultice of it, and pause over the eye wool infused in album of egg, and then the third day use of consolidative causes until that be healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	Of the incision of the nail and of the prominence of flesh of the lacrimals.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Know that the nail is of two manners, whether it is nervous, and is like a hard, fine cypress; or it is non-nervous, resembling white moisture congealed, which when you touch it, or it is forced to take on a form, it is cut off and the form is not put back in.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	And both kinds do not begin except from the larger lacrimal within which goes little by little that it covers the sight and prohibits the light and the movement of the eye.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	But the manner of working in the incision of it is that the patient places his head in the low place, and then opens his eyes, and elevates the eyelid with your hand, and then collect the nail with a pointed instrument of little duplication and extend it to the upper parts.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And then take a needle and introduce into it a thread of horse, or of bull, or of water, or of similar, or of strong thread, or duplicate the extremity of the needle little by little and put it in the middle of the nail, and penetrate it with the needle, and tie it with thread the nail; and extend it to the upper parts, and excoriate with the thread the side of the nail which sees the pupil.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And thus you follow it with the thread into the back of it.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	And then you incise the remnant in the root of the lacrimal with a subtle spatula or with small scissors, and let the flesh of the lacrimal be natural so that by incision of it there does not become a continuous flow of tears.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And at some times the nail with the sole thread extended or tied, as we have said, and then it is excoriated with a lion's spatula of which this is the form of it:
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And guard yourself that with the spatula you do not touch the cornea tunic and that there comes a rupture in it, and that the pupil be perforated.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then the incision gets in the eye a little of salt triturated or of a head made of cedar, and let it in for another day; and then cure it with water that covers it until it is healed.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot put the needle, nor is it put in it the form, then many times this kind of nail is cured with medicines, and it is healed thus as I and recommend in the division.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to incise it, then you open the eye of the patient and take a subtle lion spatula of finely sharpened steel according to this form:
am subtilitat.	With subtlety.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	And if you see that it is rarified and is confused and embraced in that root, then distill of your hour in the eye of cedar head made or with cedar wood or with salt triturated, and close the eye for another day.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat over that the operation until it is removed all that is of it, so that the contrary abscess may not be in the eye, for then you let it, and cure at the beginning the abscess until it is healed.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat your operation over it with reason until it is healed.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if it is noticed in the eye for great nuisance, be suspended with thread; and incise it from that one part, and do not complete the incision so that it does not incise the flow of tears.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And then distill in the lacrimal cedar wood and made of cedar until it is healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter XVII.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	Of the incision of the albuginea and of the water that is born of flesh adjusted in the eye.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	Sometimes in the eyes of some, flesh red is born, and it is over-laid so that it covers the pupil, or it approaches or stretches over the eyelids and strongly compresses the eyelids to the sides before and it is assembled like a rose of balustrade.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	But the operation in it is that the patient places his head in the low place; and then opens the eyes of that one and collect all that flesh with convenient threads to water, and hold water with a forceps or with a basket; and then incise the flesh at the beginning until all is finished with the scissors, and guard yourself of the eye that you do not damage it with the course of your operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And let your incision be with which you incise those or with the spatula which we have recommended in the incision of the nail, or with small scissors with which is collected asclepius according to what will come the form of it in this chapter.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Therefore, as the incision is completed and all that flesh is removed, then fill the eye with salt triturated, or distill in it cedar wood powder and similar to it of the corrosive medicines, and put on the eye before a bandage of linen with album of egg until it is assured of abscess caut.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if there remain any cause of albuginea and it is dominated by a dangerous abscess, and you fear abscess caut, then let the eye and cure that abscess with water that reduces that abscess, and then repeat over it with operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the flesh adjusted which happens in the eye of this kind.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	But however you cover that all cure of the eye steel by natural way or by accidental way, operate with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that that member is suffering that operation.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter xviii.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of the collection of pus in the groin.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	Pus veins are seen, which are swollen on the groin and forbidden to the clothing its operation, and it dilates the groin with length of days.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider if the groin in which is pus is strong and in it there is no other ailment that pus, then you collect that pus.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And it is that you command the patient to place his head in your lap, and then suspend those veins with a bandage or with two according to your prudence; and let that bandage be of subtle duplication according to this form:
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	or two bandages gradually in one body according to this form:
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	And then they are collected those veins with subtle forces, with subtlety, and abstergeys the blood hour by hour, while those veins are being remaugulated from the groin and are being rolled up.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And guard yourself that you do not lead the groin with the extremities of the spatula; and if your operation in the afternoon before the sun, and be firm in your operation that you do not cut except those veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And when you will have finished, then you distill in the groin chief green or red for that with its acuity corrodes that which is remaugulated from the pus.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	But if that is not possible for you collect everything in that hour, then you plaster everything with that which yields the pain of it, and leave it for some days until the pain of it is sedated and that it is assured of a caut apostema.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then repeat over it according to the same manner until it is healed.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form of the forceps:
Capitol .xix.	Chapter xix.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	Of the reduction of arizati to the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you cure arisati with cautery or with acute medicine according to what is preceded the narration of it and it is not healed, then it is not engendered in it but that you make on the abscess of you the maturity of it, and that you extract all the humidity which is in it and the power until it is uncovered the bone.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	And therefore cum is uncovered the bone and sees in it corruption or blackness, then you root it with a instrument of which this is the form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And it is called aspre cap, and it is made of iron, and it is the cap rounded as to grasp the one which is made pointed by the point of a file or aliskalfati by subtle point (as it is in the following form).
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And pause that upon the corrupted place of the bone, and then revolves that between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that that corruption is scraped.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And that be done several times, and then restores the place with exsiccative and styptic causes.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	Therefore if the place is consolidated and there is born good flesh in it and is abscindit the body of the sania and remains for forty days, and it is not renewed and it is not apostemat and it does not happen in it accident, then you know that it is healed.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if not, then it is not in it engendered but reduce the fissure to the form of the nose, and according to this manner: and it is that you uncover of second bone with iron or with acute medicine, and cum sira uncovered the bone, then you take tribo according to this form:
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	Let the extremity of it iron be triangular, and the shaft of it be prime attenuated into the extremity as it sometimes is so.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then pause that upon the bone, and let it be near the lacrimal; and lengthen your hand a little of the groin, and then revolve your hand with the tribo until it penetrates all the bone, and that feels the patient for as soon as it finds wind issuing from it when you the his hand.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore then restore the place with styptic and exsiccant medicines as you have been taught.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, as the flesh grows and the place is endured, then the matter which effused to the foreparts returns to the nose, therefore that is pus lighter upon the patient.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter xx.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	Of the reduction of the eminence of the groin.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	When the groin emines with its totality and it does not happen in the garment harm nor diminution, then cove that relaxes the patient, and then that you follow, and then that you pause windy in the neck its scarification and suck for good succaccio; and then pause upon the groin liniment the one which is made of acatra and aloe and enses and sarcocolla, and then strengthen the plaster upon the groin with motz polvils.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	And the manner of the polvils is that you take cloths of lions motz, and each cloth be duplicated in four pleats; and make of those motz.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	And then pause those one upon the other according to the quantity of which the groin has need.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And then strengthen upon those with hard cloth with strong strictura; and iterate the ventosas with succio ses scarification; and then oust the ventosas and leave the groin streyt the day and the night.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	But if meanwhile the ligament is softened, then cove that it be mot streyt.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then oust the ligament about the day and the night as we have said.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	And if you see the hernia already reduced, it is good, and if not, then repeat the plaster with the powders and the constriction and the leeches until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter XXI.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Of the incision of the eminence of the tunic uvea.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	When there is a rupture in the tunic uvea, and it is prominent and proceeds out from the eyelids like a grain of rasim, and the shape of a man is formed by it, and you want to cut it, then the operation in it is as we have recounted, that you introduce the needle into the root of the uvea from the part below in the part above, and then put the other needle which has a double thread from the part of the lacrimal, and make that penetrate and leave the first needle according to its disposition; and then cut the place of the double thread and lift with it the part of the uvea in the circuit of the needle, and strengthen that movement.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	And then extract the needle and place it over the wool soaked in egg white and leave it until the thread falls into the uvea.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then cure the wound with water that comforts it until the plague is healed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And sometimes, in addition to all parts with a circle of cloth around the wound, adjust the prominent eminence, and then pierce it with a subtle spatula that comes to the edge of the wound, and run the albuminous moisture, and descend the wound and enter quickly.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	And then strengthen until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXII.
De curacio de alconati.	Of the cure of alconati.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness which is called alconati is nothing but a swelling which is adjusted in the wound resembling descending water and it is not that.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	But the manner of working in it is that you make the patient lie on the saddle arranged and straight, and then take its head in your hands of two parts and hold it so that you see the swelling coming to the parts below, and then let it dry and not descend, and stay the light, and the patient sees the causes as he sees.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it does not descend below, you know that it is water.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	But if it is not prepared the descent of the swelling with the water that we have said, then make the patient lie between your hands and then take a subtle spatula and finish it on that over the panniculus, carefully the continuation of the conjunctiva with the cornea tunic in the crown (in the place void), until the swelling is expelled.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Therefore, as it is expelled, then you distill into the wound water cauda in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already boiled fennel and honey.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure it with the other causes until it is healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter XXIII.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	Of the cure of the descending water from the wound.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	We have already said the kinds of water in the division and which ones it is convenient to pierce with a sermo, declaring, then according to the health.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Now, it is necessary that you make the patient lie between your hands on a crate and tie his wound shut, tightening it.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And then place your left hand near the eyelid of his wound if the wound in which is the water is the left one; or with your right hand, if the wound is the right one.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	And then with your right hand take the almond, if the wound is left; or with your left hand, if the wound is right.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And then place the end of the almond near the crown for the thickness of the ray in the album of the wound from the part of the lower lacrimal, and then press the almond with virtue and roll your hand with it.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	And then penetrate into the album of the wound and feel that the almond has already arrived at the void cause.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	And it is necessary that the measure of the path of the almond to the edge is the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the blackness, and it is the crown of the wound; because you will see with that pupil the vision of the wound through the clarity of the cornea tunic.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And then place the almond into the place where is the water, and then you throw it down once, then another, and therefore if the water descends quickly, then wet the wound with water over which he has his sight quickly, and almond in his wound.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	And then rest for a little; therefore if the water has descended, then you remove that other time before the almond is thrown.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And therefore when it is dried and does not descend, then you extract the almond with ease, and roll it with your hand little by little, and then dissolve in the water a little clear salt of gemma and with that wash the wound carefully; and then place outside the wound cotton or stopper or wool soaked in rose oil and egg white and lick the wound with water.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	But now in those who are of our time place on that commi trissat with egg white.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you do not obey your almond to the entrance of the wound because of its hardness — because it is some of the men whose wound is very hard — then it is necessary that you take the spatula which is called alberid of which this is the form:
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And therefore pierce with that that juncture, and do not end your hand in the track, and it is not if you do not make a way for the almond to a subtle place.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then introduce the almond according to what we have said.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	And you must complete the work, have the patient prepared to sleep comfortably in a dark room, where he sleeps on his back, and be prohibited from all movement.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And keep him in nature so that his nature is cleansed, and do not turn his head to the right or left at all.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And bind him according to his disposition on the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And then unbind him in that dark room and expose him to the fresh air, and make him see some causes, and then return the bandage on the seventh day.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And do not allow him to do this during the hours of healing or as soon as the infusion.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	You must however abstain from this because the water can leak slightly through a great and vehement regard.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	But if an abscess occurs, then you must unbind the wound before the seventh day, and rectify it with water that will cause the abscess to drain.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	Then you unbind his sight and place a cloth over his face so that his movement is regulated, leaving him in the dark room for several days.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And then gradually remove him from that room and converse with him about his causes.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	And know that in alchemy the disciple is not excused from vision some times, and then you should be bold about the operation.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And we have now arrived at some of those who are in the Artach, and some say that they make fire in the Ayrac magdaam perforated with which the water is sucked.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	But however, I have not seen any in our land who has perfected water, nor is water mentioned in some of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is novel.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the forms of the species of magdaan so that it may be on those who ignore those:
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And they are made of copper or iron properly, and their extremities are with this triangular subtlety, the acute extremity thus as it is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.	Chapter XXIV.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Of the cure of flesh wounds in the nose.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	When in the nose various fleshy growths appear, of which some are caused by a thing resembling a scorpion of small weight, or a polyp; and this ailment is called a polyp because it resembles that weight represented.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And of this flesh is cancerous, pale, of a dark color; and of this flesh is the lion no of a dark color.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, in that which is in these fleshy growths lion not fraudulent nor cancerous, you must have the patient sit between your hands and put in the sunlight, and dry his nostrils, and pick your own on those flesh.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	And then extract that to the outside parts, and then incise that which you have comprehended of those with a sharp, subtle spatula from one side, so that you know that all the flesh has already been removed; if any cause of which the excision is possible remains of it, then you root that with one of the subtle instruments with ease so that nothing of it remains.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	But if the bleeding should worsen or an abscess occurs, then you pause to him what you must; or if it is of the malignant abscesses, then you cut and cauterize that so that it may be excised, and all the cavities are removed.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then be careful to put in the nose after the incision a mixture of wine and water or wine.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	But if the nose is open and from it proceeds humidity into the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	But if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you know that deep within it is flesh wound in the pus that soars bones of the nose to which the excision has not reached.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	Therefore, then you must introduce a needle of lead into which there is some thickness, and sew in it small nuts, and place between each nut the quantity of the finger or less, and engage the patient and introduce one extremity of the needle into the nose with the ray or with another cause which is possible to it.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And as soon as that is done, that it may have its odor reach into the channels of the nose, and be spit onto his throat, for many times the children in schools do this action, and it is easier cause to him who wants to do it.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	And then place the two extremities of the needle, one extremity that sticks out over the nose and the other that remains in the nose, and then administer a lock of flesh with the nuts that are in the needle, and do this so that you know that the flesh is already with the nuts of the needle.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And then extract the needle, and place in the nose after the abstraction of blood a poultice, and do this for three days or more until the ointment corrodes all that is remaining of the flesh.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	And at the end of the cause, place in the nose a lead tube for several days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	But if you find any cure that requires it, use that.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	And this is the form of the instrument a capipurge maker with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And make it of silver or copper, which is similar to a small open lamp, as a small conch, and the meat similarly.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	And if you wish, make a closed cannula like a tube, and the cannula of the instrument to be used for purging should be flat, uncovered; to which handle at the back of him, with which you hold that when you warm in him oil or water that you want of the suckable causes.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And this purgative is precious: take of ground beaver, white balayra, ginger, and saffron, long pepper, asafetida, and a pinch of spice. Take cumfrey with juice of bleda and caul, and make pills, and let one pill be taken with tepid water, and be given to the patient lying on his back.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	Of the ills of the nose in the extremities.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	Many times the ailment of the nose in the extremities is magnified and mentioned on certain days when it is not even worth looking at.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And for that reason, you should investigate that at the beginning of its appearance, and eradicate all of it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And then place on the spot a cautery or medicine that is burning, which was in the place of it.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	But if its incision is delayed until it is magnified, then consider if it is hardened, dry, of a dark color and of little feeling, then do not touch that with iron for it is a foul abscess; for many times to him who incisions this abscess, great malice comes upon him who had it.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if the abscess is of a light touch and not of a dark color, and sometimes when incisions is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and incision it without fear, and cure the spot with water that is warm and compresses until it is healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	Of the suturing of the nose and of the lips and of the ear when the continuity is dissolved by plague or by likenesses.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	Know that when accidents of dissolution of continuity occur in one of these cartilages, few confer in that operation unless in some men.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, when it is necessary to do so, consider if it is fresh plague with its blood, and then you adjust the two lips of the wound with suture, and then care for it until it is healed.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the lips of the solution of continuity are already separated, and each one is made healthy, then you should excise each part of its exposed edge until blood comes out.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then adjust the two lips with suture and strengthen them, and over the powder, place a piece of diaphano plaster, or some other of the consolidating plasters, and leave this tied for two or three days, and then untie it and change the plaster and leave it until the threads are by themselves abscinditz, and then care with a rinse until it is healed.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	But the manner of the suture is that you add the solution of continuity or with needles as we have recommended in the suturing of the belly, or add the solution of continuity with thread as you have been taught.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter XXVII.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	Of the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips in the parts of the mouth.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	Many times there must be in the mouths of men in the parts of their lips some abscesses hard like fat of worms, and some of them are smaller and some are larger.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, you should convert the lips and make incisions each one of those hardnesses from all sides, and then the abscess, fill the place with powdered sage until the blood is restrained, and then wash it with vinegar and cure the place with water that is astringent, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter XXVIII.
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Of incision of the flesh adjusted in the gums.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	Greatly often there is on the gum flesh adjusted, which the ancients called an albulus, therefore, you should suspend that with tweezers or what you have with the forceps and incision that, you should remove its root, and let the blood run.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then place on the spot powdered sage or other astringent or drying powders.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	And if that flesh returns, then incision that secondarily, and cauterize that, for the cautery will not return.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Of the reason of teeth with iron.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When on the surface of the teeth of the parts of the mouth and of the front and between the gums are adjusted rough, jagged, and some times black scabs, and are made yellowish or green as the gums are affected by this corruption and the teeth become jagged.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And therefore, you should make the patient sit between your hands and place the head of him in your lap, and scrape the teeth where those scabs and causes appear like sand until none of them remain, and this do of the blackness and the yellowishness and of the others until they are modified.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	Therefore, if that is what is in the beginning of the root, it is good; and if not, then you repeat the root over those the next day and the second and the third until it comes to the last statement in what you want.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And know that the teeth have need of various forms and figures of mortars according to how it is prepared for your operation.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	And because the razors which the tooth is razored from the root are different from the razors which are razored between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors you shall prepare as you shall see forthwith:
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter .xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	Of the eradication of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	Know that you cure the tooth of its pain with all diligence and take your time in the eradication of it, for there is no cause that should supplant the healing of it when it is eradicated, for it is substance sublimated within that the excuse in the eradication of it.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	But know when the patient is forced to have that tooth eradicated, that firmly you must certify which tooth is the painful one, for often the pain deceives the patient and makes him think it is in a healthy tooth, and you eradicate that one and the pain does not cease until the bad and painful tooth is eradicated, for we have already seen this by the operation of the barbers.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Therefore, as you must certify which tooth is the painful one, and that you know well, then know that you must scarify in the circuit of the tooth with a spatula in which there is some virtue, until it is dissolved from the tooth of the gum of all parts, and then move that with your fingers, or with subtle forceps at the beginning little by little until that you loosen it.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And then, with a strong hold, grasp it firmly with your fingers or with a strong grip, and place the head of the patient between your teeth that you well hold so that it does not hurt him, and then pull the tooth according to rectitude in a manner that you do not break it, nor give the patient greater pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And therefore, if it is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments, and put that one below it from all parts with facility and exert the removal of it as it was done at the beginning.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	But if the tooth is broken or corroded, then know that you must compress with cloth that broken piece and tighten that with the extremity of a subtle ray so that it is not broken in the hour of your constriction upon it with your fingers.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And know that you must operate exquisitely with scarification in the circuit of all parts of the gum and guard much your strength that you do not break that and remain a part of it, and return upon the patient with malice that is greater than the first pain of it.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And guard yourself that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their fisting and audacity over the eradication of theirs, because they do not administer what we have recommended; for many times they make come upon the men maladies great ones which are more difficult to be extracted, and the roots of them remaugulated all, or some of those, or what you extract that with some bones of the mandible as many times as we have testified.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And after the eradication of it, the mouth be washed with wine caut or wine agre with salt.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	And if it should flow of blood thereby, as many times it should, then take some quantity of zegi and sprinkle it upon the wound, and if you do not confer that zegi, cauterize.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The form of the forceps and subtle fingers with which the tooth is pulled at the beginning should be of long extremity, of short handle and thick, so that they are not bent when you must operate with them.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And be so as sometimes of thick handle so that when you tighten with them they are not bent, be short extremities.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And be made of Indian iron, descentment made of straight extremities, and in the extremities of those be teeth of which some introne in the others and tighten by strong constriction descent, and some times the extremities of those be the form of the beak of a bird which has the name ciconia, so it is guanta, and are of strong constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter .xxx i.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	Of the eradication of teeth and of the extraction of the bones of the mandibulas broken.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you must the eradication of a tooth which is broken remain some cause, then know that you must put upon the place a poultice with border for a day or for two until the place be mollified; and then introduce some algesti or fingers the extremities of which are assembled to the beak of a bird called ciconia or guanta, the form of the forceps:
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The extremities of them be made from the root as if it were a lime or an awl.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you do not obey to your assignment with these forceps or fingers, then know that you must cave upon the root and scrape all the flesh and introduce the instrument which has the name atali, so it is a small lever of which the form is this:
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And be of short extremity thick a little, and not be embedded so that it is not broken.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	Therefore, if by this the root is forgotten, well is it; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is of triangular extremity in which there is some thickness:
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	The form of the second instrument is that it be triangular and of more subtle extremity.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And already so helped with this instrument having two ramps of which this is the form near the following:
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And other instruments which I will describe in the scraping of teeth; for the help is done with this instrument which is assembled to a large onion, and this is the shape:
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	Of the triangular, twisted or short extremity, which is some thickness, and not enclosed so that it is not twisted.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And another thing you know that the instruments of the teeth are moving and similarly the other instruments.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	But the wise and subtle artificer in the art, finds for himself according to what to him signifies the operation and the diverse ailments; for they are of the ailments to which the ancients did not say nor placed proper instruments, for the forms of diverse species.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the bone of the jaw or of the other bones of the mouth is twisted, or if you can, then it is cured on that in its place with what is convenient to it of the instruments and forceps which we have said in the extraction of the roots of the teeth, and help gives with the gesture of which this is the shape:
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if there is any thickness little by little, and it is inserted or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until the bone of all is set; and then restore the place with medicines convenient to that.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if in the bone is a small puncture, then root that of that puncture and of its blackness, and cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter .xxxii.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	Of the cure of the prominent teeth above the others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	When the teeth are prominent not according to their natural course, for those the shape is gone, and mostly when it happens to women, and mostly to the venerable old ladies; therefore, since you consider: if a tooth is nothing near another tooth, and it is not possible to suture or liniment of it, then root that; but that it is not annexed to another tooth, then you incise that with this instrument of which this is the shape; and it is similar to a pig's snout, and it is made of Indian iron of a sharp moving extremity.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	And let your incision be with which you incise that in too many days for the hardness of the tooth, and that it is not damaged another of the teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if the prominent tooth is exposed to filing, then file that with a file of Indian iron of which this is the shape:
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	And let it all be of Indian iron and the margin well-made; and be of small pointed points as a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth be filed little by little in many days with facility, so that no other tooth is damaged and broken.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then line that at the end, and root that with scalpels.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if the tooth of which one part is twisted and it is hurting the tongue, then when you file that until the sharpness of that fraction is stayed and smoothed, and it is filled so that the tongue does not hurt it and the word does not corrupt.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Of the restoration of damaged teeth with a filling of gold or silver.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	When accidents happen to the teeth in front with concussion and removal by percussion or by fall, and the patient cannot strengthen on what it manages, and you have cured that with styptic medicines, and it has not been of any use your cure, then for so that it does not break is made in those that are strengthened with a filling of gold and not of silver, because silver becomes green and soon you can see it after a few days, but gold at no time is changed.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And let the filling be in such subtlety and thickness according to the quantity that can enter between the teeth; and the shape of the filling is that you take the filling and take the double of it between two healthy teeth, and then that you increase with two tortuosities of the filling between two damaged ones, or if one or many, until the filling reaches the healthy tooth of the other side.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	And then iterate the tamping within the part of which you began, and strengthen your hand with facility and skill so that it is not damaged.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And let your squeezing with which you strengthen the filling be of the roots of the teeth that it does not escape.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	And then incise the extremities of the superfluous filling with forceps or tweezers, and add those in each place with gesture, and convert them and hide them between the healthy tooth and the damaged tooth, so that it does not cause injury to the tongue.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And then smooth that as tightly as a Roman.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	But if it is loosened or broken, strengthen that or those with another filling in such a manner in all its time.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And this is the shape of the teeth and the figure of the rectification of two healthy teeth and two damaged ones, as well as these tied:
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And when it is done that a tooth or two are returned to their places after the fall of each one, and they are grown back as we have recounted, and that they are remaugged.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And this is done only by good artificers and wise men.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And sometimes it is fitted some cause of the bones of the cow, and it is made of them as the shape of a tooth, and it is placed in the place where the tooth is missing, and it is strengthened as we have said, and it remains and serves with that for a long time.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Chapter .xxxiv.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	Of the incision of the ligament which comes in the tongue and prohibits speech.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This ligament which comes from under the tongue sometimes is natural with which man is born, or accidental and caused by a plague which is already consolidated.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	And the operation in it is that men open the mouth of the patient, his head existing in the tieu se; and elevates his tongue, and then incisions that ligament nerve according to the latitude within which the tongue is freed from its recess.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	But if in that there is some hardness or knot, and this is due to the consolidation of plague, then you throw oil and split that by the latitude within which you have incised the ligament and the knot is dissolved.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	And guard yourself that no fissure is made in the skin of the flesh and that you split here the artery and blood comes.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And then wash the vestiges of the incision with water or with wine or with warm water; and then place the tongue in the mouth; so it is the way which holds the patient's tongue in each night so that it is not consolidated again.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	But if blood flows, place on the location vitriol trissat; but if the blood flows, then cauterize the location with a cautery of tin, which is suitable for this.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And this cure with the other causes within which it is healed.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter .xxxv.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Of the extraction of a ranula from under the tongue.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	Sometimes an abscess occurs under the tongue, resembling a small lump, which prohibits the tongue from its natural operation; and often it is magnified within which the mouth is filled.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	And the operation in it is that men open the mouth of the patient, seeing in front of the sun and considers the abscess.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see it of dark color or of black, hard, to which the patient does not feel sensation, then do not touch that because it is gangrenous.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	And if it is inclined to whiteness, in which there is moisture, then you put the oil in it, and incisions it with a subtle spatula, and incisions it from all parts; and if blood comes to you during the hour of your operation, then you place above the zegi trissat, that is vitriol, within which the blood is restrained.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then return to your work within which you had treated it with compliment of it, within which it is washed with wine and salt; and cure this with the other cure with water within which it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.	Chapter .xxxvi.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	Of the extraction of an abscess of the ears and of that which is nothing in the throat and of the other abscesses.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When in the throat it hurts, so are the glands which are assembled with a lump, which sometimes occur outside and are called boils, which when you cure them with water as we have said in the division and it is not healed, then you consider if the abscess is hard, of dark color, of little sensation, then do not touch that with iron.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron because of the flow of blood; let it rest within which it is matured, and then either you will remove it, or it will burst by itself.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	And if it is of white color, soft, and the root of it is subtle, then that is the one that should be incised.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the operation in it is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess of it has already rested with a complete rest or if it is diminished with any diminution; and then do so that the patient stands before the sun, and his head be in the tieu se, and open the mouth of him, and the servant takes between his hands, pressing the tongue of him from below with a noble instrument of which this is the form:
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it is made of silver or of brass, and it is subtle like a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	Therefore, as you press with that the tongue and it is shown to you the abscess, and gaze upon that with your eyesight, then take oil and put it in the wound, and pull that to the parts outside as much as you can.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Other water that you pull some cause from the tunics, and then incision that with the instrument of which this is the form:
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And it is assembled like forceps, however the extremities of it are curved, so that the orifice of each one is in the straight of the other, very sharp, the one which is of iron indi embedded.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	But if this instrument is not present to you, then incision that with a spatula of which this is the form of it: And it is sharp on one part, not sharp on the other part.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And since you have incised one well, incision the other according to this same manner of incision, and then the incision the patient wash with warm water
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if there is a flow of blood, wash with water of decoction of the bark of millefolium or of myrtle leaf and similar to those of the stiptic causes within which the flow of blood is restrained, and then cure this within which it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And sometimes there are born in the throat other abscesses other than those boils, and incision those according to what I have said in the incision of two wells equally.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And I had already treated a woman of an abscess which was located in the throat of her, which abscess had a brownish color, of little feeling, which had already closed the throat of her, and the woman breathed with tight meat, and had already prohibited her from eating and drinking water, and she had already arrived at death if it had not been for a day or two.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had already grown so much that it had two openings through which it exited.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	Therefore, I treated her fistularly and stayed in one of the openings, and I pulled out that one, and a large portion of it was thrown out of it, and then I incised that one where it understood from the other opening, and then I opened the mouth of it, and I compressed its tongue, and then I stayed the opening in that abscess.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then I abscised a large portion of it, and it did not flow from it except a little blood.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	Therefore, the throat of that woman was absolutely closed, and she began to drink water immediately, and then I ate food, so I did not stop inciding that abscess many times for a long time, and abscesses succeeded in place of that one, which incision entered while it was prolonged.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Therefore, I made a needle and cauterized the throat of her, so as to add nothing more; and then I walked around and did not know what God had done to her from then on.
Capitol .xxxvii.	Chapter .xxxvii.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	Of incision of a boil when it is abscesses.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	When catarr arises in the boil, and it is abscesses and is long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the part below thick and round, and then it is called a bubo.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	But when it is cured with what we have said in the division, and it does not compare its cure, and it is seen many times that the abscess cauterized is already gone from it and it is subtle, then you should incisions that which is aggregated round; and if it is to that length, and it is bloody, of brownish color or black, and it is not felt in it, then you should attempt the incision of it, because in that there is fear over the patient.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	And when you see that according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, that you should make the patient lie down and press the tongue of him with an instrument of which you process its form, and then place the opening in the navel, and pull that down and incise it with one of the two instruments which are said in the incision of two wells.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And you should not incise that one but that which is adjusted over the natural term its addition, because if you incise it more, you will lead to its speaking.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And after the incision, use that which has been recommended in the incision of two wells, and cure that until it is healed.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	But if the patient was frightened by the incision of it, then you should use a needle in the cauterization of it its fear, and the manner of the cautery in it is nothing but with sharp water, and it is that you place the head of the patient in your hand, and then press the tongue of him with the instrument which we have said, and then take from the water which we have said in the chapter of cauterization, and compare it with that living cause, and place that one not thick nor subtle, and from that one fill the concavity of the instrument of which this is the shape:
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	Let the extramitat of its concavity in which the medicine is placed be as the concavity of a spoon of ray, and place the instrument with the medicine on the boil, and the patient yawns on his side so that saliva or mucus of the mouth of that one flows through the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not descend from that one for any cause over the throat of him and that it leads to that.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then with your hand on the medicine, and express that on the uvula for the space of half an hour until you see that one being darkened and sedated by the bite of the medicine.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you want, take a cotton and envelop that over the extremity of the ray, and immerse the cotton in the medicine, and introduce the ray with the cotton into a tube of about, until the cotton adheres in that tube, and do this as many times as you can achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and then remove that one as it dries and falls about three days or four.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you were to say that you repeat the medicine, repeat that one, and after the cauterization abstergeys in the circuit of the uvula with cotton immersed in border, and modify with that which is in the circuit of it of the medicine, and be washed with cold water, and be cured for the moment with embrocation, and dedicate with gargles until it is healed.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And this kind of cure is more saving than incision and more long of fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	Sometimes the uvula is cured with that which is more subtle than cauterization and incision, because it is cured with fumigation in this manner: take calamus, hyssop, origan, rue, siccated arabic, chamomile, borage and similar to those of the herbs, and adjust all those causes, or some of them, in an olla, and be submerged with hot water, and boil; and the olla be well washed with decent lut, and be in the middle of the olla a hole, on which be placed an instrument concavity of ram according to this manner; be made of silver or of ram.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And the extremity is introduced into the mouth of the patient until the vapor reaches the uvula above the palate, until the uvula is moved and obscured.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	And then iterate over those moved veins until it is dry, and guard yourself that you do not do this cure at the beginning of the emergence of abscesses, because it would too much tighten in the abscess, and in the case that you do this, you must declare the abscess of it caut.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	But if this instrument is not present to you, then take a cane and compose in the extremity of it a hood of wood, so that the mouth of the patient be covered, because the hood of wood prohibits the vapor from burning the mouth.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure is good with health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter .xxxviii.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	Of the extraction of thorns and of what adheres in the throat and of the other causes.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	Many veins adhere in the throat or a thorn of flesh or any other cause.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	Therefore, it is necessary that you extract what of those appears, on which you cast the sight, because you press the tongue with an instrument in front of the sun, so that it is declared to you what is in the throat.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	And what does not appear and is to you hidden in the throat, it is necessary that you make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because a strong force the cause annexed the throat is thrown-up by vomit; or that the patient swallows a piece of bread or a root of lettuce or a piece of dry bread; or press a piece of dry sea sponge, and tie it tightly with thread, and then the patient swallows it, because it comes to the place in which the thorns and are extracted, then it is thrown-up.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And more, take an eel and tie it with thread, and its end is placed and its tail is extracted; or take a worm and suck its head and suck its tail.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	But if it is not thrown-up with those causes which we have said, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And it is thicker than a small ray, and in the extremity of it is concavity which you introduce into its throat with ease.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	And hold its head elevated upwards, and guard yourself that the touching of its bone of the throat, so that it is elongated to its body and with that which pushes the bone or the thorn, or that the physician with his hand.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	But however, that the patient that is introduced is better, for his science of the place of the cause annexed and pushes in down, and pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, all that according to the quantity which is to him prepared before it is thrown-up.
Capitol .xxxix.	Chapter .xxxix.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Of the extraction of bloodsucker annexed to the throat.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When it is medicated bloodsucker with what we have said in the division of the cure with medicines and does not confer, consider then in the throat of the patient to the sun, because you have compressed the tongue of it with the instrument which to you we have recommended.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	Therefore, if you see the bloodsucker, extract it with a small pin or with a subtle gesture decently.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not to you possible to extract with that, then take a concave cannula and introduce that into the throat of the patient, and then place in the concavity of the cannula a burning iron, and do this as many times (until the bloodsucker is dead and is removed from the throat) and abstain the patient all day of water.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	And then press a vessel full of cold water, and work the mouth of it in that, and wash the mouth with that; and do not swallow of that any cause and evil the water one hour after another with its hand, because the bloodsucker as soon as it feels the water catz.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	But if it is not thrown-up with what we have recommended, then subfumigate the patient with cymice or with asafoetida by the instrument which we have recommended in the subfumigation of the uvula.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	Do this, so in that it falls.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And it is another way of operation in the subfumigation of that, is that you take a bowl in which there are burning embers and the bowl is covered with a cover in the middle of which there is a hole, and it is composed in that hole the extremity of the instrument; and then let go downwards the subfumigation; and place the patient his mouth at the extremity of the cannula, and close his mouth so that the subfumigation is not thrown-up until you know that the subfumigation has arrived at the bloodsucker, because the bloodsucker as soon as it falls.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if it does not catch, then you iterate the subfumigation many times, and abstain the patient from drinking, and eat causes salty and alhs, and do not drink water, and thus necessary is that with this regimen it be thrown-up.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	And this is the form of the instrument with which the bloodsucker of the throat is treated when it is seen; and it is similar to forceps as you see, except that in it there is some curvature:
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	which is placed in the throat, and the extremity of it is similar to the beak of a stork, which is gaunt, in which it is sharpened with a file, so that, when compressing any cause, that does not leave it.
Capitol .xl.	Chapter .xl.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	In which is the sum of the sermon in the opening of abscesses and in their section.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	Abscesses are special sores, of many kinds, according to what we remember of them, of each one in this book.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And they are diverse in their perforation and section by two ways, of which one is by the species of abscesses in themselves; and by what we understand of the humidities.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And the second way is according to the places where they occur in the body, for the abscess that occurs in the head is different from the abscess that occurs in the buttock; and the abscess in the fleshy place is different from the abscess that occurs in the joint; and to each of them is its own treatment by operation.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	And more than abscesses there are some that ought not to be perforated but rather when the pus is ripe in them or the completion of them.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	There are other abscesses that ought to be drained when they are ripe, and not when they are fully matured according to their completion, just as abscesses that are near the joints, for when an abscess occurs near a joint, its being is prolonged until it can be drained, and then it is often corrupted the ligaments or nerves of that joint, so that it causes contraction of that limb; or it is an abscess near a principal member, and if you delay the perforation of it until it is fully ripe, it will spread to the principal member; or it is near the buttock, therefore perforate it before it is ripe; and you ought not to perforate it crude, of non-completed digestion, but the one that is near the buttock, so that you can prevent the protrusion of it and its elongation to the parts behind the buttock, and a fistula is made, or that it is done in the term of it that it is not healed.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	But more than that, you ought to know the hour of the perforation of the abscess, and thus it is when it is ripe.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	And you ought to know that it is ripe when there is the cessation of pain and the cessation of fever, and according to the diminution of the heat and of the pulse, and the acuteness of the head of the abscess, and the other signs.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And that you ought to know the perforation to be done in the place pus after the abscess and pus coming from the cure of the eminence.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And the perforation always be done along the length of the flesh or of the body, if the abscesses are in the parts of the arms or of the feet, and in the places of the tendons, of the nerves, of the arteries; and, lastly, in all places equal in which there is no reflection; for in those that are reflected, use of perforation according to that member.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	But when the abscess is in a fleshy place, then it is better that you let the perforation of it until it is confirmed the digestion of it according to completion, as we have said; for if you perforate that before it is ripe, it is prolonged the course of the pus of it and of much filth, and often the lips of it are hardened and the depth of it.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	But some abscesses are perforated according to the width of the flesh or of the body, according to the necessity, or according to what the member requires.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And you ought to administer a small perforation, and in large abscesses a large perforation and many sections according to the diversity of the greatness of the abscesses.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And others are of abscesses in which the incision ought to be concave and be incised, when it is done so that bread is made and it is done in a term that it already follows, just as the one that occurs in trops of boils and buboes.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And of those are those that are incised with a section having three angles; and of those is the one in which it is incised as the figure of a myrtle leaf, just as the abscesses of the angles.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And of them are those in which a round incision and a lunar incision, and similar to those are administered.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	But that one in which there is no such as their abscesses are superficial, you ought to perforate that with a superficial perforation, or flat only.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	And you ought when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, that you perforate it and do not take that you extract all the pus in that hour; have extracted from it one part, and then close the abscess until the next day, and then extract a larger part, and then do this many times according to gradation until it is completely drained.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	And especially if the patient is of a weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old person in decrepitude, for the animal spirit many times is resolved with the egress of the pus, and often the patient dies, and you operate on them.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	And guard this chapter with great care, and in the way you perforate these abscesses, you ought to abstain from the plagues and consider therefore if the plague of the abscess is few, or is a flat section, then you administer the poultices of it or of a counter-poultice; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the perforation are many, then you ought to put a piece of cloth in each tract until they come together.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if in the abscess is incised a part of the incision or has concaved it in the circuit, then you ought to cover it with old cloth or with a thread made of linen of it, as when you have treated poultices or dressings, its moisture; and strengthen that in the third day; and then process this and cure it with what is due of the dressings until it is healed.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	But if blood flows during the operation, then you administer cold water and vinegar to which you have placed a cloth, and place that over the area of the blood flow many times.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	But if the bleeding persists, then you must administer regimen and cure as I have recommended in many places in this book and elsewhere.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	But if it is in winter, and the location of the abscess is a place of many nerves, then you must enfund pulvils in wine and oil caut, and place those on the area.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you must place poultices soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, and all that be cold until the third day, as we have said, and then you must open the abscess and cleanse it and administer in its care what is appropriate until it is healed.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	And thus is what is necessary of the knowledge of the cure of abscesses universally, but according to the way of distinction I have already said of all abscesses in what manner is the way of its cure by chapters individually.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter .xli.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	Of the section of abscesses that come in the nape of the neck.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the nape of the neck small abscesses, and so of kinds of nodes which contain tunicas that are to their making; and the kinds of them are many.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And of them are pimples, and of those are those which contain humidity similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And of those are those which contain humidity similar to powder, and resembling to them; and of those are those which are stony, hard.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those there is no fear, as you must the exterior of those does not make contrary artery.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And the operation in section of those is that you probe those with an instrument the form of which comes near thus, the which is called entromes, until you know that it contains.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	Because if that which contains is humidity, then you split that with a section according to the length by superficial section according to this form:
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And begins in the section of the line of .B. within to the line of .G. Therefore, as the humidity is evacuated, then you excoriate that skin that contains that humidity, and do not leave of that any cause of all, because troops many times returns, if there remain of that any cause.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	And then you submerge the wound in Egyptian ointment, if it is present, and if not, in water and salt; and fill with that the wound and leave it in until the next day, because with that you corrode all that is rotten of that skin.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	And then repeat on that wound with Egyptian ointment second and third times if you need it, until you trust that there is no rotten any cause of that skin; then cure the wound with ointment until it is healed.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And if abscess contains fatty nodes, then you incise that according to this form:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	with a section having the form of a cross, and get oncis between two lips of the section and scrape that from all parts, and exert your virtue in extraction of the tunic which contains that.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	But if your artery makes contrariety, then do what I have told you first.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	And similarly do in the stony abscess of section and cure according to what I have told you; and section over stony abscess is easier, because it is of little blood and of little humidity.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	And sometimes there are some of these abscesses which are in the head in some men with which of all there is no humidity; the cause of which is because I incised upon an abscess in the head of an old woman and retrieved the abscess as if it were a deaf, rough, white one, which could not be drunk, and if anyone was with that struck, it would plague him.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	But in the other abscesses accidents in the head other this is not this chapter, as the abscesses that come to the heads of children and you have the roots of the ears, but the section of all these is superficial.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	And pause the perforation of those from the part lower of them so that the body be relieved of the sania to the parts lower.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	And then cure those with what is appropriate to that cure.
Capitol .xlii.	Chapter .xlii.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	Of the section of scrophulas which happen in the neck.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	Many times these abscesses develop in the neck and in the armpits and in the groin; and sometimes they happen in the other parts of the body.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And those that happen in the neck, and so many that are generated among them, and all scrofula of those is within its proper tunic, and as in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have recounted.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And the kinds of these scrophulas are many, because of those some are stony, and of those some contain humidities, and of those are malignant those which do not obey to cure.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	Therefore in that which you see of good disposition in the Touch, of which the color of that which is manifest is proper to the color of the neck, and is mauguda to all parts, and is not annexed to the nerve of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and is not pre-occupied, then you must incise that with superficial siccio from the part below to the part above of the body of the line of .G. within the line of .B., and scrape that from all parts, and extend the lips of the neck with onci, or with many oncis if you have need of those, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract that little by little.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is more caution that the vein or nerve be not incised.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	And let the spatula not be too sharp, that it does not wound your hand in cutting, or that it disturbs the patient, and that you cut only what is necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and prohibit yourself from your operation, then you would pause in the wound, and put vitriol or other powders in it, which cause the flow of blood, and tighten the wound, and leave that within which the sharpness of the abscess rests, and the wound is softened, and begins to be pus-filled.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When the blood is cut.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	Therefore, return to your operation while you have completed it.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	And then inquire with your little finger if there is any cause of the other small abscesses, therefore cut those and cleanse them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is at the root of the large abscess, cover it then that you do not cut that abscess from its root.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	Cover it then with a strong double cloth and let it fall by itself, so that it does not harm itself.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	And then fill the wound with old cotton which you have already submerged in Egyptian ointment, and then cure that.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you cut that abscess entirely, then cover it so that you adjust the two lips of the wound and sew them so quickly that there is no remaining superfluity.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	But if you see that there is superfluity due to the greatness of the abscess, cover it so that you understand to cut the root of it, and extract it and administer suture and what is said.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	And those of the abscesses that contain humidity, perforate it with a superficial perforation where you see the place of maturation of it, and pause the perforation of that which seizes the pus from the bottom of the body, as we have said.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And then administer perforation, poultices with ointments and similar things to those, so that it corrodes what is remaining of the corruption.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And then when you see the wound already cleansed, then you cure it with ointment of generative flesh until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter XLIII.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	Of the section of the pile of the abscess that happens within the throat.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	The ancients said this section in the throat, and no one in our land has done it.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the inscription of the sermon of those.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	But in men having a squint, cover that the extraction of the throat be avoided, as for that it is not done well for that all the veins and major arteries of the body are here.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	But in those who have abscesses caused in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the disease is not in the canal, cover to use the section of the throat to avoid the damage which is done by perforation.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, cover when we want this, that they cut the throat below three circles of the circles of the throat, or four with a small section for the latitude in that which is between two circles by quantity, that the section be in cartilage, not in the flesh, and this place is convenient for section, because it is deprived of flesh and the blood vessels of it are there.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor is fearful, cover then that he extends the tendon of the throat with an incision, and then make the incision until it reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if he sees any cause of them.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	And then cut the cartilage as we have recommended; and it is significant over the section of the canal by the flame which is of that which is emitted with that which is discolored of it and by the abscess of the voice.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave the wound open for some time.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	Therefore, as the hour is renewed in which perforation is feared, add two lips of the tendon of the wound, and sew that alone if it is cartilage.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And then administer medicines that cause the flesh to grow until it is healed.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And Albucasis says that the sum of the sermon which we have recommended, exposure is not sino that you see that some of these abscesses have already opened the throat of the patient, and the patient has come into death, and the vein of it is separated, and some go to cut the epiglottis so that the patient breathes over the place of the wound by any respiration, and be saved from death.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And for that reason command to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease is consumed; and the malice of it is for three days; and then command so the wound, and cure it until it is healed.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And what I have seen with my own eyes, is that a servant took a knife and thrust it into his throat and cut with it a part of the canal of the lung, and I was called to the cure of him, and I returned the woman as it is mooed of the dead, and uncovered the wound and returned the blood which was emitted from the wound small.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, I was confessed that she had not cut a vein nor guidegi, and the wind was emitted from the wound, and I cured it until it was healed.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And no harm came to the servant if not for a rawness in the voice, and after some days returned to improvement of his dispositions.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that in the section of the epilepsy there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter XLIV.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	Of the incision over the abscess which happens in the throat outside, and is called a hernia of the throat.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	This abscess called a hernia of the throat is a large abscess according to the color of the body, and it moves in women.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	And it is according to two manners, whether it is natural or accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And in the natural one it is not a matter of curing.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	And the accidental one is according to two manners, of which one is similar to fatty nodes, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that is made by a blockage of an artery, and in that one there is fear.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And no cove that it be presumed to him as iron, but in that one which is small.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And you probe that one and investigate it with the finger, and if you find that it resembles a fatty node, and it is not suspended by any of the veins, then you incise it as you would the nodes, and extract it with what contains it from the skin and bursa; and if not, then you scrutinize its whole being, and then cure the area with what is necessary for healing before it is healed.
Capitol .xlv.	Chapter XLV.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	Of the incision of the species of nodes.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	Of nodes there are many species and I have already said all the species of them in the division.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And I want to recount thus the difference between a node and an excrescence as if there were doubt.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore I say that in an excrescence there is heat and fever and violent pain until the boiling of the superfluity subsides; and it is complicated by putrefaction that at that time the fever, pain, and heat cease.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	But in a node there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains that hard lump which is in the sac properly.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And it is according to the color of the body, and the beginning of it is like a cheese and is made so as a vessel, whether it is larger or smaller, and they are according to two species, whether they are fatty and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are many, according to what I said in the division.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you come to the cure of a node, that you explore it and inquire about it at the beginning with the instrument which is called an intromes, according to what will come its form in the chapter which is next to this.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	And the manner of inquiry of abscesses and of all nodes, and it is that you take this instrument and introduce it into the most humid place which you find in the abscess, and you will revolve your fingers with it little by little until you know that the instrument has already penetrated the core.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And then finally your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and you extract the intromes and consider what is emitted in the trace of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if the humidity is flowing out, of whatever color it may be, then you incise it with a superficial incision according to what I have said in the other abscesses.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	And if from the trace of the intromes there is no humidity, then you know that it is fatty.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	And cut over it with an incision having the form of a cross according to this form:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	as you have been taught, and suspend it with tweezers, and excise the core from every part with ease, and guard the skin or sac, if you can, over it and extract that pus with the node.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	But if it is broken in the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus, and many times it is necessary to do so, and then you extract it with pieces until there is no cause of it remaining.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	For if from it there remains any cause, little or much, the node returns according to the most.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you see that from it remains any small part, then fill the wound with some sharp corrosive powders and strengthen the wound, and place on top of it a cautery and cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	And if it is a large node, then you sew the two lips of it and cure it with what is necessary for healing.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	But if a pulsating vein is against it, or not pulsating, then you cut and cauterize the place of zig-zag that is vitriol and leave that straight for two or three days until you can stitch the wound and that the boiling of the blood has subsided; and then return to incise what is broken from the node.
Capitol .xlvi.	Chapter XLVI.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the forms of the instruments necessary in incision and perforation.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those there are the forms of the intromes, and they are of three species, of which one is large, and of those one is medium, and of those one is small.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	The form of the large introme is this:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The form of the medium introme is this:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	The form of the small introme is this:
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	They are made of iron, of lead, of extremities that are decently rounded, so that they fit the entrance into the abscesses.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And these are the forms of the probes, and they are called probes, and one of those is called a berid.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And there are three kinds, for some are large, medium, and small.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	The form of the large one, the form of it:
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The form of the medium one, the form of it:
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	The form of the small one, the form of it:
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	It is convenient that they be for those abscesses and fistulas and buboes so that among those are of the bones and of other causes.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	And they are made round, large, like needles, as well as large stitches with which the wounds are sewn, and they are made of citric metal, or of lead or of iron, or of silver, And the best are when they are made of citric metal.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And they are made the instruments of black feather, the ones that are agreed upon that for those ones be openings the fistulas in the concavity of which are reflections, that be reflected with their lightness with those reflections.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	And they are of three species, for some of them are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and of its stricture.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	Form of the large lead instrument:
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Form of the medium lead instrument:
Forma del experient petit de plom:	Form of the small lead instrument:
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the probes are of many species, for some of them are simple, to which there is only one curvature, and they are of three species: large, small and medium.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And of them are  curved probes, and they are of three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of those are probes having two curvatures, and they are of three species.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of them are having three curvatures, and they are of three species.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	Form of a simple large probe, the form of it:
Forma de unci simple migier:	Form of a simple medium probe:
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a simple small probe, the form of it:
Forma de unci orp gran:	Form of a curved large probe:
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	Form of a curved medium probe, the form of it:
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	Form of a curved small probe, the form of it:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a large probe having two curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	Form of a medium probe having two curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	Form of a small probe having two curvatures:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a large probe having three curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a medium probe having three curvatures:
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	Form of a small probe having three curvatures:
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	And these are the forms of the scalpels with which the nodes and abscesses are cut and scraped, and they are of three species, for some of them are large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of a large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:	Form of the medium scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:	Form of a small scalpel:
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	The extremities of those with which the incision is made are sharp, and the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a manner, but that the incision of the nodes be made carefully, for fear of cutting a vein or nerve, and so that the disease may be healed and tranquility be restored a little by the burning which destroys the excoriation of the abscess.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And these are the forms of spatulas, and they are of three species: large, medium and small, as you see.
La forma de magda gran:	Form of a large spatula:
Forma de magda migier:	Form of a medium spatula:
Forma de magda pauc:	Form of a small spatula:
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	They are made of metal and are similar to a ray with which and alcohol is made.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And it is in the lateral extremity pointed with a spatula hidden and in that one it runs to the inside and outside parts, when you want, as you see.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of spatulas, which are hidden among the fingers during the perforation of abscesses and are not perceived by the patients, and they are of three species: large, medium and small.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And these are the forms of those:
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	The forms of cupping glasses with which the flow of blood is removed, and they are of three species; large, medium and small; the forms of them:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	They are made of citric metal, round with some length, and they are subtle.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	And so that these species of cupping glasses, large, medium and small, be so that by those you remove the flow of blood with speed in need, and then when to you first it is not medicine.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	However, do not use those to remove blood in every location of the body, and do not use them except in fleshy places, such as in the folds of the arms and thighs, and in the folds of the breasts, and of the belly and of the groins, and similar to their fleshy, moist folds.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And sometimes these instruments are made of other small ones, similar to small scorpions, according to this form; by which the blood is removed when it is done by phlebotomy, or by incision of a vein or artery.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Capitol .xlvii.	Chapter .xlvii.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Of the cure of the nipples of men which are assembled from women.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Sometimes the nipples of some men are inflamed as they begin to be hairy, and then the nipples are inflamed and assembled like the nipples of women, and far away, pus.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to him who has this, it is necessary to cut those with a lunar section according to this form, from the line of B. into the line of G., and then scrape the whole thickness, and then fill the wound with a medicament of carnation, and then adjust the two lips of the wound with stitching, and take care of it until it is healed.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the nipple inclines to the sides and is softened by its magnitude as it should in women, then it is cut in two halves, with two sections resembling a lunar figure, of which each one contains the other, until that the major line contains the minor one according to this form of the line of B. and the line of G. And then scrape the groove which is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the fat, and administer what we have said of the suture and the poultices, that which is necessary in the cure until it is healed.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not comply with the incision of this which is to be incised because of the restlessness of the patient, and because of the flow of blood, then it is necessary that you fill the wound with a cloth submerged in corrosive wash and leave it until that corrodes which is the gray matter, and take care of it until it is healed.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter .xlviii.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	Of the perforation of abscesses that come from the nipple.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	These abscesses that come from the nipple are of the species of scrophulas, hard, those which contain a skin that is sac.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And of those there are some that contain humidity; and those that contain humidity must be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G. to the line of B. And as everything is evacuated that is in the abscess of the healthy, then you fill it with old cloth and leave it until the next day.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And then the cloth is removed and it is cured with a convenient wash to it, until it is healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	And if the abscess is of the species of nodes and of the scrophulas, then you divide it as we have said in the section about the scrophulas equally.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	But if the wound is extended in such a way that it is a pockmark, then administer cauterization to it according to what we have said before.
Capitol .xlix.	Chapter .xlix.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	Of the section of abscesses that occur because of an artery or vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When an artery is ruptured, and the groove that is above it is consolidated, then many times abscesses occur. And the signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are by the artery or vein: because when the abscess is by artery it is long aggregated in the front of the body; and that when you pierce the abscess with your fingers, you feel in it a kind of stridor.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	And that which is by vein is red around the manifest of the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And the section on this abscess is an error, and most of all in that which is from the armpits, and in the corners, and in the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very large, therefore it is necessary that its cure with iron be avoided, and that which is in the extremities, or in the head, it must be avoided.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	But on that which is of them by inflammation of the orifice of the artery, divide in the groove a long section; and then open the section with hooks and then the artery, and deliver from the tunics until it is uncovered.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then put on that needle and make it penetrate into the other side, and tighten the artery with a double thread in two places, — which cause you to see in the extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	And then prick the place which is between the two ligaments with a spatula until there is all the blood that is in it, and the abscess is dissolved.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then administer a cure in which it is engendered power until the ligaments fall; and take care of it with convenient washes to water until it is healed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	And if the abscess is by the section of a vein, then it is necessary that you have with your hand that which is possible of the abscess with the groove, and then introduce the needle from the place which you have had from your hand, and make it penetrate; and be in that double thread until you extract that from the other side, and then tie the abscess with a good ligament according to what I have told you in the ligament of the grape of two parts with two extremities of the thread.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	But if you fear that they will extract the thread, then introduce the thread with that needle from all the abscess, by the incision of the first needle, and tighten your threads in four places.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	Then dry the abscess in the middle place of it until when it is issued that which is in it, then you cut the superfluity of the groove, and leave that which of it is tied.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then place on it the powder which you have submerged in wine and oil, and then administer the cure which is made with poultices and washes until it is healed.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	Chapter 1 of the abscess which happens by twisting of nerves.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	Thus as abscesses happen in arteries and veins, and similarly abscesses happen in the nerves when they are struck or happen by excessive work, and by similar means.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And it is made the most in the places of the auxiliary bones or the talus, or in every place where the joints are bad.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And it is a serious abscess, and it is assembled to the color of the other body, and in the major of its dispositions it is of its own and when it is tightened with violence, it feels in the patient a semblance of stupor.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And it is not abscesses joined in the front of the body, and for this it is left the chain, and it is bad to all parts and does not go to the parts ahead or behind.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore those that are in the joints should not be filled with iron, because very quickly they will become inflamed.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	But the one that is in the head or in the front, end the chain with a spatula.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	But if it is a small abscess, then take it with the forceps and cut it from the roots.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is large, then you suspend it with an anchor, and excoriate it, and then close it; and adjust the plate with suture, and cure it until it is healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter .li.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Of the section of abscess which happens from a boil that happens to the belly.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	And it happens to some men growths in the bellies of those and in other parts of the body of those, the ones that are called fungals for similarity to those with fungi, of which the root is subtle and the head of it is thick; and already the lips of those are converses, and it is of those that is small, and it is of those that is very magnified.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And I have already seen one, and in the belly of him were two parts which were more like fungi, and there was no difference between those white, of fine root.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And already the lips of those were turned inwards and were splitting, and humidity was running from it all the time.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	Therefore I incised those and brought out in one of them a weight of about eighteen ounces. And the other about six ounces.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And the operation in the incision of them is that you consider then if the patient is humid, and the color of the boil is white, humid, of subtle root; then you should cut it with a spatula wide, and be in your presence cauterize in the fire, because many times the secretion of it is expelled a lot of blood; and if you see the blood, cauterize it.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you see the patient pale and fearful, guard yourself from incision with iron; but then take a leaden weight recently made, and strengthen it with that boil, the manner of which is that we have said; and leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	And then adjust in the stricture of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease to strengthen the lead more and more in the boil, until it is cut and falls by itself its work.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	But if the boil is of thick root, then in the incision of it there is some cause of fear and of terror, and more so in the one that is in the belly.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	But possibly it is that you should incise the majority of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then cure it until the wound is healed.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	And guard yourself that you do not presume to incise those that are of dusky color, of little feeling, of light regard, because those are cancerous abscesses.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And I will come with a remembrance of cancer to that.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter .lii.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	Of the cure of the prominence of the umbilicus.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	The prominence of the umbilicus is made by many causes; or by fissures of the fascia which is above the belly, and there comes out the web or intestine according to what it should be in the other ruptures; or by blood which flows from the vein or artery according to what is said before, or by contracted wind in it.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	But if it is by fissure of the fascia and by the protrusion of the web, then the color of the abscess is similar to the color of the body; and it is lion its pain, and then appears from various positions.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if it is by the egress of the intestine, then the situation of it with that which we have recounted, of more vehement diversity, and when you press it with your hands it is hidden, and then it returns; and very much is with it so, and it is magnified much by the introduction of bath and vehement work.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if it is by humidity, then it is lion and is not hidden when you press with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it believed.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And if it is by blood, then with these signs appears the abscess to blackness declining.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	But if it is by flesh nothing, then the abscess is serious, thick and hard, and it is placed according to a quantity.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	But if it is by wind, then the touch of it is lion.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	And the operation in it is that you consider then if the prominence of the umbilicus is by blood of artery, or of vein, or by wind; then you should be prohibited from the cure of it, because in that there is fear and terror as you have been taught in the chapter in which I have said the abscesses by artery and by vein.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if the prominence of the navel is due to the hernia or the fabric, then order the patient to hold his leg, and be standing extended; and then feel with your fingers around the entire navel, and then order him to lie between his hands on his back, and then surround it with a spatula broad around the navel on the spot which you have marked with the finger; and then extend the majority of the abscess to the upper parts with a large hook; and then tie it around with a strong thread or with a lead and the manner of tying decent.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And then cut the edge of the extended abscess over the ligament and introduce your finger into that incision and feel for the hernia; and if you have found it or kept it by the ligament, then you extract it and push the hernia to the sides of the belly.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	And if you have found the fabric, then take it with a hook; and cut away the superfluities of it.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	But if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then surround that spot, and then return to your operation; and take two needles and put in those two strong threads and introduce the two needles into the circuit which you have made around the abscess in a manner of cross, which you make penetrate; and then strengthen the abscess in four parts on the needles.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, remove the needles and leave the place until the stretched flesh can fall by itself; or cut it when it is subtle and can be, and then care for it with water that is customary of the ointments until it is healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	And if the prominence of the navel is of flesh nothing in it or by humidity, then order that you excavate the abscess as we have said and extract the blood or the humidity, which you find in it, and then care for it with water that is customary and that consolidates the place.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter .liii.
De curacio de cranc.	Of the cure of cancer.
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	As we have said, in the division, of the species of cancer and in what manner is its cure with medicines, and that it is  avoidable in it the cure with iron because it is not ulcerated; and we have said cancer generated in the marrow and caution of the cure of it.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in a place where it is possible the eradication of it, as of the cancer which is in the nipples or in the groin and their likeness of the limbs allocated to extract all of that, and especially when it is beginning small.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	But when it is antiquated and is large, do not order to it, because I have not been able to heal from that ulcer nor have I seen another, nor that has come to it.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	And the operation in it is when it is allocated as we have said, is that you precede and leave the patient and purge of black bile sometimes, and then bleed him, if a manifest repletion is found.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	And then prepare the patient with the preparation in which he is located with the operation, and then prohibit in the tract hooks which order to it; and then concave from all parts with the good saw careful excavation until no remnant of the roots of it remains.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	And let the blood run, and do not cut it lightly, and express the places, and wipe away the thick blood all with your hand or with an instrument with which is at your disposal of the instruments.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	But if to you makes contrariety of thick blood incision of vein or of artery, then cauterize that until the flow of the blood is ceased, and then care for it with the other cure until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.	Chapter .liv.
De curacio de ydropici.	Of the cure of hydrops.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	We have already recounted, in the division, of the species of hydrops of the water, and the signs of each species, of the cure of it with medicines.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	And that one which is cured with iron is only the species of althitas alone, and it is not approached with iron to the species of tympanistres nor to the species of hypoarcha, because that is mortal.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	And when you have already medicated this species of hydrops tympanistres with medicines and do not confer your medication, then consider, that if the patient already is achieved debility, or is with that other illness another hydrops, as if it is in his cough or body of belly and similar to those, then guard yourself that you do not medicate him with iron, because fear is upon it.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	But if you see the patient of exuberant virtue, and in him there is no other illness but hydrops so alone, and not a child nor old, then the manner of the operation of it is that you elevate the patient between your hands, and the minister then expresses the belly of him with his hand, expelling the water to the side below the pubic bone, and then take a spatula spines according to this form:
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	be of two parts sharp long, of sharp extremity as a spatula; but however be in it some shortness little by little, so that in the operation with it you do not pass into the hernia, and that you lead it.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider if the generation of hydrops is of part of the hernias, because then order that you with the section you stay away from the navel for the quantity of three digits to the sides below, in the right of him over the pubic bone.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	But if the generation of hydrops is by illness of the liver, then your section be left of the navel for three digits.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	And if the generation of him is by the measles, then his section shall be on the right side.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	And do not make the incision on the side where the patient wants to lie, so that the superfluities do not flow to that place freely.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then pierce with the instrument the whole bone, and then insert into that incision, and raise your hand with the spatula between the bone and the skin, and you exfoliate that; and if the quantity of a nail or thereabouts.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then pierce the skin until the spatula reaches the desired location, and it is the place of the water.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the shape:
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	and it is similar to a silver cannula; it is made of silver or brass or lead, to which in the lower part of it there is a small hole, and on the sides of it there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and the end of it is made blunt according to the manner of a feather, as sometimes:
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And at the end of it most sovereign is an armlet, because when the instrument reaches the water, then it immediately rises over the instrument, therefore evacuates the water in the middle quantity, because if you evacuate more than that in the hour, very soon the patient will die by the resolution of his animal spirit, or you will bring him to the five-pi that is approaching death.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	But evacuate from that according to the quantity of its virtue and according to what the dispositions of the patient signify to you from the virtue of its pulse and from the goodness of it.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And then extract the instrument, and retain the water which is the cause because it is immediately retained by the bone which retains the hole that is on the skin of it and I recommend to you that you pierce that according to that manner.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And then repeat the instrument the other day if the patient tolerates it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do water for some days with caution, and guard yourself from error so that there does not remain much water.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	But if you fear about the patient, and let out a large quantity of water, then cure him with burial in hot sand, and bathe him in sweat, and in the sunlight wait for a long time; and cure him with drying medicines until he is healed.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And cauterize on the stomach, and the measles and the fig, approach the extraction of the water, according to what I have recounted in that which is preceding.
Capitol .lv.	Chapter .lv.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	Of the cure of children who are born with the places of the urine unpierced.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Sometimes some of the children are born from the womb of their mother and the head of their mixture is not pierced (or it is straight hole or it is not in its place).
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, it is necessary to repair with the perforation of it as soon as it is born with a very fine spatula according to this form:
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And then place in the hole a fine lead nail and tie that, and keep it for three days or for four.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when he wants to urinate, it will be re-opened and urinate; and then return that.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	And if you do not place the lead, it is already possible that the urine which goes over the place, does not let this opening.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	But that one of whom the hole is straight be medicated with a lead nail, as we have said, for too many days until it is amplified.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	But those in which the hole is not in its place, are ledgers, the cause because of those, the one who is born and the hole is the end of the head of the vagina because he cannot urinate to the sides of his, until he elevates the vagina with his hand to the upper parts; and it is not to his generation, because his sperm cannot reach the mother according to rectitude, and it is a very bad illness.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	And the manner of the operation in him is that the patient be turned on his back, and then extend the head of the vagina of him with your left hand with vehement extraction, and inscribe the head of the head of the vagina of the place of the perpucii with a sharp spatula, as it is inscribed of a feather, or that you do not scrape any part, so that the middle of him comes to resemble the head of the vagina and that the hole falls in the middle place according to what is necessary.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And guard yourself in your operation of flux of blood, because many times accidents happen in this; and pause yourself to him with the water that you have separated the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.	Chapter .lvi.
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	Of albater which happens in the prepuce at the head of the vagina and of corruption and blackness and adherence of the prepuce of the head of the vagina.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Many times this albater happens in the vagina and it is a prominence of bad flesh.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And of that one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	The non-malignant, because you suspend it with a fine unci and cut that until that whole thing is gone; and then place on that a poultice submerged in Egyptian ointment; and then that, cure him with diaphicon ointment until it is healed.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the albater is malignant, of bad color, then because you administer cauterization to the incision of it and the base of it.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	But if there is a tear in the foreskin of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the tear is inside the foreskin and the other part is outside, then you must treat the tear that is inside first while it is still fresh; and then you treat the one outside, because when you treat the outside one at the same time as the inside one, it is not certain that it will not be torn.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	And if there are accidents in the genitals and foreskin, blackness and corruption, then you must cleanse all that which is already corrupted and which is going to be corrupted or which is already corrupted; and then apply a poultice on that with honey, which is mixed with flour of the rind of millet and of herbs, well crushed and sifted.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And treat that with the other cure until it is healed.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	But if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery according to this form:
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	Because a cautery is useful in two dispositions at once, so it is for a flow of blood and for the plague when it is corrupted.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if the head of the penis is corrupted and destroyed all at once, then you must introduce into the flesh of the foreskin a lead pipe so that the patient urinates through that.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not happen except in the one whose foreskin is his, and on which circumcision is not required; and when adhesion happens because of plague or abscess) you must excoriate with a blunt spatula until it is dissolved the ligament and the head of the penis is freed from all sides.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	And if it is difficult to separate them delicately, then you must excoriate with a spatula some cause of the head of the penis and the foreskin, and thus it is because the foreskin, when it is thin, easily perforates with its thinness.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a thread of linen, the one which has already been soaked in cold water so that they do not adhere again.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	And then it should be treated with a styptic until it is consolidated.
Capitol .lvii.	Chapter .lvii.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Of the purification of children and the cure of what happens to those who are circumcised.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	Circumcision is not a solution of continuity like other plagues: however, since it is of our operation and our will, and it is done to those of our own, it is necessary that we assign in that better operation and easier way less loss to health.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	Therefore, I say that the ancients did not write about circumcision in some of their books, because they did not use it in their laws, and it is only because we have acquired it through experience, the cause of which is that I have found the majority of the artificers and barbers use circumcision and purification with a knife and with torches; and they use ligatures with thread and incisions with the fingernail.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	And I have already tried all these manners and have not found better purification with scissors, with a ligature with thread than with purification with the fingernail, because many times the cord escapes the lower part, because the foreskin has two tunics, and the tunic remains further down, and very easily it is forced to another incision and certain pain.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	And in purification which is done by alphecati, and is digital, of which the barbers use, the incision of the extremity of the male member is not guaranteed, because very easily it enters into the opening of it.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	But in the operation with the fingernail, very easily it obscures iron and corrupts your operation.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	And the cord of the child is short by nature, and many times it appears in such a manner that there is no need for purification, and I have seen that.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	But of the purification which is done with scissors and ligatures with thread, the goodness, experience has shown me, because the scissors are of proportional incision, because the sharpness that is below is as the sharpness that is above; and therefore as you press your hand so proportionally to two sharpnesses, and you incise according to a comparison in one time; and it is done compression of the thread with a figure containing the cord of the penis entirely, with which there is no error at all.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	And the manner of the first operation is that you make the child lie down mostly if it is of those that understand a little, that you do nothing but that you tie the thread in its penis only, and that you leave that in for another day.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then do that to make him happy in all that manner that is possible to him according to what he receives in his understanding.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And then make him lie down between your arms, prepared, and do not be seen by him; and hide the scissors in your hand or below your leg, that the child does not see them nor any other of the instruments.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then introduce your hand into his penis and blow into the cord, and pull that until it is emerged the head of the penis, and then purify that of what is attached to it of dirt.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And then tie the place signed with thread double, and below that one little the second ligature, and then put your finger on the place of the ligature below with good retention, and incise between the two ligatures.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then elevate the cord slightly and extract the head of the penis; and let the blood run little by little, because it is better; and place powder above and on the powder place a cloth in which is spread a mixture of honey with water, mixed with fresh rose oil; and leave that on it for another day; and treat that with cure until it is healed.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	The shape of the forceps for modification, this is the shape:
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let one pair of limbs be blunt and the other sharp, so that the ram of the key does not come out, and the length of the two points be like the length of two equal hand spans.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	But the error in modification is when too much of the intrinsic tendon is removed, or a part of it should be cut.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Therefore, as you extend that one with your fingernail in front of the abscess and cut it according to equality.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then extract that one with an instrument and cut it.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	But if three days have passed, and that which is swollen remains, then you should let it go until the abscess softens, and excoriate it with ease, and cut it according to what you have prepared.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And guard yourself from the head of the abscess, for it would not be good for you.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore cure it with that which the plague consolidates from the powders which we have recommended in the treatise of powders.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if it is cut from the tendon beyond measure, and it is swollen in the parts above, it will not be good for you.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	But cure it with that which we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Chapter .lviii.
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	Of the cure of urine retained in the bladder.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by an obstruction made by a stone or by a clot, or by a tumor or by a carbuncle, and similar to those of which we have said of the ways of cure in the division.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	And if the urine is not dissolved, and the retention of it is due to a stone which is already in the neck of the bladder, then the patient should be bent over his knees.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	And then place his feet on his buttocks and extend his belly from the part above his buttocks, and the patient strains as much as is possible for him.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Therefore, then the neck of the bladder is constricted so that the expulsion of the stone is towards the rear parts, so that the urine is released.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	And if it is not dissolved with what we have said and the cause is very vehement on the patient, then you should administer an extraction from him with an instrument which is called a syringe, of which this is the shape: It should be of silver and be a subtle cone, as well as a pipe of bird bone with the subtlety of a ray long in the likeness of a palm and a half, to which there is a subtle pipe at the head of it.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And the manner of the emission of the urine by this is that you take the flexible tube and tie it in the middle with a thread or cord for a good binding; and insert the ends of the tube into the part below the syringe, and cut with the forceps if there is any superfluous cause of the thread, but introduce it into the pipe with vehemence, and then insert the syringe with border and with album of egg.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make the patient lie on his back, and massage his bladder and the abscess with oil of roses, and olive oil, and water.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	And then insert the syringe with ease until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and then double the abscess above at the level of the navel; and then push the syringe into it; and then push it until it reaches the bladder, and that the patient should be made to feel the cause, and it is not done according to this order, but the meat in which it goes is tortuous.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And then extend the tube with the thread little by little, so that the urine moistens the thread.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then extract it and do for the cure of urine, and use the syringe, do not cease to do this and use the syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relief.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter .lix.
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	Of the quality of clysterization of the bladder with clampcedra and with similar instruments which are according to this.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there occurs in the bladder ulceration or abscess, or a clot in it, or it is constricted by a tumor, and you want to distill waters and medicines into it, then it is done with an instrument which is called a clampcedra, and this is the shape of it:
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	...but in the middle of it is closed, so it is closed.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in it there are three tubes: two on one side, as well as the other.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning is the concave place, in which the water is poured, and according to the quantity that it is poured, it is added, until when any cause is drawn from the humidities, it is drawn, and when it is expelled, it is drawn with water, and when it is expelled long, according to what the clampcedra does with which naphtha is poured into the battles of the sea.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	Therefore, as you want to pour humidities into the bladder, insert the end of the clampcedra into the humidity, and draw with it the water that is poured into the upper parts, so that the humidity is drawn into the concavity of the clampcedra.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	And then insert the end of the clampcedra into the abscess as we have recommended in the syringe; and then push the humidity with the water that you push it with, so that that humidity reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient feels it.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	Shape of the clyster subtle am which the bladder is clystered, and that is the form:
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And it is made of silver or lead, of which the head must be like a small feather, and below it a tube is attached.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And then take the bladder by the mouth, and place in it the moisture that you want to clysterize into the bladder, and then tie that between two with a strong double ligature, and heat that moisture over the fire.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then introduce the extremity of the clyster into the rectum.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then tightly press your hand on the bladder with the moisture and structure descending until the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	But if you do not have a bladder, then you take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; and pierce that throughout its entirety; and then insert a strong thread into those holes, so that it is rolled; and then attach the circle so that it is attached to the sofat, because you place in that the water that you want of the humidities, and oils and waters.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	And then you tie that onto the instrument and do with it as you have done with the bladder, and express with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Capitol .lx.	Chapter .lx.
De extraccio de peyra.	Of the extraction of a stone.
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already said in the division the species of stone and cure of it with medicines, and the difference between stone generated in the kidneys and stone generated in the bladder, and the signs of that.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And we have said the stone in which catz operation with a hand, and section.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is lodged in the bladder.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And I am narrating this with a manifest exposition and abbreviation.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Therefore I say that stone generated in the bladder mostly comes to children; and of the signs of it is that the urine that is issued from the bladder is similar to water in its subtlety, and appears in that sand; and the patient feels his rectum, and many times it pains, and then it is dressed; and with that you see the hole in the rectum in many of those.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And it is easier the healing of the children of that into which they have reached fourteen years; and it is difficult healing in the old.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	But in the young it is milder for that which is among those.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And of that from which the stone is larger and the healing is lighter; And if it is little, it is contrary to that.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	Therefore as we come to the healing of that, cove at the beginning of that which we modify the patient with the clyster which extracts all the wound which is in their bowels; because that wound sometimes prohibits the entrance of the stone and the inquiry of it.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then place the patient on their feet and sit them and make them groan so that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or which jumps from that place or sometimes.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then make that cezer between your hands prepared, and the hands of it are left the things of it, so that the bladder is entirely made declining to the parts below.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	And then pierce that and all of that through.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore if you feel the stone in the space, then you take care immediately with a section over it.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if you do not catch all of it from below your touch, then cove that you anoint with oil your said index of the left hand, if the patient is a child, or the said middle if it is a young complete, and insert that into their rectum.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And pierce of the stone until it stays below your said.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And turn that little by little into the neck of the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	And then press on that with your said, and expel that to the parts outside ves the place of which you the section.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command the minister that presses the bladder with his hand; and command another minister that with his right hand extends the genitals to the parts above, and with his other hand restrains the groin which is below the genitals, in part of the place where the section is made.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then insert a spatula well incident of which this is the form of it:
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And cut in it the water that is between the anus and the genitals, not in the middle place,  leaning to the left side of the groin; and let the section be on that stone and your said be in the anus, and let it be a transverse section, so that the section outside be wide and inside narrow according to the quantity that is expelled of the stone be to it possible, and no greater, because very hard we compress your said which is in the anus the stone and it is thrown out of its faculty.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And know that of the stone there is some to which so angle and margins, so that the extraction of it is made difficult by that.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And of that one it is lion seeming to gland, and it is round, and it is made of it light extraction.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Therefore if it is that one to which so angles and margins, adjust in the fissure.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	And if it is not thus thrown out, then cove that you engage upon that, or that you strengthen upon that with a decent gesture, the extremity of which is like a file with which you strengthen upon the stone, and do not escape from it; or that you insert below it a subtle instrument of curved extremity.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	But if you cannot do it on that, then you enlarge the opening a little, and if you see a flow of blood, cut it off with vitriol.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	But if the bladder is more than one, at the beginning you push your hand into the mouth of the bladder, and then cut into it; and then push a little bit in there; and similarly do so if there are more than two.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	And if the bladder is very large, then ignorance is that you cut it open with a large incision, because it happens to the patient one of two causes: either it dies or it makes a continuous distillation of urine, because of which the place is not completely consolidated.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	But administer expulsion of it while it is thrown out, or engineer in the fracture of it with the forceps while it extracts that in pieces.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with ointment of aloe and dragon's blood, and tighten that.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And place on that cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rubbed oil and water, so that the abscess may be yielded.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	And then turn the patient onto their back, and do not untie the bandage until the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And when that you have untied it, embrocate the place with water and a little oil, and then cure that with an enguent diafinicon and an enguent diabazilicon until it is healed.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	But if in the wound there happens a bad, putrid, and corrosive abscess, and of this sort as if the blood is in the bladder frozen, and because of it the urine is prohibited (and this is known by the egress of blood in urine), then therefore intervene your said in the wound and extract that blood, because if it remains it provokes the bladder to corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then wash the wound with vinegar, water, and salt, and in opposition to every kind, with that which convenes to it of the cure until it is healed.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	And cover during all the hours of the cure that you lie both things and adjust the medicines which are placed upon the place.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if the bladder is small and is in the middle of the vagina, and it is put in it, and the emission of urine is prohibited, then cure that with water which I recommend before you arrive at the incision, because troops of times by this cure it is accused of incision; and already I have expressed this, and it is that you take a steel perforator, of which this is the shape of it:
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	of triangular extremity, sharp, put into a shaft.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	And then take a thread, and tie with it the vagina below the bladder so that it does not return to the bladder.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And then intervene the iron in the vagina, perforating with ease until the perforator comes to that bladder.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And revolve the perforator with your hand in that bladder little by little, and you perforate the perforation of it until you make that of the other part penetrate; because the urine is immediately released.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	And then press your hand over that which is broken of the bladder from the side of the vagina, because that is broken, and is thrown out with the urine, and the patient is healed.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	But if this cure is not to your liking for any cause which prohibits you from it, then tie a thread below the bladder, and another thread above the bladder.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then cut into the bladder in that vagina between two ligatures.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And then extract that.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	And then untie the ligatures and modify the congealed blood, which is made in the wound.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And it is not necessary to tie a thread below the bladder, but only so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other ligature above, because when the thread is untied, the bladder returns to its place and covers the wound.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And therefore it is necessary to you when you tie the thread above, that you elevate the bladder to the upper parts, or that you return to your compliment, and cover the wound as we have said.
Capitol .lxi.	Chapter .lxi.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Of the extraction of the bladder from women.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	Bladder in women is rarely generated.
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	But if a bladder is seen in any of those, then difficult is the cure of it, and it is prohibited by troops of manners.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	One of them is that the woman is very much a virgin.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And the second is that you do not find a woman well-knowing who describes herself to the doctor when she is chaste, or is of the women having husbands.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	The third is that you do not find a woman well-knowing this art, especially the operation with hand.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth is that the place of the incision on the bladder in women is far from the place of the bladder, because you indigeys of pre-incision, and in that there is fear.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	But if necessity provokes you to that, then cover that you take a woman midwife well-knowing, and few are found.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	But if you are deprived of that, then seek a midwife who is chaste and subtle, or present a woman matron well-versed in the deeds of women, or a woman who in this art has a share of the art.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	Therefore, do that present, and command him to do everything that you tell him, from the inquiry about the stone to the beginning; the reason is that he should see if the woman is a virgin, then when she puts her finger in her anus and wants the stone.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if you find that, force her to put her finger in, and then command him to insert it into her.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	But if she is not a virgin, then command the matron to insert her finger into the vagina of the patient and inquire about the stone, because she puts her left hand on the bladder, and compresses it with good understanding.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Therefore, if you find that, then command her to gradually withdraw that from the orifice of the bladder to the parts below with the sum of her virtue until it reaches the root of the vagina.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	And then insert it into that position of the majority of the vagina, at the root of the vagina, from whatever part it is stopped and center the stone in that part, and the finger of her should not be removed from the stone, short of her.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And the section should be few at the beginning; and then insert the ray into that section, and if she feels the stone, then adjust in section according to the quantity which she knows the stone is thrown from that.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And know that the kinds of stone are many: for some are small and large, and lion and sharp, and long and round, and having ramps.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	Therefore, you know how many species are of her by what you signify about what you want.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if you see a flow of blood, adjust in the place vitriol trissated and put it there for an hour until the blood is absconded, and then return to your operation until the stone is thrown out.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And do that you prepare with you of the instruments which are said in the extraction of stone in men, so that you may be helped by those in your operation.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if you see a flow of blood, and know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that is incised, then you put powder on the place and tighten that with powders and constriction descends, and do not repeat that; and leave the stone and do not extract it, for very soon the patient will die.
E aprop cura la plagua.	And then cure the wound.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Therefore, when the sharpness of the blood is ceded after some days, and the place can be opened, then you return to your operation until the stone is thrown out.
Capitol lxii.	Chapter lxii.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Of incision upon hernia.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Hernia is nothing but an accumulation of humidity in the white membrane which is below the chain of the genitals containing the bowel, and it is called the membrane.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And some times it is in the proper panniculus which has prepared nature in the part of the bowel, before that it is known that it is another bowel; and it is the chain of the genitals between the white membrane which we have said, and it is not that but a tart.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And the generation of this hernia is by weakness which happens to the genitals, for that those are poured into this matter, and sometimes it happens by percussion made upon the genitals.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And this humidity is having many colors, for the color of it or is declining to citrine or to sanguine, or red, or it is black feculent, or it is aqueous white, and that is what is most.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	And the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water is: for if it is in the white membrane which we have said, then the abscess is round declining a little to length as if the figure of a bowel, and appear the genitals, for the humidity contains that from every part.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if the humidity is in the proper panniculus, then the abscess is round with a part of the bowel and by this man estimates that it is another bowel.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the humidity is between the chain of the genitals and the white membrane, then cats below the feeling.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And as you want the knowledge of the color of the humidity, then you probe the color of the humidity in the abscess with the entering catheter of which the form is preceded; and according to what is seen in the vestige of the catheter, judge of what is inside of it.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	Therefore, when we come to the cure of it with iron, then command the patient to be flebotomized if that is possible to you, and times the body of him full.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And then be resuscitated upon his back upon some cause a little high, and put beneath him many cloths.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And then set yourself upon the left part of him, and command the minister to follow on the right of him, the one which extends his arm to one of two sides to the chain of the genitals and to the part of the miracle of the belly.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	And then take a spatula late and split the chain of the genitals from the middle place by the length until near the penis.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	And be made the section according to rectum equally distant from the line that divides the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the white membrane comprehending.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	And excoriate that, and observe, and guard yourself so that you do not insert that; and your excoriation with which you excoriate by a part just as it should be suspended with the bowel more and subtly scrutinize with the excoriation according to the quantity as much as possible.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then pierce the bladder full of water with a wide perforation, and extract all the water.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And then separate between the two labia of the section with hooks, and extend the bladder to the upper parts; and do not touch the cord that encompasses the genitals, and incise the bladder in that manner that is to you possible.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And incise that [bladder] in its entirety or in pieces, and mostly its thin side, for if you do not scrutinize exquisitely the incision of it, it is not made safe that the water does not return.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	But if the fluid proceeds from that outside of its cord during the time of your operation, then when you will have completed the section of the bladder, return it inside, and then adjust the two labia of the genitals with suture, and then care for it as well as the other ailments, until it is healed.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	And if the fluid is corrupted by another ailment, then you must cut the vessels that are on the suspensory, and extract the fluid, and then care for it with the water that we have said.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	But if the water is gathered in two parts simultaneously, then know that there are two hernias; therefore incise that part according to how you have done in the other, and if it seems to you that it is one operation, then you do it.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	And then you cleanse the blood, and introduce into the sections wool submerged in oil or in rose oil; and place before another wool which you have submerged in wine and oil, and spread that over the genitals and the mirac of the belly; and place above cloths folded and powders, and tie those above with a bandage which is according to this form:
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And then take two cloths and be them filled with carmine wool according to this likeness; and be made the extremities with which it is pressed of cloth or of wet wool, and be added with structure in the waistband of the breeches, and one of the extremities presses from the anus into the two, and the second presses at the part of the thigh, and two extremities over two cushions of the thighs and two other extremities over two angles, and all the structure be adjusted in the waistband of the breeches.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes this hernia is medicated artificially with cautery in place of section with iron; and it is that you take a subtle cautery knife and that you incise with that the cord of the genitals, and it is ignited according to how we have recounted until the white bladder containing the water is discovered, and then you take cautery according to this form:
e es asemblat a letra greca.	and it is assembled like a Greek letter.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	And then pierce with that cautery, and it is ignited until all the humidity is expelled.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	And then extend the bladder with hooks, and scrape with hooks, and scrape with a subtle cautery ignited; and incise that according to how it is possible to you until you eradicate all of it; and guard yourself that the fluid that the fire does not touch it.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And know that this operation is safer and farther from blood flow, and better than an operation with section.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	But if to you makes contrariety abscess caut in the hour of section or in the hour of cautery, or blood flow, then you must cure that contrariety that makes to you by that, with cure which convenes to it according to what is said.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	But if the patient is fearful, and does not expect the second operation because of its horror, then administer perforation according to how we have recounted this; and it is when it is certified you, by that which we have said of the significations, that that hernia is watery.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then you must make the patient lie down on some elevated cushion, then pierce the abscess in the lowest part of it with a broad spatula, and pause the perforation according to the length of the body.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And let the opening be wide until all the water runs out.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And then place over the location cloth and tie that and leave it, so that the remaining water runs out.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And then care for it until the wound is healed.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	But if contrariety is in the discharge of the water in that hour you pierce that: and this is not done except for that which the white panniculus in the orifice of the wound makes contrariety and prohibits the exit of the water, then you must put in the wound a probe or instrument with which it is extracted the water from the hydropitz, the form of which is preceded; or adjust in the opening of the wound a small one.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	And know that the water returns, and is gathered again about six months or around those; and as it is gathered, then it be pierced according to that same manner, that the patient thus passes his days.
Capitol .lxiii.	Chapter .lxiii.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	Of Section on a Carnous Hernia and Its Cure.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	Know that in the section on this hernia there is fear of losing to harm in the major dispositions; because to me it is seen the dismissal of it and being saved by that better.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And I remember the operation on that and the species of the abscesses.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Therefore, I say that the abscess arises in the bodies of those whose genitals are composed and is done for many causes: or for acute superfluity, which is poured into the genitals, or for percussion.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and there is no pain in it, and it is a serious abscess.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	And a hard abscess is calcified, of which the color is dark, and there is no feeling in it.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes it is made by the knotting of the arteries, and by the inflammation of those so that already the memory of it is perceived, or by the inflammation of veins.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	But that which is by the inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you compress it with your hands; and no cove that you touch.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	But that which is made by the inflammation of veins is not dispersed by any cause of compression with the hands.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And it is possible that on this kind a section is made and on the other flesh; and that you insert the knife of the genitals, and then extend the bowel to the parts below, and extract that from the white sac, and deliver the suspensory of the vessels, and tie them, and incise the suspensory as much as you deliver that from all parts of the bowel.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore if the bowel is already among those flesh consolidated, then you must extract the bowel and incise it.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is adhesion for any cause of the sac, or between that which is between the vessels, then you must deliver all that adhesion and incise it by a round incision.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	But if it is the birth of flesh in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then you must incise all that which is of it, and extract the bowel as we have said.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Therefore, as the operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and wine; and then care for it with the other cure until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.	Chapter .lxiv.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	Of the cure of a hernia that is of the womb.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	It is an abscess enveloped by some wrapping resembling a sprout with softening of the testicles, and it is made difficult movement exercise and walking on the patient.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	And in the cure of this disease it is by fear for that of which it is preceded memory.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	However, it is necessary to say operation in it according to that which I did the first.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And I say that it is necessary to make the patient lie on a raised cushion; and then pull the suspensory of the testicles to the parts below; and then take the knife of the genitals with your hands with the vessels that are probed to the groin; and hold those other instruments that you, and extend those with vehement extension.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	And then incise with a broad sharp knife by a transverse section in the right of the vessels until the vessels are uncovered.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	And then excoriate from all parts as we have said in the extraction of the arteries which are in the temples.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	And then place in those a needle which is double-pointed, and tie that in the first of the places in which you have incised the vit, and tie that other time in the rear of them.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And then incise those in the middle place by a straight section according to the length of the body, and extract what is aggregated of the fetid and corrupted humors.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	And then cure the wound with the cure of the other wounds in which you wish to be healed generated so that the vessels which you cut, one of the two genitals, which is not evil for that.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	But if you have incised the vit to all the vessels, then it is necessary that the testicles be extracted or that the testicles for that are tied with the vessels, so that it be deprived of all nourishment by the incision of the vessels, and that they be stabilized, or that they are tied so that it is not a good thing with those.
Capitol .lxv.	Chapter .lxv.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Of the cure of intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	The advent of this hernia is by a section that must be in the sac extended over the belly of the part of the angles of the miracle of the belly, so that by descending the bowels of that rupture ad to some of the bowels.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this rupture is either of the sac or of the extension of it, and these two species are caused by many causes: either percussion, or sautz, or clamor, or elevation of any heavy cause, or semblance.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	And the sign of this, when it is by the extension of the sac, is that it happens little by little in a long time, and it does not happen suddenly, and it is an abscess equal to the preon within the ves for that the sac compresses the bowel.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of this is when it is by the section of the sac, because at the beginning it makes happen vehement pain suddenly; and it is an abscess diverse appearing below the proper cord appearing, and that is for the eyssiment of the bowel, and the body of it to the parts before the sac.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And sometimes it is forgotten with the bowel the web, and this intestinal hernia is called zirbal.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	And sometimes it is made with flatulence, and sometimes it runs in the bowel split, and here it is retained, and it is with this great harm of the patient, and sometimes it makes become evil pain and more intensely when it is pressed.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	And in the cure of the species of this malady with iron there is fear, because it is necessary that it be avoided the catching in it.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And the manner of the operation of this is that you command the patient to reduce the hernia with his hand to the parts between the sides of its cavity if he obeys its return, and then it is inverted upon his belly between your hands, and elevate the legs of him.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	And then hold the cord which is the cord of the testicles to the upper parts, and incise the cord of the testicles along the entire length; and then fix in two lips of the section uncis according to how you intended to open the section with those.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	And if the section according to the quantity that is possible to you that from that the huou be foregotten.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	And then scrape that which is covered by the cord of the testicles, until the white hard cap of each part is uncovered.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	Now you introduce your finger into that which is the testicle, in that which is between the white cap, which is left the cord of the huou, and between the second cap, and dissolve with that adhesion that is in the part behind the huou.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And then with your hand hold the cord of the testicles to the forward parts, and by this extend the white cap on your left hand, and elevate the huou with the cap to the part of the section; and command the minister to extend the huou upwards and you dissolve the adhesion that is behind with a completed solution.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And seek with your fingers that there be no cause of the hernia enveloped in the white hard cap.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	But if you find any cause of it, then you unwrap it to the belly below.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And then you take a needle in which there be a thick thread made of x threads, and introduce that through the back of the cap, which is below the cord of the testicles, which we see section; and then incise the extremities which emerge from the thread until they are four threads, and then compose some of them over some figure in a manner of a cross; and tie with that the cap of which we have said that is below the cord of the testicles with a strong binding of two parts.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then wrap the extremities of the threads and tie those with a vehement binding so that some of the vessels that nourish those cannot transmit any cause so that from here no abscess may occur.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And place another binding according to the size of the first binding, far from it less than three fingers; and then these two bindings leave of the cap which is below the cord of the testicles the quantity of the greatness of the finger, and incise all the remaining according to roundness, and remove from it the huou.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	And then incise in the part below the cord of the testicles by a section of which blood and serum run as we have recommended in that which we have said.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And then administer wool submerged in oil, and place it on the wound; and administer the binding which we have recommended (and some times the white cap is cauterized, which we have said near the incision to fear the flow of blood, because many times those occur) and leave the binding until it falls by itself.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	But if the case of it is late, then of hot water be embroiled, and place it over it until it falls as we have said.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And then cure the wound with the other cure of wounds until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvi.	Chapter .lxvi.
De hernia ventosa.	Of  a  ventous hernia.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	In this hernia no one has been seen to have been bold in the cure of it with iron.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	And the first said that it is done as we have recommended in the hernia that is with vi; which is that you tie the vessels near the section over it with facility of it; and then dry in the middle place in surrounding the abscess with that which opened it, until the vessels fall.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the wound as we have said until it is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	Chapter .lxvii.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Of the dislocation that is made in the anguonars.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	Sometimes it happens that a rupture in the anguonars as we have said, and emerges the place.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And do not give to the genitals any cause of the hernias to the genitals; and if they give, that is little; and return it in all hours.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	But if the time is prolonged with it, it is adjusted fissure in the cap until the hernia descends in the cap; and happens that by the extension of the cap which is in the anguonars as we have said, which cause is that the cap is extended, and then it is softened and the place is abscesses and emerges.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	And the cure of it is with cautery as it is preceded the narration of it.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: and that the patient lies on his two between your hands, and then dries the place of the rupture of the abscesses emerges with a section by the latitude according to the quantity of three fingers.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then stretch the white cap that is below the cord until it is uncovered.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	And then take the ray and place it over the eminent place of the cap, and press it to the front of the belly.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And then sew the two eminent places on the extremity of the ray of the cap, and adjust with the suture one of them with the other.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And then extract the extremity of the ray, and do not cut into the head of all, nor extend the bowel, nor any other cause as I will tell you to know in the cure of intestinal hernia.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	And then cure that with the cure of the plagues, and as you cut the fibers, purify that and restore the plague while it is consolidated; because the head is contracted and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cautery is better in this place, because it is more proper to health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Chapter .lxviii.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	Of the softening of the cord of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	Sometimes the cord of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh that is between it is softened, and it is felt the regard of it.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	Therefore, it is necessary for him who is asked in the cure of it that he make the patient lie according to his two, and cut all the cord which is softened over the natural cord; and then that he adjust the two lips with the suture.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And if you want, sew in the beginning the superfluity of the softened cord with three stitches or four and with firm suture.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then cut between the sutures; and then cure for the cure of the other plagues while it is healed and the fibers fall.
Capitol .lxix.	Chapter .lxix.
De castracio.	Of castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	Know that castration in our law is exempted, but for the reason it is brought to my mind in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two ways, of which one is that it be in the knowledge of the physician when he is asked about it, that he knows the cure of it to whom it happens; and the other way is that we many times have need of castration of other animals for our benefit from them, as well as from goats, and sheep, and pigs, and similar to the animals.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by attrition, or by fissure to section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	But in that which is done by attrition, the way of the operation is that we make the beast to be in water tail while its genitals are softened and are limp and that they hang.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	And then take those with your hand while they are resolved and do not appear after the touch.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	But in castration done by fissure and section, cover that you have the beast and press the cord of the testicles of it with your left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And then lie the suspender, and cut above each bowel with a section between two bowels processed.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	And then cut those that you will have each excoriated.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not leave on those of the head any cause, but the subtle head which is above the vessels.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	And this way of castration is better the one done by attrition, because attrition fort leaves no cause of the testicles for which the beast desires coyt.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	And then cure the plague while it is healed.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter .lxx.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the cure of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	Hermaphroditism in men is according to two ways: one is that or appears in that which sees the space in the cord of testicles, in that which is between two testicles figures as a cunh of woman in which it is.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And some times from that corr urine which is in the cord of the testicles.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	But in women it is a species: and it is that the cunh of the woman on the pentil is as two testicles of a man a little of all yminiheys to the part before as the perpucii of a man and two testicles.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	And the cure is of three species: of two of the men and of one species of the women.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	And it is that cover that you cut those adjusted flesh while it escapes the emprecio of it, and then that you cure those with the cure of the other plagues.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And in the second species of men of which yeys urine which is in the cord of the testicles, there is no cure nor operation in it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	Of lending and of eminent flesh for causes of the women.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	Lentige fort leu is adjusted on natural causes while it is etressat and is made leg the regardament; and some times it is magnified in some women in so much that it is spread as in men and perve into the coito.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	Therefore, cover that you have the superfluity of lentige with your hand or with anci and cut.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	And in the last incision, mostly in the preon of the razit, so that no flux of blood endenge.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And then cure it with the cure of the plagues while it is healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	But carn nascuda is flesh that nays in the horrifici of the mayre while it is full of it, and fort leu is eyssit to the parts before according to semblance of coa (and for that some first appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); therefore cover that we inscidam as we inscide lentige, and curem that while it is healed.
Capitol .lxxii.	Chapter LXXII.
De curacio de alratica.	Of the cure of hernia.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Hernia is when the woman's womb is not perforated, or the opening is small.
E es o natural o accidental.	And it is natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	Accidental is due to illness that has preceded, and that is made either by flesh not well fitted or by a subtle or thick cicatrix.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	And it is made either in the front of the mother, or in the sides of her, or in the upper part of her, or in the lower part of her, and forbids coitus and pregnancy and childbirth, and very strongly forbids menstruation.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And the knowledge of that is made by looking at the womb, if the opening is apparent, it is clear; but if it is not apparent, then you search for it with your fingers or with a probe.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	But if the opening is by a subtle cicatrix, and it is present to the two labia, then you cut and break that.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And it is that you place on the two labia powders, and then you place your fingers, indicating both hands at once.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And the woman be on her back, her thighs extended, and then extend the two labia with force so that that subtle cicatrix be broken and the opening be opened.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then take wool and soak it in oil and place that on the spot, and pour some warm water over it every day so that the cut spot not be consolidated.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	But if the cicatrix is thick and thick, then you carve that with a spatula or with a myrtle leaf.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	But if the opening is by flesh, then you suspend that with an instrument, and cut it.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	And be with you the medicines that cause to cease the flow of blood from a bite, such as agarwood, and dragon's blood, and incense, mixed with the album of an egg.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And then administer a broad lead pipe so that the plague not be consolidated lightly.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And keep that for a few days and administer a poultice of licorice.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And then be cured with the other cure of consolidation until it be healed.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And sometimes accidents happen in the mother's womb of other flesh, and then you carve according to this manner.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	But if this is due to a  cankerous abscess, to the cankerous abscess which is in the womb, let no contrariety be made with iron in any manner.
Capitol .lxxiii.	Chapter LXXIII.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Of the cure of hemorrhoids and of tail and of red botch that happens in the womb of women.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	Hemorrhoids are the appearance of many veins in the orifices so that from those flow blood continuously; and as they are old hemorrhoids and are made they are boils.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have already said in the division the species of those and their signs, and I say thus those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and boils when they are in the front of the mother and do not appear to the touch, then in those let no cure be made with iron.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	But those which are in the orifice of the mother upon which one feels, those are the ones that are cured.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And you must put the woman in a warm bath and then extend the boil with the scissors, or with rough cloth, and cut those with the roots.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then pulverize upon those of the fluxes of the blood of one of the incisions-causing powders, such as agarwood and similar to those.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	And then bandage her feet for an hour, and then place that in cold water.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the fluxes of blood persist, then make that seizer in a decoction of wormwood and of the skins of  millegrain and of  walnuts and of similar things.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	And then take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar and make a plaster with water on the back of her.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	And if the blood is abscised, it is well; and if not, make adhere to two wind-bags, and to the nipples their scarification.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then take wool and submerge it in the juice of coriander or in the juice of arnica or in the juice of  guarravier with vinegar and make adhere to the spot; and then cure the spot with ointments until it be healed.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	But a red botch which is of a harsh appearance, you should cut that which appears to you of that according to what I have said in the boil's treatment.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And cure that until it be healed.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter LXXIV.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	Of perforation of the uterus which happens in the mother.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	Many species of abscesses happen in the mother, such as canker and abscess lapident and ulcers and adhubelat and erpetromens and hemorrhoidal fistulas and rags and boil and other abscesses.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And I have already said these ailments and the species of those and their signs, and the cures of them in the division.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	And I want to say in this treatise of abscess caut the one which comes in the mother when it is of the abscesses that coalesce and heal, and if you want to know in what manner the operation of it is made with iron.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	Therefore, consider if the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and sometimes that redness and if you touch it, then do not cut it with perforation, and treat it with what helps on the maturation until the acuteness of the accidents ceases.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And then have the woman lie on a bed that has two beds; and recline on her two sides and adjust her feet to the part behind the belly, and her thighs be spread, and place her arms behind her shoulders, and tie something to her with a suitable bandage.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And then the midwife follows the straight line and administers the instrument with which the orifice of the womb is opened, the form of which will come in those causes that will be made nearby.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	And when you want to administer this instrument, you put it with the ray of the womb of the woman, and what from the instrument is entered into the womb be no more than the ray of the womb and lead the patient.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	But if the instrument is larger than the ray of the womb, then have you put powders on the texture of the ray of the womb so that it be prohibited the instrument of all instruments in the ray of the womb.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And have you put the verge that runs in the instrument of the latz pus desus and that the minister has the instrument and turns the verge while the orifice of the womb be opened.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when the extraction appears, and it is touched with the hand and is lion and moist, then have you succeed that of the head of it with a spatula lat.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And when the sania is evacuated, then have you put in the wound a mecha submerged in rubbed oil or green oil in which be some stickiness; and put the calca7 in the section in the ray of the womb.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	And put before the womb and on the pentenilh clean wool submerged in water in which be boiled malvas.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And then be cured after about two days with gargles which are convenient to that until it be healed.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And some times the womb and the wound be washed so that it be christened with water and honey, and then with water in which is boiled root of lily or of aristolochia longa, and then return to the gargle.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And if the wound is deep in the womb, then have you be prohibited from the cure of it with iron, have cure that with what we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.	Chapter .lxxv.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	To teach the midwives in what manner the living embryos be medicated when they are according to a unnatural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	It is necessary that the midwife knows at the beginning the figure of the natural birth by signs of it, and it is that when you see the woman express to the parts behind and desires to smell the air, and above that is relieved by that which is above her of the part, and hastens the emission of the embryo, then you know that this part is according to a natural figure, and it is the emission of it over its head, and the second one with that or suspended or pendant from the navel.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	Therefore, as you see those signs, then have the belly of her be compressed so that the embryo descends lightly when it descends over its head, they give to it the second one, and it is cleaned of those superfluities with good modification.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu .i., o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	But that which is another this part is unnatural and not laudable, because when the embryo is emitted over its feet and the body of it is emitted before the head of it and its feet, and the hand of it one, or at the foot of it .i., or it is emitted the head of it and the hand of it, or at the belly of it, and fort leu is converted over its neck, and similar to the figures of it not laudable.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	Therefore, it is necessary cause to the midwife that she be wise and subtle in all those causes, and that she guard against error and deception.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And you see showing all figures of those, and what kind is in those by so that it be signified by it and be stood upon it.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the feyt is emitted over its head by natural egress, and that is vehement over the woman and is made to her part difficult, and sometimes the virtue of it already debilitated, then make that seizure, or that which the women have it, and evaporates the conh of it with fenugrec coyt and with humid oils.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then intermeddle the metrona between its said spatums petit and fenda with it the second one, or succeed that with its nail until it runs that which is in it of humidity.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	And press the belly of the woman until it descends the fetus.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	But if it does not descend, then have the woman be christened with mucellage of ptilli and mucellage of fenugrec with cizami.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And then command to it, to the christening, that it be compressed and make that stornudar with condisi; and te the mouth of it and its nose for one hour, because the fetus sira foro-getat tantost.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the two masses of the fetus are foro-getated at the beginning, then have you reduce those with facility little by little.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	But if she does not obey the insertion, then place the woman on a bench and lift her legs up, and then shake the bench on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall during the shaking.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if the fingers are not deftly turned and the foot dies, then cut those and extract the remnants of the foot or tie the body to the hand with a cloth and extract it with equality, because this is a difficult case.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Of the movement of the embryo over its feet.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the fetus lies on its feet, then you must push those upwards, and then turn the small fetus, and then straighten it, and then take one of its legs and extend it little by little.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	But when it is brought inside the thighs, then you command it to express itself, and do that extraction with care, because it is a difficult case if God wills it.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not difficult as we have recounted, then you return the small fetus little by little until you place it in that second natural figure, because this is then easily moved.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is prohibited by all that we have recounted, then take of althea and gum dissolved, and strike all in the mortar with a good percussion, and then apply it to the woman's groin, at the bottom of her belly.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	And then make that poultice in tepid water, until it obtains the hypocondria.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	And when times that the parts of her are softened, then do a fumigation of myrtle and place that under her.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And when you have the fumigation for an hour, then you make her lie on a bench, and then do that extraction and extend her mouth, and take from that, and press the lower part of her belly with light compression, because the fetus is then easily moved.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Movement of the fetus over its teeth and its hands.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	When the fetus lies in this form, then you gently insert its hands little by little; and the woman should lie stretched on her back, and her legs hanging down, and those should be resting on the light, and complete its hands.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	And then press on her belly little by little, and then extract what is below her legs from the ears until it is prepared in the lower part.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the fetus is not moved, then take its legs and move them with vehement movement, and then press what is above the hypochondria little by little until the fetus moves to the upper parts.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then insert its hands and straighten the fetus little by little, and command the woman to express herself until the fetus is moved.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Movement of the fetus longitudinally while holding one of its hands.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	It should be gently reduced by hand, but if you cannot reduce it, then lift the woman and make her move.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	And if moving doesn't work, then make her lie on her back, and shake her thighs with vehement shaking, and then administer ointments as I have told you and recommended of poultices.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And if labor has begun, then make her lie on a bench, and then study on the reduction of the hand, and straighten the fetus in its natural figure, and do the extraction for the woman and command her to express herself until it is moved.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Movement of the fetus on the back with its arms and feet spread out and the fascia of it is on the side of its mother.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	Make the midwife have the hand of the fetus and then turn it little by little, and that with ease.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it is and as much as it is straightened, and then place on its groin what we have recommended of oil and poultices.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	And then command her to move little by little, and when you have done that, then make her lie on a bench and command her to be inclined on the right side, and then command her to express herself; and do that extraction with care.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	Exit of the prepared fetus on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When they lay the horrors of the mother in this manner, consider, and then you cut the second with your nail until it is evacuated of humidity.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if the fetus is suspended over the face and neck of it, then you cut that of the navel, so that it is not held back and dies.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And then push the fetus to the fingertips until you place that second which you cover, and send the woman to express herself several times, and it will be moved with light movement, if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	Exit of twins or multiple fetuses.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	Know that twins are born many times, and sometimes even three or four, but that is strange and difficult to endure; but it is due to natural causes, and not to life.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And count them, whether they are multiplied, one second, and they are separated by the cicatrix, distinguish those among the ligaments in the navel of each of them. And sometimes they are moved as if it were one fetus by easy natural movement, and they are positioned sometimes by movement not laudable as we have recounted.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if some of their parts are difficult during childbirth and they reach what we have said about unnatural figures, then you care for them as we have recounted.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if the midwife is skillful and does what is done with ease and subtlety, and with patience, and is ingenious according to every figure according to what is prepared for her by the ingenious one leading to health.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	A remembrance of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and miscarriages.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Sometimes things are formed in the womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even ten, and it is already known to me that one woman aborted six, and another one ten, all formed, the cause was made by measurement of the glorious wise.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And all this cove that is in the science of the midwife, which is very much like that appearance, and therefore it is necessary to do it as it is commanded.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Chapter .lxxvi.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	Of the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	When you cure the dead fetus with what we have said in the division of the medicine and it is not expelled outside, and you are forced to use operation with your hand, then it is necessary to consider if the woman is of sound virtue and is not among those accidents by which she is feared to be harmed.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	Then it is necessary that the woman be placed on her back over her two, and her head be inclined downwards and her thighs be elevated.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And the minister shall have those two parts or be tied in the bed so that the body of him does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you moisten the mouth of the mother with oily and with mucilage of althea and fennel and seed of lily.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And then the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and mucilages, and then she inserts her hand with facility into the mother, and then she seeks with her hand in the place where the forceps are in the fetus.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	And convenient place in this: therefore you consider if the fetus is prepared that descends on its head, and then you place the forceps in the heels of it, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or under the beard, or in the fork of it, or in the proper places of the back, or under the hypochondria.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	But if the descent is on the feet of it, then in the penile, or in the middle of the back.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And it is necessary that you have the forceps with your right hand, and pause the curvature of it in that place which is between the fingers of your left hand, and insert your hand with facility and place the forceps in one of those places which we have said, until you reach the left cause.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	And then pause and place in the opposite position of it another forceps, or the third if it is necessary, so that the traction be equal, and not be extension according to its straightness alone.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And may it be good to all parties, so that the expulsion of it be alleviated as it is done during the eradication of it.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And it is necessary in it that which is between them the extension be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then it is necessary that the midwife anoints some of her fingers with oil and inserts them skillfully and revolves with those that are retained.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore if the part of the fetus is expelled, then the forceps shall be changed into the place which is more out; and do so until the whole fetus is expelled.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	But if the hand is outside the other, and it is not possible to reduce it by the constriction of it, then it is necessary that a cloth be enveloped over it; and then extract it until the whole is expelled, and incisions it either in the junction of the hand or in the groin.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And so it is necessary that you do in the other hand and in the two feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	But if the head of the fetus is large, or there is an accident to it constriction in the expulsion, or it is in the head of it water adjusted, then it is necessary that you insert between the fingers the spatula spine and split the head and extract the water, or what disrupts it with an instrument which is named "alundat", the form of which will come with the forms of the other instruments in the chapter which is next.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And similarly do if the fetus is of a large head by nature: and then it is necessary that you incision it with the algematu, or that you press it with the alunda as we have said; and then extract the bones with the forceps.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And if the head is outside and is constricted by the fork, then it is split until the moisture which is in the feet is poured out.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	But if it is not complicated, nor obeys to expulsion, then you incision the head as soon as it is possible to you.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	And if the remains of the womb are inflamed or there is hydropsy in it, then it is necessary that you perforate it until the moisture which is in it flows out.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	But if the problem is on his feet, then the traction of it is lighter and the direction of it to the mouth of the mother is lighter.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	But if it is constricted of the belly and the feet, then cover what you extract with the cloth which you will have enveloped over your hand, and make the belly and the feet inside that it may run what is in those.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	But if the other limbs are stayed and the head is turned, then the midwife inserts her left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is obstructed, then she inserts her hand into the perineum of the latter, and with that she seeks the head, and pulls it into the mouth of the mother, and then inserts a hook, or two hooks, and pulls it with those.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the mother is obstructed by an abscess that occurs to the one, then cover that it not be trebled upon it; cover that then administer effusions of humid fatty causes.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	And administer plasters; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	And if the problem is on his side, then if possible, be pricked; and be administered the water which we have said in the living fetus.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	And if that is not possible, then be incised in the buttocks, and be extracted.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	And cover that you leave no cause of the second.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	And when you have completed your whole operation, then administer the water which we have said of the cure of the abscesses that occur from the mother.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if there occurs a flux of blood, then descend into styptic waters and administer the other cure.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And I have already seen a woman in whose belly was a dead fetus, and about that fire another pregnancy, and about fire dead is the fetus other.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	It happened to one about a long time ago an abscess in his navel; and it inflated until fire opened, and began to throw out pus.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And I was called to the cure of him, and medicated him for a long time, and the plague was not consolidated.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then I put on him some causes of strong attraction plasters, and extracted from him a bone, and about a few days passed, and extracted another bone; and I was too amazed, as in the belly there were no bones.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	And then I thought that they were of the bones of the dead fetus.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Therefore I pursued the plague, and extracted from him many bones, the woman existing in her thousands dispositions, and already living in such a manner for a long time, cured of him a little pus.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And I do not affirm that this is strange, but that in this there is science and help to what the doctor artifices with his hand for the cure administers.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Form of a verge with which the mother is opened:
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is the form of a stretcher in which the free ones are tied, to which tying there are two vertices in two extremities of two feet.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	But however this vertex cover that it be more subtle of a strictor, and be made or of ebony or of a shaft of wood.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	And be the width of each shaft two fingers and the margin of each one is a finger, and the length of each one is a palm and a half; and in the middle location of two shafts are two adjustments of that same shaft, the ones which are already finished, of which the length is the majority of a palm and a little more, and the width of each one is two fingers, or a little more.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And these two additions are inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it may be opened with those when you revolve the two prescribed vertices.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Another form similar to that more subtle and lighter:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	Be made of shafts of ebony or of wood according to the resemblance of forceps.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But however at the extremity of it there are two additions as such times, and the length of those additions is about a palm, and the width of each one is two fingers.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	And as you want with those to open the mother, then you make the woman lie on the sheet with her feet hanging, open that which is between her thighs.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	And then open your hand with the instrument as you do with forceps similarly according to the quantity that you want of the opening of the mouth of the mother until the midwife makes so that you want.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	The form of a verge the one which the ancients said:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	Form of an impellent with which the fetus is pushed:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	Form of an amisidat2 with which the large head is contained
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And it is assembled to forceps with which teeth in the extremity, as such times, and some times it is made long as such forceps according to this form, as such times, to which teeth are as such teeth of a saw with which it is incised and contained.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	Form of a small amisidat:
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Form of a hook having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Shape of a hook having two spines:
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	Shape of forceps which has teeth to close with which the head of the fetus is contained:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	Shape of a spatula having two extremities with which the head is severed:
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Shape of two broad spatulas:
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	All those instruments are exercised, and when more are multiplied the species of that and are prepared, the artificers, as much as is lighter to their operation and more aut of those men by their quantity.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And in works of those instruments already whatever be it, that you should prepare, because the necessity of those is not excusable.
De extraccio de la segondina.	Of the extraction of the second.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	When the second is retained during childbirth, then it is necessary that you command the patient to retain her breath, and then make that stir with the condition, and strengthen your hand over its mouth and over its nostrils, and if by this it is expelled outside, well is.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if not, then you take a cloth and perforate in the covering a hole and place in that herbs burning the mouth of the mother, thus as calament and rue and aneth and chamomile and siccated arabic and cassia lignea and santaurea.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	All these herbs or some of them are submerged in water in the cloth, and place that over the fire.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	And then place a tube of cane in the mouth of the mother, and keep that inside so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the mother.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	And then make that stir as we have said, and the second is expelled with velocity.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	But if remaining after this cure and it is not expelled, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or in a mixture of althea, and then introduce that into the vagina and search with that the second, and as that is found, then take it and extend it little by little. But if it is annexed in the perineum of the mother, then introduce her hand as we have recounted, and when she will have found the second, extract it little by little according to rectum so that the mother does not feel the traction vehement.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	It is necessary that it be changed to the right and left sides with ease.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And then it should be adjusted in the amount of traction, because it will obey and escape from adherence.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recounted the cure with stirrup and with medication of the cloth with herbs.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	But if it is not expelled with all the causes which we have recounted, then keep that you do not tire on it in iteration of abstraction, but rather that what is emitted from it to the mouth of the mother lies to the cushion of the woman, and then sterilize that with ointment and tetrafarmacon; because that will make it soften and after a few days it will be dissolved and expelled.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	But when it can be done, it is elevated from it bad odor to the head, and to the stomach, and this is what is done to the patient; and therefore it is necessary that fumigations and conveniences be administered to it.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	But some of the Ancients already are praised fumigations of nazitort and of dried figs.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	Shape of instrument with which the woman is fumigated for the retention of menses and of the second:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	It is made of wood or of brass.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And it is placed the subtle extremity in the vagina and the wide extremity over the fire, and the fumigation is placed over the embers of the fire.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And keep that inside so that the fumigation is consumed and repeat another.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Of cure of the unperforated anus of the child.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	Many children are born and the anuses of them are not perforated, the ones which already have a subtle and opaque.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Therefore it is necessary for the midwife to perforate with her finger that opaque; and if not, perforate it with a sharp spatula, and keep that it does not touch the rectum.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	And then place over that a cloth infused in wine and oil; and then cure it with ointment until it is healed.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	But if you fear that it is opaque, then place in the hole a tube for many days, and remove it when the child will want to defecate.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	And already happens opacity of the anus by consolidation of plague or of abscess; therefore it is necessary that that consolidation be incised, and then be cured with what we have said of the cure and of the lead.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	Of cure of the fistulas that originate from the anus.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The fistulas that originate in the part of the anus lower than the nodulation and thickness of which originate near the anus outside or in the space of the one part.
E es una fistula o motas.	And it is a fistula or many.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And as that nodulation is ancient and runs from the humid watery white or subtle pockmarking, and some times from these fistulas some penetrate.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And those that penetrate are known by that which is emitted from them by the egress and by windiness; and sometimes the patient of egress, and for a long time it is emitted from them worms.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And some of those fistulas sometimes penetrate into the space, into the bladder, and into the meat of the vagina; and some of these penetrate into the junction of the vagina and into the knot of the buttock.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	And in which it is known that a fistula penetrates into the anus and does not penetrate, it is that you put your finger inside the anus, and you introduce a subtle probe of thread or iron into the fistula when there is no turbidity.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	But if there is turbidity in that, then introduce a subtle probe of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or hair in your finger.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	And if you do not feel it at all, nor do you perceive any cause of evacuation or worm or wind, thus as we have said, then you know that it is not penetrating, and then you turn to the cure.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the meat of the vagina, then the meaning of it is the emission of urine from that and prohibition of it so that the place may be consolidated with medicine.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	But if it is penetrating into the junction of the vagina or into the buttock and causing pain in the circuit, then the sign of it is that the probe enters here if there is no turbidity in it, into the buttock, and causing pain in the circuit of the part; and that from it there is always pus; and that it does not benefit from that medicine, nor is it consolidated with an enema.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those fistulas penetrating there is no cure of all, and the cure of those is the work and vanity of the leaves of the physicians upon which it is founded.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	But in that which is not penetrating and not old, healing with iron is expected according to what I have told you, and what I have already proved.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back and elevates their legs into them, the thighs being inclined to their belly, and then introduce a probe of lead, or iron if there is turbidity in the fistula, until you know the place where the probe penetrates.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	And if that feels the patient around the buttock, then cover that you introduce your finger inside the buttock.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel in your finger the probe already by itself being inserted, or another thing that you feel between your finger and that skin or flesh, then you know certainly that that is penetrating; and therefore do not work on that, for it is not in that healing, as we have said.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	But however, some say that it is healed in some men tart.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And of the medicine by which is expected benefit in it is that you ignite a subtle cautery according to the size of the fistula, as it is preceded, and introduce that ignited into the fistula until it reaches around the buttock; and then repeat that two or three times until you know that all those flesh adjusted to the fistula, which are like the quill of a bird's feather, are already cauterized.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And then cure that with poultices enveloped in border until all those flesh which are cauterized can be covered, and then cure that with medicines that generate and consolidate flesh, and if it is healed, it is well; and if not, then it is not healed in any time by other cure.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if the probe enters, and does not penetrate into your finger which is in the buttock, and between that and the probe which is veiled with flesh or skin, and sometimes the fistula in that which seizes the surface of the pudenda, then dry the pudenda from the beginning of the fistula, and you see drying with the probe, and it is in the fistula until the drying reaches the place where the extremity of the probe reaches, and by the probe it is liberated and catched.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And then purify those fistula flesh which are assembled to the quill of a bird's feather and do not break from those any cause.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	But if a flux of blood sometimes comes between you and your operation when you are inserting those flesh, then the best that it may be and of the light pus instrument is cauterized with fire or with acute medicine, for cauterizing with fire adjusts good two habits: it is the cauterization of those flesh adjusted, and abscessing of the blood excretion of the humidities.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And then cure that with poultices enveloped in border or in caus trissat until the place gets brace, and then cure the plague with enemas flesh hard generating and consolidating.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And so medicines in which there is styptic and excretion; when then it is restored already healed and you do not fear iteration.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	But if the fistula already reaches into the perineum of the buttock and is elongated from that surface of the body, then introduce your finger into the buttock and inquire with that.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	And therefore if you feel the probe and between you and it is veiled with skin or flesh, and is proper to penetration, then it is not operation in it but according to your trust and hope.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	The which cause is to administer in it one of three ways: or that cauterize it as we have said; or that dry it until you achieve the concavity of it so that it is possible for you to introduce the probes and the proper cure; and do not proceed to cut by so that you do not wound the lacert containing the buttock, and that happens upon the patient's emission of feces by their will; and then cure it with what we have said that is strong cure; or that elongate that veil and cleanse that pus that dries it within the buttock, as we have said, or with probe or another instrument of acute extremity, and then purify those fistula flesh which are in the section where you can with percrustation; and then strive to make the restoration of the whole plague with section, and if the orifice of pus above is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open in the part of the buttock, and pus light from the patient.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	And in some cases, the fistula is ended in this way: when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is in the latz of the anus around the surface of the body with the codena and on the edge of the anus, then take the probe of perforated extremity, which is like an awl of preparing the hearts according to this form:
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And insert it into that faithful envelope of v fiels or around those; and then insert the probe with a faithful into the fistula until you achieve the cavity of it.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	But if it is penetrating in the edge of the anus near the entrance, then you extract the probe from that tract so that you insert your finger into the anus; and extract the extremity of the probe and adjust the two extremities simultaneously, and tighten each one, and leave it for a day or two, and when you have incised the probe more deeply into the flesh, tighten well that which those flesh are incised which are between the two extremities of the probe and which are joined.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And then cure the plague until it is consolidated and healed.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	But if the orifice of the fistula is not penetrating, then make it penetrate, in whatever way it is prepared for you, so that it is not moved in the groin, for it is not for you to do this so that you do not injure the groin; and then make it with that until it is healed.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	The shape of the spatum spinos with which the fistula is fended: the curvature of which is very sharp and the other part is not sharp, so that you do not injure what is not necessary, as sometimes.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	Of suture of hemorrhoids in which blood runs in the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	Hemorrhoids are in two ways, for they are between the anus like those that are of coals, or those that are like the fat of a rasim.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And of those are small and large, and that the blood runs from those always and it is one, and they are many, and they are outside the anus, and in the extremities of it.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	But however, those that are outside the anus are according to the months of little humidity, of which water citrina or a little blood with continuous body runs, and they are according to the color of the body.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	And the cure of that which is inside the anus is that you command the patient to defecate and to express himself while the anus is empty and the hemorrhoids appear to you.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	Then you take it and suspend with hooks or what you have those with your nail, and then you incise those of their roots.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	But if the hooks are not held in those because of the humidity of them and their softening, then take those with rough cloth or with a stick or with wool fleece, and extract those with your fingers, and then incise those and pulverize over them some powdered caudas near the incision, so that they are in those place of cauterization; or cauterize those according to what is preceded in the chapter of cauterization.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And then cure those with the other cure until they are healed.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	And if the anus does not obey the egress, then christenize the patient with a cristeri in which there is a small bite, and wash it with that water that is in the anus and that obeys the egress lightly when the patient expresses himself.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then the cause of them is lighter, and it is that you take those with your nail, or that you take those with a hook, and incise those, and then cure those with the water that we have said until they are healed.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And that which you have incised, cover that you administer suture of them according to this way: take a faithful enveloped and insert it into a needle and then extract the hemorrhoids to the upper parts, and make it penetrate with the needle into the root of the other part, and envelope the two extremities of the faithful in the part farther from the needle, and it is laterally; and tighten the hemorrhoid with strong structure, and then untie the faithful and extract the needle.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	And do this to all, and leave one of those untied, so that the superfluity of the blood runs from that one.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And then place on the anus cloth soaked in rose oil or in cerot; and place that on the anus and command the patient to rest.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And then leave that until it dries; and when it is dried, cure those with ointments or with other cure until it is healed.
De curacio de fistulas.	Of the cure of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Many times it happens by the drying of a wound or by the constriction of nature.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And as they are old and are not of use in that medicine, then you must cut those with the point of the spatum or with your nail until they are made humid and there is a host of those the pus that flows from below, which prohibits those from consolidation; and then cure those until they are consolidated.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then you must cut those with a reason pus vehement that the first one until it is bloody and they are excoriated; and then cure those until they are healed.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Of the cure of almesamir, it is called.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Know that alamermar, it is called, and it is not if not a knot round according to the color of the body resembling the head of a clavicle, and it is made in all the body and mostly in the parts below the feet and the fingers, and therefore by those pains the ailment.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And therefore, whoever is cut in that which is in the circle of the key, and is held with the forceps or an instrument, and is eradicated from its root; and then care for that.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	And if you want, cauterize the following that is preceded in its chapter.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	More of a wart is a small, rough, fistulous, round eminence on the surface of the body, and often times they appear on the hands of children.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And the cure for it is that you extend and cut that, or that you tighten that with a thread or with a needle that is sewn into the skin.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	And if you want, cauterize that, according to what we have said, with fire or with a sharp medicine.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And already eradicated, both ways and the other way, with the instrument which I have told you about.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	But a stye is a small,  feathered or fistulous, thick eminence on the surface of the body, going into the preon, and when the  flegm  finds that, it is felt in it resembling a bite of an ant, and it is made around the body.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And the cure for it is that you take a needle of swan feather or of vulture feather, and it is strong, and you place that on the stye inside that it contains the circle of the needle of the parts of it; and then you revolve your hand with the needle inside that you cut that which is in the circle of the stye, and you place that in the preon of the flesh, and that you eradicate the stye from its root.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you want, do that with a needle of bronze or of iron according to this form:
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the part above the needle be drawn to subtlety, blunt (so it is not perforated), enveloped so that over the finger the apprehension of it be ablated and the revolution of that.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want, cauterize the stye according to what is said before in the cauterization of a boil in the chapter of cauterization.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	Of the form of the instruments that are administered to give christening.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	Sometimes christenings are made of silver or of laton or of bronze melted or hammered; and sometimes they are made of those instruments small and large according to those to whom they are administered, because that which is administered in the cure of the small children be small; and of those whose buttocks are wrinkled or sore, the christenings of those be small.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	The form of a large and few christening:
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The head of the needle of it above in which the purse is tied be wide according to this manner; and be to it distinction the one in which the purse is tied as well as sometimes.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And the extremity of it further down, which is inserted into the anus, be blunt (so it is not open) much lion, drawing to subtlety; and in one of the sides of it be two holes, and on the other side one hole, and be the breadth of the hole according to the thickness of the rays and a little thicker one a little.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And be the purse in which be placed the medicines of bladder of beast or of sheepskin, and the root of it be a palm.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And be perforated by many holes as it is revolved; and if the space which is between the holes the thickness of the finger.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	And then insert into those holes strong thread of cru thread which be of ten threads, or about those; and adjust with that the purse; and when it is placed in it the purse, be straight in the head of the christening between two distinguished with strong constriction, and then cauterize with that each hole: But the quality of cauterizing with that is that you fill the purse of the medicine, that be warmed according to the quantity of the tolerance of the patient; and guard yourself that it be not too hot nor too cold.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And then the patient be supine on his back, and elevate his legs up and place behind him a cushion on which already are the men or a bolster; and then anoint the extremity of the cautery with oil or with album of egg or with mucilage of fennel or of similar; and then insert that into the anus with facility, and then the minister takes the purse and expresses that with two hands and simultaneously with vehemence until it be evacuated into the bowel all that which is in the christening; and then extract the christening and the patient raises his legs to the wall.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine forces that to eyssiment, have the as much as he can; and if he sleeps with that for a whole night, it is better in recovery.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you cauterize that in the maladies of solution of belly and the eyssiment of it the gut, then you iterate the cautery until it be healed.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	And if in the anus so hemorrhoids or apostemas ledens, then be the christening much subtle and lion, of the christenings with which the children so christened.
De curacio de las plaguas.	Of the cure of the plagues.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	And I have already said in the division of the cure of the plagues that which was convenient to the book, and I say so the cure of those with my hand and with medicines according to the complement.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	Therefore I say that the plagues are diversified according to what in which they are made the plagues and according to the place upon which befall the plagues.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	And the causes for which many times are made the plagues so as by the  bite of a serpent, or incision of a spear or of a sword, or percussion with a lance, or with clubs, or with arrows, or similar to those of many causes.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	May the plagues that are in the places of the body be like the plague that catches on the head, or the neck, or the feet, or the belly, or the figure, and similar to those of the limbs.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And you are counting the cure of some plagues so that you pause that reasoning and rule over the other plagues.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	And you begin with the plagues of the head simple, because the remembrance of the composed will come to the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	Therefore, I say that when a simple plague occurs in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to a stone or similar, and the bone has been broken only a little and it is a great plague, and you fear about that patient having a boil, then you take care and immediately perform a cephalic phlebotomy, and do not delay this; and extract from that blood according to the quantity of its virtue, if no other cause prohibits phlebotomy, especially if the blood that is drawn from the plague is little.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And it is phlebotomy on the opposite side of the afflicted area; and guard the patient from repletion and from wine and from heavy foods.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	But if any cause prohibits phlebotomy, then reduce the food and do not approach meat or wine.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And put on the plague, if a boil occurs, a cloth infused in rose oil or in wine in which is stippled.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	But if it is certain of a boil, then put on the plague, if it is recent with its blood and the air has not changed that powder which I will recommend soon.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if the air has already changed that, then put on poultices until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	But if the plague is large or is due to an incision of the skin and similar things, and the lips of it are not adjusted by sutures, then adjust those with sutures according to how I will recommend of the sutures of them.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	But if the plague is already discovered from the bone and flesh, and it is not a retention of it but a small suspension, then incise that and treat the plague with medicines and restore the flesh in the place of the bone, and command the patient to be frugal of foods in which there is thickness: caps and forms, and similar to them, until it is composed.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if a putrefaction arises in the bone and does not adhere to the bone, then you incise all that and throw it away, and then treat that.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	But if in these plagues an artery or vein is found from which blood can flow, and it is not cut off by medicines, then you inquire about the artery, and if you find that not incised, then you incise that with a spatula, or cauterize it; and if necessity compels you that what we have said does not confer, then you cauterize it until the blood is cut off.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these plagues are simple and small, then the cause of them is light; so that you pulverize on those this powder, because it consolidates before the air changes them.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	And the manner of the powder is this: take olive oil, one part, dragon's blood, two parts, and non-extinguished cautery, three parts; let all be ground finely and sifted, and let the plague be filled with it, and be constricted by a good constriction until it is well adhered, and coagulated with the blood.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And after strengthening that with poultices and leaving it, do not undo it while it is like that so that it is not suppurated, because the medicine is not extracted from it until it is healed.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	And sometimes do this alone with cautery, when you do not have present olive oil and dragon's blood.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And already do this same operation in the great plagues when it is necessary that it be placed on them and be constricted, and are recent plagues with their blood, those which the air has not altered.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if the air has altered them, and especially when it is in summer, then it is not understood in the position of this powder, but rather treat those with what we have said, so that you place on them some digested poultices, or that you place on them powder of barley flour with water and honey until they get a poultice; and then treat those with the other cure until they are healed.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	But if a plague occurs with a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you extract that with a spatula.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And I say the cure of the fractures of the head in that which is venomous.
De las plaguas del col.	Of the plagues of the neck.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	But if the plague occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in medication, and between the plague of the head when it is simple.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	But if the nerve of the neck is incised or the artery, then if it is a nerve, do not treat it, but rather that its cure be avoided with what makes vehement styptication, such as ziniar and zegi that is vitriol and similar to them, because they are harmful to the nerves and oppose that.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	And do not place on the plague any cause of all cold, because the substance of the nerves is cold and the continuation of it is with the brain, which is the most delicate of all the members.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if that is cured with light medicines, such as is washed with sweet water, some time infused in rose oil or non-rose oil, and then washed with sweet water and the other pebbles minced according to this manner, and humid poultices.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	But if the ulcer is large, then administer sutures, or constrict the lips of it, and then care for it with poultices until it is healed.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	But if the ulcer is deep or an accident has occurred in it to the lower part of the wound, then perforate that in the most depressed area.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	But if in the ulcer an artery is already incised and there is a flow of blood, then separate or dry that, or tie that, or cauterize that if necessary to stop the bleeding.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	But if the spinal bones of the neck or all have already been incised, and the veins of the neck are saved, then you adjust the lips of the trachea with sutures over the trachea and do not touch that; lift that and return it to its natural figure, and then strengthen that with a decent structure, and leave that for a few days; and then care for that with ointments in which there is styptic and excitation until it is healed.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	But if the ulcer has already been made in the bone, then strike that, and if there are fragments of bone in it, extract all those that you can of them; and what to you is not apparent, leave that inside until the ulcer is purged, and it is separated and the discharge from it is relieved.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the ulcer is recent, then pulverize over that the powder which is recommended to you.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	But if a fistula has been made in the ulcer, then cure that with the water of which the memory will come in its chapter.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Of the ulcers of the neck or of similar kinds when made between the plates and is made with a spade or with a knife or with a lance or with similar tools.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If it is a percussion of a lance or of a knife, and sometimes of it the depth, then consider more if from the ulcer there is windiness when the patient is ill; then you know that the ulcer is mortal.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if in it there is no depth and the ulcer is recent with its blood, then you place in it of the first hour powder, and do not strengthen that so that the blood is not retained in the depth of it and that it returns to the heart and that it kills the patient, but place in it attractive ointment, and unbind that twice a day.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And if the ointment is not to you present, then you place in the orifice of the ulcer a cotton cloth so that it sucks that which is of the humidities; and make that the patient sleep on the ulcer so that it runs that which is in it adjusted.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	But if from the ulcer have passed three days or more and does not occur to the patient spasms nor tremor of heart nor constriction of the throat, and sometimes the other good dispositions of him, then you know that the ulcer is saved; and therefore cure that with poultices and with the other cure until it is healed.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	But if the healing of it is excused, and already all time is open, then you know that already a fistula has been made; therefore cure that by its chapter.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	And if the ulcer is by incision of a spade or of a knife, and is simple in the surface of the foot or of the back, then cure that with the water which is preceded by sutures, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	But if already has been made a penetration in the bone, and already from it incised pieces, then you turn the ulcer and try to extract those pieces, if they are separated.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	But if they are not separated, then leave them inside until the ulcer is purged, that the extraction of them is relieved.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And of the other accidental ulcers in the other members the judgment in cure is the judgment of the water that we have said.
De las plaguas del ventre.	Of the Belly Ulcers.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The indisposition which occurs in the belly is either great, or little, or medium.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Of the great some times there are the bowel or nerves of the bowel, for which is made intrusion of them and the suture of them being more vehement and more subtle.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And a small disruption is made difficult by another manner, and see that the reduction of them is more difficult, if you do not take care of the intrusion of them to their place as soon as possible, for it opens and is thickened for which the entry of it is made difficult.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	And therefore the best disruption is medium, for in that one the reduction of the bowel is not difficult, as it is difficult in the two species mentioned before.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And you know that the suture of the belly is according to four manners, but two sutures are common that are convenient in sutures of the other ulcers of the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And two other sutures proper communicate to the others, but however they are more proper in the suture of the belly.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And I recommend to you each one with exposition and declaration.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	Therefore I say that when the ulcer is small and there is caused any cause of the bowel by that, and it is made difficult to reduce that, then this is in one of two manners: or by smallness of the disruption as we have said, or when to the bowel has come inflammation by the coldness of the air.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And therefore when this is so, then cove that you scalfe that as if you were submerging a sponge or cloth wet in tepid water alone, or which you squeeze in water with squill, and spice, and embrocate with that the bowel until the inflammation is resolved.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	And sometimes this is done with a decoction, and it is better than water alone in the resolution of inflammation.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And therefore, when you see the inflammation being resolved, then you moisten the intestine with water in which are boiled other and mallows, for by this it is alleviated the contents of it with little cause.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	But if the contents of it are excused by this cure, then you split the disruption a little with an instrument with which hemorrhoids are incised.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first cure is better, when it is proper that it is not a section, and not an occupation to dry by necessity and deficiency.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	Of the instrument, such is its shape:
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of it is sharp, and the other part is not sharp, and the tip is subtle, and not with the subtlety of a spatula, rather it is blunt a little.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And therefore, when the plague is amplified and the intestine is pushed out, then it is necessary that its reduction be according to the form of its natural, in its proper place, if possible, for that is better.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	But when the disruption is wide, and it is in the lower part of the belly, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on his back, and place his legs higher than his head; and if it is in the lower part of the belly, then you place his head and feet higher than the middle parts.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then you place your attention and consideration always in that way so that the part in which the plague is is higher than the other.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	And thus you must administer this in great plagues and in middling plagues.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	And in small plagues, place what is prepared by you, and make that it be ministered between your fingers, the one which has the disruption entirely with its hand and adjusts the lips of it, and then uncover from that to that which sews any cause to another.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	And this is the manner of common suturing: one that takes the needle, or count of needles according to the quantity of the amplitude of the plague; and then lays it from the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger, and strengthens the needle one, or another that you do not put thread in the two extremities of the cord, with two extremities of the chaplet that is below the cord of the fingers, until you make that penetrate from that part; and you have already added two extremities of the cord and two extremities of the chaplet, and so are made four orders.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And then strengthen with thread double in the circuit of the needle, and sometimes of two parts together, and then add the two lips and the plague by decent addition; and then lay down the thickness of the finger and fix another needle in that, and then tie that with thread as you tied with the first needle; and do not cease to do this if it is necessary with the needles until you have completed the whole constriction of the plague.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	And let the needles be middling between thickness and subtlety, for the subtle needles lightly cut the flesh; and the thick ones are of difficult entrance in the cord, and therefore by that they must be middling in subtlety and thickness.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And let the needle not be placed in two extremities of the cord properly, so that the flesh is not lightly incised and that the plague be healed before its consolidation.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And let not the sutures be prolonged so that the plague is not prohibited from consolidation.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And then cut the extremities of the needles so that they do not prick the patient's sleep; and place on the suture powders expanded of all parts, the ones which have the extremities of the needles; and leave those until you know that the plague is already consolidated.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And this kind of suturing with needles in this manner is most convenient in small plagues, for it suffices in the suturing of them one needle or two or around those.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	But the second suturing is common: and it is that you administer with suturing the four extremities, of the cord and two extremities of the chaplet, in one go, with a needle in which thread is enveloped equal in subtlety and thickness.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	And when with the needle you have penetrated these four extremities, return the needle from that same part from which you commenced, so that the thread is retracted from the most superior part to the plague, so that the suturing be according to the suturing of cloth with which the cloths are tightened.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	And pause between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the little finger.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And this suturing is what the men do.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And with this suturing I healed the plague which was inflicted on a man in his belly which had been plagued with a knife, and the disruption of the plague was greater than a palm, and it was pushed out from the bowels around two palms of the bowel of the middle place and the disruption was in the middle of the limb; and therefore I reduced that after the bowel had been pierced by the plague for twenty-four hours.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	And the plague was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or around, and I cured that one and he is healed; and then that was visible for most years, and it is converted in its dispositions.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And the other doctors had judged that it would not be healed; and by miracle fire, because I did not cure that wound with an enguent, because it was in a place where enguent was not found nor any medicine, but I placed over the plaque a hot cloth twice a day and assiduous washing with honey water until it healed.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	But I say two kinds of suture proper according to the narration of Paraula.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And it is that you begin with the suture of the tendon, and you insert the needle from the front part to the back part.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And therefore, as the needle penetrates the tendon and in that middle laceration according to rectitude and length of the whole body, and leaves the extremity of the ciph (?), in which you have inserted the needle; and make it penetrate in the other extremity the needle from the back part to the front part in the other extremity of the mihat.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	And therefore, as you have made that penetration, then you make that penetration another time in that same extremity of the mihat from the front part to the back part; and leave the extremity of the ciph(?) that is in this place, and make the needle penetrate in the other extremity from the back part to the front part.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And make penetrate with that one your penetration with which you make that penetration in the ciph(?) in the extremity of the mirat which is in the part of it while all that penetrates.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And then, as you begin from this same side and sew with the extremity that is of the ciph(?) in the other place, and extract the needle from the tendon which penetrated, and then reduce that one in that tendon and body the extremity of the ciph(?) that is in the other side with this extremity of the mirat; and extract that one from the tendon which is of part of it.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And do this one time and another, and do this one time then another until you sew all that which is front according to that example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this manner of suture is that you sew with suture of pellicies with which you sew the hairs, in this way that you sew the ciph(?) one time from the part of the extremity of the tendon, and that you leave that other time while you make it completed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	But the second kind of proper suture which I call Gualia, and this is of its service and by it recommended, is that you sew that one according to similarity with which certain medicants sew that one, in this way that they join all part to its corresponding part to it convenient by nature; and apply the extremity of one of it and the extremity of the mirat to the other extremity of it, and this is done according to that which you to you recommend.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	So that you put the needle in the extremity of the mirat to your proper side from the front part, and make that penetration to the back part in that same one, and leave two extremities of the ciph(?); and then revolve the needle and make that penetration from front to back in two extremities of the ciph(?).
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	And then revolve those each one, and make each one penetrate from the back part into the front part in two extremities of the mirat others that are in the contrary place.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this manner of suture is better than the common suture lighter, and is the suture of which I previously mentioned recollection.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the service of Gualia
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	But some, they said, suture of the belly is rectified with two needles, so is that you introduce in these ones each one a thread, and begin with introduction of needle of that which you owe you, and make that penetration into the other place according to suture of those with which they sew the guts equally.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	And know that when disruption is in the middle place of the belly, then the suture of it is more difficult than of the other places of the belly.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	But the judgment of medication of plague is judgment of the other plagues.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	Which cause is because when you obtain the plague recent with its blood before the air alters it, and reduce the hernia and sew that one and fit that one decently, then pause over that carnal powder.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the air has already altered the plague, then pause over that some enguents which are at your presence until they make hard and they break the threads, and be consolidated ciph(?) and mirat; and then cure that as it is the cure of the other plagues until it is healed.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	But if to you are not present the medicines, then pause over that immediately, because it begins to throw brac, hot cloth, and change that two times a day, as to you and I taught, until it is healed, because you do not indigeysses of other medication in many dispositions when the plagues are simple.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	But if you fear that the plague communicates in lesions to the main members, then you must submerge wool leon in oil of good quality, or in oil rubbed, and pause that in the circuit of the places that are between the angles and leave the aysselas.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	And if you feel pain or putrefaction in their hernias, because many times that must be, then cauterize that one with vi stiptic black tebe, and more so if the poyredura is reached in the hernia and is made exitura penetrating into the concavity of it.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And know that that one which is of the thick hernia is of pus lighter healing than that one which is in the subtle hernias.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	And it is of difficult healing because the hernia which is called "gegunu" does not receive healing from plague that comes in it of all; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it and because of the magnitude of it that is in those, and because of the subtlety of the body of that, and because of the proximity of that to the nature of nerves.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	But if that which proceeds from the plague is the cloth, and you obtain that recently, reduce that according to your recipe with which you reduce hernias similarly.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	But if it has passed into the space and is already made green or black, then you should strengthen that with a file over the area that is blackened by it, so that blood flows, because in the cloth are veins and arteries.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then cut that which is other than that ligament, and place the ends of the file pending from the part where the plague has gone through, so that upon you it is relieved the attraction of it, you must the removal of the cloth and emission of the arm of the plague.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Remembrance of the plagues when they happen in the hernia.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	When a disruption happens in the hernia and it is small, then it is possible that it can be restored in some men, for this reason because I saw that one who was plagued in his belly with a lance blow and the hernia was on the right side of the stomach, and the hernia was old and made a fistula, and he of it had management and flatulence.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Therefore, I thought of the cure of him since he was not confident in the healing of him, but I continued to subtlety that within that which was healing and the place is consolidated.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And I saw that the place already consolidated, I put on the patient that he should not lean on that accident of evil in his belly; and do not become anyone for that evil accident and remain in their thousand dispositions eating and drinking, and then enter into baths and is exercised in his days.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And already said some experienced that when a hernia happens in the belly, and it is small, then it is necessary that it be tied according to this manner: and is that you take a few sprigs of large heads; and then adjust the two lips of the hernia and place a sprig of those that has the mouth open over the two lips of the hernia; therefore when it takes upon those and strengthens its mouth, cut off the head of it, because it adheres and is not dissolved.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And then place another sprig near the first, and do not cease this to do with sprigs one near another according to the quantity of the whole hernia.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	And then reduce that and also the hernia; and remain those annexed heads in the belly until the hernia is healed; and do not happen to the patient any harm.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And already it is possible that the hernia be tied with a subtle file which is made of the belly of beast annexed with it, because it is more in needle; and is that you take the extremity of these files of belly, and be it much skinned, and then tie the extremity of it with a file of it, enveloped, and then enter that file in needles and body with that the hernia, and reduce that in the disruption.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	And this manner of suture with sprigs is not but according to a way of trust and of hope.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	But if the hernia is large and wide, mostly if it is in one of the subtle bellies, because then it is not born but subtlety, and it is not the healing of it at all.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	Of the cure of zuchem and fistula.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	Know that every hernia and abscess when it is inflamed and becomes old, and is made an ulcer, and is not consolidated and throws out arm all the time and is not cut off, then, in any member that it is, universally it is called fistula and we call that azukem.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And fistula according to truth is a fibrous, hard, white knot, with which there is no pain and to which the concavity is like the concavity of a bird's feather; and for this reason, that one is called some rizatz, that is, feather.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And it is in some men humid, which throws out arm; and for a little while the humidity is cut off in some hours.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And some times this humidity is moved, and is little, and is thick, and is subtle.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	And I have already said in the division, then as I said the hernias, that every ulcer that is not healed nor is in it naked flesh, it is not that but for one of these causes: of which one is or because of poverty of blood in the body; or because of malice of it; or because between it and the lips is hard flesh prohibiting the birth of flesh; or because it is of moved legs; or because that ulcer in itself puts itself is rotten and the matter that is to it transmitted is of bad quality; or because the medicine is inconvenient in the cure of it; or when corruption catches in the region, and is pestilence; or by property of region as it happens in Zaragoza, in which is made difficult digestion of the diseases, and is delayed in that healing of abscess by nature; or because in it is bone, or moved bones.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	Already and shown all those causes, and the signs of them and the cure of them with medicines in the division.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And I want as I make to you know the cure of fistula which is made by way of operation with my hand.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And know that fistula happens in all the members of the body; because of those are fistulas that reach the great veins and arteries, or to the nerves, or to the head, or to the belly, or to the bladder, or to any of the ribs, or to any of the vertebrae of the spine, or to any of the joints composed by composition as that of the hand and the foot; and of those that give to it proximity of the principal member and of likenesses.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And therefore of these fistulas that are according to this manner are of the diseases of difficult healing, and do not receive cure, and occupation with this is work and ignorance.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	And if it is of the fistulas any the depth of which does not reach these places that have been said, and you wait and confide in the cure of it, and you want to arrive at knowledge of it, then take a probe or of iron, and if the fistula goes according to rectum, and inquire that with it.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	But if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate that with a probe of fine lead, because lead with the lightness of its body is relieved and curved of its tortuosity.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	And if the fistula is having hideous moths, it is not to you possible that you signify upon it with a probe.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Therefore, cleanse the orifice by its orifices, because the humidity by which you cleanse that goes through the other orifices and flows from them.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And then inquire exquisitely, according to what manner to you is possible that you know if here has the bone or the nerve, and is the concavity of the fistula distant or close, or is a fistula to which its orifices are hideous and this over all with the sum of your strength, with your interrogation, with which you interrogate the patient, and the invention of the pain you owe your compression with the hand over the place, and similar to the significations and of the causes accidental to the abscess.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And when you will have stood upon all those causes with true station, then come to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider then if it is fistula apparent close or in salt place, distant from joint, or of nerve, or of artery, or of vein, or of one of the places which you and I have said.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then you dry the fistula according to that which before is said of the narration of it, and remove that which is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and that which is born in the orifice of the flesh, or of theil and of similar things, and cure that within that it be healed.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	But if the fistula is of distant depth, and is according to rectum, then cover that which you incised in the preon as much as to you is possible, and then modify that of all its corrupted flesh; and then administer poultices enveloped in acute medicines, and introduce those into the concavity of the fistula, which you have understood with iron.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And do this with that some times within that the acute medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the concavity of the fistula of the corruption.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And then restore that with poultices which engender healthy flesh within that it be healed.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	But if it is not healed by this, then you cauterize that according to that we have recommended.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	But if the cause of the fistula is bone and it is due to you certify that, then you inquire that and dry that according to that we have recommended, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or of nerve or of principal member as we have said.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is to you discovered and there is in it any corruption and blackness, then you root that within that the corruption be hosted all; and then cure that with that which it encarnates within that it be healed.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is not healed and throws a brac as it did, then you know that you have not arrived at the total eradication of the corruption; and therefore you discover over it secondarily and exquisitely do the root of it and the purification of it with the rear strong tie, and then restore that.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore if it is healed, well is; and if not, then you know that that corruption is in the distant depth of the body, which has not been achieved, and therefore to you in that there is born only to leave that.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is to you possible to throw that, then you throw it with subtle forceps which convenience to that.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if there are many bones, then exquisitely do the extraction of all those, and of those leave none cause with your strength.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	But if to you makes contrariety any cause of the humidities, and in their incision there is no fear nor error, then incise those ligaments or flesh if they are here, and deliver the bones.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	But if to you is not preparation to remove the bones of your hour, then pause over the plaque that which can cause the plaque that, and leave that within that that is around those bones of flesh and of ligaments, and guard the plaque that it not be consolidated, and be constricted the section which you have incised in your operation.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	However, if you fear, pause over it cot submerged in sopre trissat with oil, or cot submerged in Egyptian anguent, or in one of the green poultices, because when they will have softened those ligaments, and the bones are of their separation the ablation, and of those traction is relieved.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if it is a great bone as the bone of the hip or of the joint or similar to those, and that which of it is corrupted is the face of it so only, then root that with resio so only rear within that it be hosted that blackness and corruption, and then restore the plaque.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	But if that which of it is corrupted is a great part, and the corruption has already achieved the medulla of the bone, then it is a necessary cause to close that and that all incise within the place where the corruption has been reached, and then cure that within that it be consolidated.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	And I recommend to you that you make a man in his bed so that you may place that as an example and helper on your operation.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Take a young man around xxx years old, who has an accident in his groin, and the pain from the inside out is on the matter of the body, as the matter has come to the groin, and it is matter of abscess with a large abscess, and it is not to him an external cause.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	And therefore take the time with that by the error of the doctors, as the abscess is opened, and there come from it many materials, and its cure is properly stopped as the leg is fistulated, and made in it many horrific things, which all throw out pus and the humidity of the body.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And therefore the cure of many doctors around two years, and not in those wise but in the art, as I was called.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And I saw the leg of him and the materials that ran from him those horrific things for a great body; and already the body of that man was all stabozit and the color of it was citrina.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And therefore I inserted the tenta into one of those horrific things and reached the tenta to the bone.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	And then I and scrutinized all the horrific things and found those to reach their all parts of the leg.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then I me cut and incised over one of the horrific things as I described a part of the bone, and I found that corrupted, and it was already terrible and corrupted and degraded; and it was already corrupted a part of the leg as it had penetrated into the middle.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then I sewed that which to me was discovered and prepared from the uncovered bone.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	And I cured that it was not in the bone but that corruption which I excised and sewed, and I had already drained it.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then I placed the restoration of the plague with medicinal consolidatives for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And then I repeated and discovered over the bone second time over the first discovery, and I found continuing corruption with the bone.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And I sewed what appeared to me of that corruption, and then I was perforated to make the cure of it and restoration, and it was not restored.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then I discovered over it another time and did not cease to incise the bone little by little particularly and perforated the restoration of it, and it was not restored until I incised around a palm of it, and that extracted with its marrow, and then I restored it with medicines, and it was consolidated slightly and healed.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it was not necessary iteration in the operation of it and section of it but for the disposition of the frailty of it and for the scarcity of the tolerance of it and fear of it of death, because to it happened in all hours for superfluity of evacuation syncope evil.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And therefore the healing is by whole healing, and nothing is in place of bone hard flesh; and it is made good the disposition of it in its body and returned the virtue of it; and it is converted in its dispositions and did not make to it contrariety in ambulation nor harm in any cause.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	But if the bone is eminent in the place of the body already drawn, then when you succeed this in this manner: and that you take a ligament and strengthen it at the extremity of that eminent bone, and command to someone that it extends it upwards; and place that ligament of wool thicker than the first ligament; and then tie that over the flesh that is left the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you pull the flesh to the left sides, and you uncover the flesh over the place which you want to sew so that the saw does not damage the flesh.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And place a board or table below the bone decently, because when you do this it is not forbidden the saw that does not succeed the corrupted flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	And cover that it be the sawing over the corrupted place little by little, because if it is in the concavity of the bone corruption and does not appear in its appearance to the touch, and force to sawing of it another time.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	And if the bone is corrupted and not eminent, abates is the one part continued with the other, and the corruption is in the middle place or in a part of it, then you uncover the flesh of all parts totally; and then place a board below, and then saw that of the first part where is the corruption so that it be continued the sawing of the other part.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And be the sawing according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it is continued from the other part.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	And if from the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in it reason but engine.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or of the foot, it is very difficult; however, cover that you inquire the corruption in what manner appears to you, and that you open that, and clean that according to whichever disposition which is to you possible, and in case engine be rectified to you, when it does not make to you contrariety vein or nerve.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	And know which are the incisors and the saws to incise these bones are very according to the situation of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the thickness of those, and the subtlety and the greatness and the smallness of those, and the hardness and their rarity; for that cover when you prepare for all species of operation instrument convenient to that operation.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	And know that this operation signifies to you about the type of instrument of which you indigeysses; when you are great study and long and knowledge of the ways of this art, and witness of ways of illnesses, for then you already have by yourself that which is convenient to them of the instruments to all illness.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And you so to you forming at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will place as simple with which you will proceed to your prohibition which you will experiment on others.
Forma de serra:	Shape of saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra:	Shape of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Shape of another large saw:
Forma de ray:	Shape of a ray:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Let the head of this ray be according to the shape of the head of a star-shaped key, and the points of it be according to the shape of the points of the althefegi.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And it is not convenient otherwise than that with that they be confractured the heads of the joints when they are corrupted, or the mouth is wide.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	Shape of a razor larger than the others:
Forma de razori menor:	Shape of a smaller razor:
Forma de razori lat:	Shape of a lat razor:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	Shape of another saw decently made: let it be arched as much as possible and the sharpness of it of iron, and the member of it of a boy dagger decently made.
Forma de lu:	Shape of it:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	Shape of a razor which has a concavity:
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Shape of another subtle razor:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	Shape of another razor of curved extremity:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	Shape of a small razor resembling a tentacle:
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Shape of an incisor with which bones are incised:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	Shape of another minor incisor:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Shape of another incisor; this one resembling a ray, and the extremity of it is like a saw, and it is exhibited in many places in the ration of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Shape of a ray which is convenient to the ration of that which is perforated of the bones:
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	And the extremity of it is triangular and of acute extremity.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly as to all the causes that we have said of razors and incisors and saws.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	Of incision extremities and of the serration of the bones.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	The extremities can be caused either intrinsically or extrinsically, or as you will have medicated that corruption by cure of those medicines and the cure does not confer, or sometimes the corruption goes from the member which you do not strike any cause, then as you incise that member into that the honor of the corruption, so that the patient escapes by that of death or malice which is a greater defect of the member.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	And the sign of that one to whom it happens, is that the member is made black before it is cured that fire has already burned it, or you may approach the blackness before the poultice of that one is applied to that member which seizes it and which nourishes the whole body; and therefore, you must incise that one.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly if the cause of the corruption is the percussion of some venomous causes such as from a sea scorpion or viper or rutabaga and similar.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the corruption or percussion is in the extremity of the finger, then you incise the finger and do not give space to the corruption so that it may enter into the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similarly if it happens to the hand, then you incise it at the root of the forearm, and do not give space to the corruption so that it may spread in the forearm.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	And if instead of that, then you incise the arm into the armpit at the junction.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the corruption passes another and sometimes encircles the armpit, then in that is the death of the patient; and administer another cause another to that in cure is the quantity of virtue.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly do of the foot when corruption envezeys the toe of the foot, then you incise it into one of the toes.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And if it takes hold in the heel of the foot, then you incise the whole foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	But if it may enter into the thigh, then you incise the thigh into the junction of the thigh.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	And if the corruption has already reached the thigh, then in it there is no other than dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the manner of incising the member or of sawing it is that you strengthen the ligament in the part furthest from which you want to incise, and strengthen another ligament over the place; and extend the minister a ligament to the parts below, and extend the minister another ligament above; and you separate the flesh which is between two ligaments in a lat spatulum until all the flesh is uncovered; and then you incise or saw.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And so that it be placed cloth of linen from all parts so that it does not touch the place itself, and that it comes to the patient lesion adjusted and abscess caut.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	But if it happens flux of blood when you work, then you cauterize the place carefully, or place upon it some powders that restrain the blood; and then return to your medication until it is completed.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then bind the afflicted member with a convenient ligament, and care for it until it is healed.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	And I tell you this that happens to a man in his foot, this same accident that I have told you, which is that a blackening occurs in his foot with burning that was assembled like a fire's combustion.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And that corruption blackens first in his toe before it spreads throughout the entire foot.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	And therefore that man prepares himself by putting on a poultice that he feels will help the cure to go to the member with the vehemence of it that it throbs with pain and burning, and the blackening of that foot enters into the joint, and fire heals.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Long time blackens that same corruption in the toe of the hand I indicated.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	And therefore it comes to me, and so I am persuaded to reflect that superfluity with what I place on the hand of the medicines, to approach the purification of the body of it; and it does not reflect the superfluity and begins to go to the other toe before it began in the hand.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And it implores me to cut the hand of it, and I do not want to do so, hoping for the reflection of that superfluity, and more than I fear the incision of the hand of it dead, because the virtue of the ailment was over the casing.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	And since he left me, he returned to his land and I came to know that that man prepared and cut his hand entirely, and he was healed.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And I have not added this narrative except so that it may be helpful regarding what happens to this ailment, and that its significance by which it is signified and according to which it is treated.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of the cure of wounds and the quality of clysterization with medicines.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members, and the space of the abscess is prolonged while it makes a collection of pus, and then it is broken and perforated, and pus is extracted from it, and the place remains empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin that is above it is as subtle as cloth, and it has not reached the back corruption, and has not imprinted on the bone or on the nerves or on the ligaments, it is called a sinus, and it is not called a fistula.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	But however, if the space is prolonged while the corruption presses into some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	And the cure of it is that the skin is incised entirely as if it were revolved, and more so when it is subtle and made like cloth, and composes that it does not adhere to the place by its corruption.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	But if you hope that the skin adheres and that the corruption has not reached further consequence, and in the skin there has passed through from the front, then you cure that with clysters.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And it is that you consider the sinus, and then if it is large, and the brac that you see is of a fetid odor, then you clysterize it with an Egyptian medicine which is of oil and strong wine and ziniar receiving equal parts, and they are placed in a vessel, and they are heated over the fire until the medicine becomes thick and reaches the consistency of honey.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And then you take from it what is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey; and clysterize it with that the sinus, and strengthen the orifice of it, and leave the medicine in it for the quantity of two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then you extract it with a sponge; and do this for as many days until the sinus is purified and the stench is removed.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	And some times it is clysterized with ash water, when this medicine is not present to you; and it is that you take the ash of vite, and put water over it; and then you collect that and clysterize it with it until you confess that the sinus is then healed.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	And if the ailment has no tolerance over the Egyptian medicine nor the ash water, then clysterize it with water and honey and a little crushed ziniar, and clysterize it with wine and honey mixed, because of the property of honey is that it purifies and washes, and the wine makes the sinus adhere, and more so when in the wine there is superfluity of astringency and dryness.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And as you do this sometimes and you confess that the sinus is already healed, then clysterize it with water that makes flesh grow in it.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And it is that you take of dyphynicon and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine; or that you clysterize it with some medicines and other washes that have the properties which I have already written in the treatise of washes.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow in which the clyster nozzle is not received, then you enlarge it with a small iron little by little, and place in it a poultice enveloped in Egyptian wash or basil wash until it is enlarged.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And similarly if the orifice is wide, then you add the lips of it with suture and leave it in the quantity in which between the clyster there is addition.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And if the orifice from which the pus flows is elevated to the upper parts, then dry that in the lowest place that is in it so that the pus flows downwards, because when the pus is constricted in the depth of the sinus the flesh is generated in it.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus within the environment of the lowest bone as you want, then you perforate that you prepare the member with the preparation by which the pus flows lightly according to what is fitted to you and that there is no cause of the pus retained in it.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And take medications that are placed on the appropriate sinus for that which you want to extend those on a cloth of it.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	And the cloth be of such a quantity as it makes the communication of the whole sinus; and then cut with the shears on the right of the orifice of the sinus a wound a little wider than the orifice of the sinus; and then extend on another cloth of the lions' hides according to the quantity of the wound, and place it on that one in a distant position from the orifice of the sinus so that it be relieved the swelling of the arm of it and do not show the great cloth except after a few days once.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	But that which is on the orifice of the sinus, the which you remove every hour so that it may escape that which is adjusted in it of the arm.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you know if that which flows from it of the arm is much or little, or is digested, or is undigested.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	And thus you consider the place of that sinus, if in it the patient feels pain or not, and if it is in it an abscess.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And as your medication is prolonged in this manner, and you see the matter that is placed on the orifice of the sinus already adheres, or begins to adhere, then the third day you untie it, and when you untie the bandage, then change the cloth for another and renew the poultice.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	But if from the sinus there appears a long space of subtle virus, then do not despair of its adherence, for the healing of it approaches, for some men in whom the slow generation of flesh in their wounds, and of those it is done the contrary of it.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	And if from the sinus after many days there is issued arm undigested, then know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and is the prolonged cause, then you adjust in the drying of the medications, and if the medications are humid in their substance and in their virtue, they are dried as a diaphana poultice, when there is in it adjusted superfluity of addition of zegi.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And the last which is cured, is that you take of diaphana poultice and be dissolved in rose oil, and be on it poured a little vinegar in its substance, and then apply that to it, and use of that.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	And already does it seem in that action, when there is no arm, diaphana poultice, honey when it is cooked until it is thickened, and use of it; or that you take myrrh and aloes and incense, and grind all and pulverize it on the honey when it is on the fire, and then line it on cloth and apply that on the sinus; and line it with the honey which you have cooked until it is thickened, and pulverize it on cloth and apply that.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes are administered with it the long and roots of lily celestial (and it is lily celestial) and flour of herbs and centaurea, and use of those simples or adjust them, grind them and sift and pulverize on the honey which I have recommended; and use of it.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if the sinus is prolonged, and is not healed by this cure, then know that the corruption is in the bone of it, and already make inquiry in the bones or in the other hard members or in the ligaments; then you cure it with fistular cure, as it has been said above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	Of the cure of panaritium, and of ingrown nails, and of the addition of a finger incision and section.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Panaritium is an abscess which arises from the nail of the finger of the hand or of the foot, and it often arises in the other fingers, and when it is prolonged and its cure is less valued, or it is an abscess of an abscess caut, or it is corrupted, and it casts matter while it corrodes the roots of the nail, and often corrupts that whole, and often transmits its corruption to the bone until it is there a foul odor, and is made the extremity of the finger lame, and the color of it is made dark.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	And therefore when you will have that with what we have said in the division and do not apply your cure, then know that you should cut with iron all the superfluity that is remained from the nail and then cauterize the wound with that, for cauterization is very useful in that.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the additions of the nail voids already compress the flesh to the sides of the fingers, and they begin to prick and pierce that, then know that you should place a fine needle under the angle of the nail that pricks the flesh, and drive that up and cut that flesh with ease, and place on that which remains of the flesh of the corrosive comburent medications until it is all removed; and then cure that with poultices until it is healed.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	But if the corruption has already entered the bone, then know that you should cut the bone that and extract it, for no time is healed that in it the bone is corrupted.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you see the corrosion and corruption going into the finger, then you should cut it in one of the joints according to how its remembrance is pressed, and then cure that until it is healed.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	But if to the nail there is a blow or friction, and there is in that a vehement pain, then know that at the beginning you should poultice the patient, and then dry the nail with a sharp spatula with a transverse section from above down, and guard yourself that the section does not reach into the flesh that is below the nail, for you will make happen to the patient a vehement pain, and it will be a cause to the birth of the flesh adjusted superfluously in the place; and then cure that place with what soothes the pain.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	This is a difficult one, but I'll give it a shot.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth of them in some nuts of the said.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	But the one that is born in some nuts of the finger does not hurt, and this one that is born in the joints is very painful.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And of those that are born fleshy, the section is lighter, and that you should cut its root with a spatula.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	But of the one that is born at the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore guard yourself from the abscess of it.
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But in the one that is born in the finger, cover that you cut at the beginning the flesh of it with a round incision into the bone, and then saw with one of those saws convenient to that, and then cure that inside that it may be healed.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	But consolidation which happens to the fingers between their many movements or by birth of the man who is born this way, or by consolidation of plague or by burning of fire, or by similar things, then cover that you succeed that consolidation inside that the fingers return to their natural form.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And then pause between their cloths of them infused in olive oil rubbed so that they are not consolidated lightly, and separate between those, or pause between those a lamina of subtle lead inside that it may be consolidated according to what you cover.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly if consolidation happens in some fingers with the palm, then you dry that consolidation according to what is prepared and convenient to the figure of the member.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Of incisions of vices, they are varicose.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices are varicose, and they are veins convoluted thick full of melancholic superfluities which come in motion of the limbs of the body, and the major advent of them in the legs, and more in the legs of the travelers and the laborers and the porters.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Therefore cover that you administer purgative of the body of black bile some times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilica vein.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	But the cure of them with iron is according to two manners: one is that it be incised and that the black blood be thrown out, and the other manner is that the vein be elevated and all of it be extracted.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	The section of it is according to this manner: embroil at the beginning the leg with warm water motion inside that the thick blood be resolved, which is feculent of the leg, and then strengthen the leg of the patient to the most sovereign part of the thigh, inside to the part behind the knee with a bandage, and then dry the vein in a place, or in two, or in three with wide incision, and then elevate the black blood with your hand from the part behind the leg inside up, and down in, inside that from the blood be issued the quantity that you want and that times will suffice, and which will take the virtue of the sickness.
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then tie that, and command him that he abstain from the foods that engender black bile.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	And repeat the cure by phlebotomy when the veins are full and that night to the patient.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	But the elevation of them is according to this manner: you that raise the leg of the patient, if in it there are motions, and then put it in a bath and embroil the leg of it with warm water inside that it becomes red and the veins are exuberant; or that it be exercised by strong exercise, if bath is not to you present, inside that the limb be scalded.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And then cut the tendon in the right of the vein by incision in the long or in the back of it finger, or in the lowest of it of the ankle.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then open the tendon with pincers and excoriate the vein from all parts inside that it appears to the feeling, and is of the appearance of it that times that rug declining to blackness.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And therefore come evasive and from the tendon you times that white which is cord.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And then you put below it the ray inside that it be elevated and be thrown from the tendon, and suspend it with an ounce or lion's horn.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And then cut another incision near that incision for three fingers, and then excoriate the tendon from the part above the vein inside that it appears.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And then elevate that and incise it in the back incision of the ankle, and then extract that and elevate it inside that it be issued by the second incision, and then extract that from the incision that is above it.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And do that inside that you extract that from the incision that is most sovereign or most high of all the incisions, inside that all is issued; and then incise it.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you do not obey to your extract and elevate, then introduce a needle with a strong double file and tie it and extract it, or introduce below it the ray and revolve your hand to all parts inside that it be thrown.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	And guard yourself that it not be incised; because if it is broken, it is done to you difficult to elevate that motion and it is come upon the patient for that damage.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And come that all that aura be thrown out, then pause upon the place of the plague wool immersed in wine and olive oil rubbed and olive unrubbed, and cure that inside that it may be healed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the gut is contracted and has a twisting that is in its wrapping in the parts, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must do upon that entire twisting of it and the places of its wrapping, and then suspend that with hooks while you raise that whole thing.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	And guard yourself that you do not cut the vein and that you do not damage it, for it will be difficult for you to raise that; and serve your prudence in that.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Form of the incision made on the dried gut:
Forma de unci orp:	Form of the hook orp:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	It is not sharpened like the hooks nor is it of sharp extremity so that it does not damage the vein; and it is of thick flexibility like a lion, for if it were subtle, it would cut the vein by its subtlety; it has in it superfluous thickness as we have said.
De extraccio venae cruris.	Of the extraction of the vein of the leg.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This vein is generated in the legs in hot lands as in the At-Tigris in the land of Arabs and in the lands of India hot and arid of little fertility and in which there are no herbs nor trees.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And it is strongly produced in other places of the body other than the legs.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And the gestation of it is of putrefaction that comes from the bone as if venom from the inside of the body serpents and worms and scarides and worms that generate between the bone and the flesh.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	And a sign of the reception of its arrival is of this vein that accides in the leg inflammation vehement; and then the place is vesicated; and then the vein begins to issue from the place of that vesication which seems like a root pulled from a plant.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And therefore when it appears from him the extremity, then you must wrap over that a piece of lead of which is the weight of a drake. Within two drachmas, and bind that and let the lead suspended from the leg.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And as many times as you see from it any cause to the parts outside, wrap that in lead and tie that.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the motion is prolonged, then you must incise a part of it and wrap the remnant; and do not incise that of root within that it be outside, for if you incise that it is contracted and enters into the flesh and makes it happen abscess and pus in the place and bad ulceration.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	Because that it must be treated gradually and be extracted little by little, until that it be thrown out from the end of it and there remains no cause of it in the body.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And of this vein it is issued in some men that it is in its length of five palms and ten, and already it has reached me that it issued one of twenty palms.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is incised at the time of its medication, then introduce the ray into the tract of it and perforates that with a long tract with the body, until that it be evacuated all that which is in the matter, and administers putrefaction of the place for some days with medicines; and then cure that by the cure of abscesses.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	And this vein sometimes has many branches, and mostly when it appears at the junction of the foot or in the foot, and come to it many orifices, and it is issued from each orifice a branch.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And therefore cure that as we have said in the division and with that which is said below.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	Of the section above the worms generated under the skin and it is called the bovine ailment.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	This ailment is called in some lands of us the bovine ailment because it often happens to oxen and it is a worm few one which is born between the bone and the flesh, and it goes in the whole body up and down, and it is shown in the feeling of us its movement from member to member until it disrupts the bone and comes out.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And the generation of it is by putrefaction of some humors as if it were worms and serpents and earthworms and roundworms in the belly.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	And it is feared for the malice of it, because when it goes in the body and is elevated to the head, and it has reached the brain, then very strong fever occurs in it and it enters and destroys the brain, and this happens many times.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And therefore when you want to cure that and extract it, then it is not done if not by its ambulation and appearance of it to the feeling, and then you must strengthen that which is above it and that which is below it with a bandage and constriction strong, and then dry over it and extract that.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if it is buried in the flesh and not the above, then you pause cautery with fire over the place until it dies, and the major cause that is feared is corruption of it with which it corrupts the place as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	And if you see that being reached to the head near the brain, then strengthen over the forehead with a strong constriction, and then dry over it, and extract that; and make the patient use of modification of his body with medicines evacuant putrid bad humors, and guard himself from foods that generate putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	Of the section above the ailment nafir.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This ailment is called in our land nafir, and it is pain which comes in some members, and then it is changed from member to member.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And I have already seen that according to what I will tell you.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	I was called to a sick woman in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the arm, and since it was warm for an hour, I saw that inflammation go as if a worm was pushing towards it, but more lightly than it should be, as if it were living silver when it runs from place to place.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then it went into the pain of that place and quivered in the muscle, and I placed my hand there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then I corrected it in the other arm until I reached the other arm.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I recommended to him that he should roll it all over his body as I saw; and it was too marvelous the permutation of it and the speed of member to member.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	And I had already seen this before in my pupils in this manner, however, I have seen many of them whose pain was transposed from limb to limb.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	But I did not see this in my pupils as in the woman.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And I did not think it to be anything but that because the woman was old, or of dry flesh and exposed veins, and in this appearance, that volatility was transposed.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this retro-cure in those who are delicate and with moist flesh and well-covered veins.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	And as you want the cure of it, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not to you apparent in the pupil as we have said, then you strengthen over it and leave it lightly and secse over it until that volatility is constricted, and cauterize the place.
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	But if you do not see it in your pupils, then you cure it with the shaking of the body and with that which you expel volatility, and charm them with pills of stench and pills of serapi and similar things.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Of extraction of arrows.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are diversified according to the species, and according to the places of the body in which they are shot, because their diversity is that of those that have large tips, and small, and concave, and blunt, they are solid; and of those that have three angles, and of those that have tongues; and of those that have shafts.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And that one which is according to the limbs and the legs in which it is shot is according to two manners: because the limbs or so principal members concave, as the brain, the heart, the liver, and the lung, and the intestines, and the bladder, and their similar; and therefore when it is shot in any of these members and you see signs of death, which cause you recommend to proceed, then you must avoid the extraction of that arrow in those where death seizes it in the most disposition, and when you do not see these evils signs, and the arrow is not hidden in the depth of the member, then you extract it and cure the plague.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And of the signs of the neck is when it is shot in it, and it pierces the bone, and it is emitted from the cyphons which is above the brain, because it happens through it violently soda, and scotomia, and vertigo, and roaring in the limbs, and inflammation and roaring of the tongue, and spasm and mixture of understanding and vomiting of bile, and very strong the word is cut off and the voice is destroyed, and it is emitted from the place of the plague humidity white resembling dust, and eyes of it resembling the consistency of the flesh.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And therefore if these signs appear to you, then you abstain from the cure and the extraction of the arrow, if it is not outside.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	But the signs of the arrow when it is shot in the heart, are that it is near the left nipple, and feels with that which it has been placed in a hard cause, and it is not a void cause; and very strong the movement of the arrow is similar to the movement of the pulse, and running of the plague black blood, and seizes that coldness of the extremities, and a sore cold, and syncope; and therefore you know that death descends all the way down.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are so easily blood sputtered from the plague, and the vessels that are near the neck are inflamed, and the color of the patient is changed, and expiries great spirit a lot, and demands attraction of cold air.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if it is shot in the ligament which is in the feet, and the pain then is near the small bones, and it is made the leg great with vehement pain and with sigh, and it is not bad all the limbs of the muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	And if it is shot in the stomach, then very strong eyes of the plague are seen and some undigested food.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	And if it is shot in the belly, and it is put in it, eyes are seen of the plague, or the fabric, or the intestine which is disrupted, and there is no hope in the cure of it extraction of the arrow.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	And if the arrow is shot in the bladder, and it is emitted from outside urine, and it proceeds from it some cause to the parts outside, and very strong is pain on the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	But the other members as well as the face, the neck, the throat, and the shoulders and the helpers, and the vertebrae of the back, and the clavicle, and the hip, and the leg and their similar members, are saved according to the greatest dispositions when the arrow does not touch vein nor artery and is not a venomous arrow.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	And I will recount to you what I have seen of the nature of these arrows, so that you may signify this to your healing.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	The cause is, that in a man struck by an arrow in the lacrimal bone of his nose, at the root of the nose, and you extracted that from the other side, leaving the gray of the eyebrow, and it is healed, and does not cause any harm in the nose.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who was struck by it in the gray of his eyebrow, leaving the eyelid, and the arrow was already hidden and could not be obtained from it except for a small extremity with which it adhered to its shaft, and it was a large arrow of the sharp arrows of the Turks, with a lion's head in it, in which there were no eyebrows.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	And the Jew healed, and did not cause any harm in his eyebrow.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who was struck by it in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, and it is the one that has eyebrows; and therefore I incised upon it between two guides, and it was already submerged in his throat; and therefore I subtiliated it with it, and then extracted it, and the Christian healed.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And I extracted another arrow from a man who was struck by it in his belly, and I thought he would die from it; and therefore, because forty days had passed and there was no change in him from any of his dispositions, I incised upon the arrow and engineered it, and he healed, and did not cause him any harm.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And I saw a man in whom an arrow was lodged in his back, and the plague was consolidated on him, and because it was about seven years, I extracted the arrow from the root of the thigh.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And I saw a woman to whom an arrow was lodged in her belly, and the plague was consolidated within her, and she was not changed in her dispositions in any way, and the woman did not suffer any harm in any of her natural operations.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And I saw another man to whom an arrow was lodged in his face and the plague was consolidated, and I broke the arrow, not finding much pain here, and many appearances to this.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And I extracted the arrow from the man of the king's princes who was struck in the middle of his nose and had already declined to the right side a little, and the whole arrow was hidden.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And I was called to his healing after the lodging of the arrow entered three days.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	And therefore I felt the plague of the arrow very strictly; and then I inquired about it with a subtle attempt, and I did not feel it; but I felt it pricking below the right eyebrow, and therefore I supposed that that prick was because of the extremity of the arrow.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And I plastered the place with a plaster in which there is attractive and digestive virtue, confessing to myself that the place would be apostemated so that it would appear to me the place of the arrow, so that it would succeed on it.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And there was no harm in the place significant that the arrow had reached that place; and I continued with the plaster on it for many days and there was no harm; and the plague was consolidated meanwhile, and I broke the patient's evil from the extraction of it for a space of many days until one day he felt the arrow within his nose and recounted this to me.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	And therefore I placed upon the plague medicine acute corrosive for many days until it opened, and with the probe I touched it, and felt the extremity of the arrow subtly, which adhered to the shaft.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And then I adjusted in the appearance of the plague by that acute medicine until the extremity of the arrow appeared to me visibly, and it passed to me time with it for the space of time within four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then because the plague had been amplified, and it was possible for me to intervene with the forceps in it, and to remove it, and not to be able to do so by the usual means, then I did not cease to subtly and ingeniously work on it with manners of ingenuity, until one day I began on it with manners of ingeniously hanging it with forceps made descentment, according to how it will come the form of them at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it; and then I restored that plague.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	And some physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose was not restored, and I restored it, and the plague was consolidated, and the patient healed for entire health, and did not suffer in him in any way.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	And I recount to you the quality of extraction of some arrows so that you may pause this rule and signification upon what I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions of it are not comprehended by narration nor are they comprehended by the book.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And the wise artificers compare with few about much; and with what is present about what is absent; and finds novel operation and novel instrument deserves the descent of the extraneous causes of the art when they occur.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	And therefore I say that arrows are not forced out of the members in which they are lodged but according to two manners: or by traction of the place in which they enter; or by the contrary of the other part.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And that which is drawn out by the place in which it entered, or is an arrow proceeding in fleshy place, and it is drawn and forced out.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	And if you do not obey the easement of the hour in which it catches, then you must leave it for some days until the flesh that is around it becomes soft, and the traction of it and its egress are relieved.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And if it is stuck in the bone and does not obey your pulling, then leave it for a few days and repeat it with traction and movement every day, and it will be out.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if it does not obey your pulling, then after a few days, cover the area where the arrow pierced the bone with a fine drill until the area around the arrow is widened, and then extract it.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow is stuck in the bone of the head and has already entered one of the ventricles of the brain, and appears in the patient some of those accidents that I have said, then abstain from the extraction of the arrow and leave it inside until its being is equal after a few days; because if the arrow reaches the brain, then death is not prolonged for him.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not stuck but in the bone of the body alone and does not pass into the brain, and the patient remains for a few days, and no accidents happen to him, then you engineer in the traction of the arrow and in the traction of it.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	But if it is well stuck and does not obey your extraction, then you administer drills in the circuit of the arrow as we have recounted, and then care for the area until it is healed.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	But if the arrow is already lodged in the place of the body, and is hidden from the feeling, then you inquire about it with a probe, and if you feel it, then pull it out with some instruments which are convenient for its extraction.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you cannot pull it out because of the constriction of the plague and the length of the arrow, and here there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein, then you cut into the plague until it is widened and it is possible to extract the arrow.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is to the ears that it is held, then you cut away the flesh in which it is stuck on all sides with all the skill that you can do; and engineer about that, if you cannot about the evasion of the flesh in the fracture of the ears and in twisting of those until it obeys.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any place where it is, then you use with the twist of your hand with forceps on all sides until it obeys; and with subtle skill that the arrow is not broken and that it is made to you difficult traction of it and of that extraction.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	And if you cannot about that of your hour, then you leave it for a few days until the parts that are in the circuit of it can be relaxed, and then repeat it when it is relieved.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	But if to you makes contrariety flux of blood, then you administer that which we have said of cure in its chapter.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	And guard your virtue of incision of vein or of nerve, or of cord, and administer skill in every manner to you possible of the evasion of the arrow; and do that with facility and tranquility and tardiness and firmness as I and to you recounted.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And therefore that you make contrary the arrow so that the patient be according to the figure according to which fire you must the placement of the arrow in it, because it is more helpful.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	But if that is not to you possible, then you administer that which is to you possible by the figures.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	But if the arrows that are outthrust by the contrary of the other part, or which already from it proceeds any part to the parts outside, or makes difficulty the extraction of the arrow by feeling of the part above the codena proper and sometimes that eminent; therefore you cut about that; and let the section be according to the quantity in which the forceps grasp; and then pull it out, because it is made lighter to extraction.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	But if it is held in the bone, then you twist the blade according to contrariety until the arrow presses in the bone, and amplify to itself, and then extract it.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	And if not, leave it for a few days, and then repeat it until it comes out.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	And if the shaft of the arrow is in it, then you impel it with it.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	But if the shaft is broken and you want to administer impulse, then you introduce and that, if it is blunt, a concave instrument so that between the concavity of it in the tail of the arrow and then impel it with it.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	But if the arrow is concave, then you impel it with a strong instrument entering into it, because the arrow is relieved by that.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	And if the arrow is envenomed, then cover that you concave all the flesh in which it is the vein, if it is to you possible that, and then care for it with what is convenient.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the arrow catches in the foot, or in the belly, or in the bladder, or in the rib, and it is near so that you touch it with the probe, and it is to you possible to cut about that, then cut about it and guard yourself from incision of vein or of nerve, and extract it, and then close the wound if it is indignant, and cure it until it is healed.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	Form of forceps with which arrows are pulled:
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let the extremities of them be like the beak of a bird that are made like a saw when they grasp upon the arrow so that they do not let it go.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And of those are made many kinds, great, few, and small, according to the quantity of the greatness of the arrow and its pauqueness, and of the width of the wound, and of the constriction of it.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	Form of impelling concave of this extremity concave as if with the pain of a bird so that it be alleviated the entrance of the arrow in it, and impulse of that deaf:
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Form of impelling deaf extremity:
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	as if with a ray so that it be alleviated the entrance of it in the concave arrow and is impelled with that.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	Of phlebotomy of the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so .xxx., de las quals so en le cap .xvi., so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	The veins of phlebotomy of which it is customary to phlebotomize so .xxx., of which so in the head .xvi., so are two pulsatile veins which are near the ears, called alhasisain; two herbs that are in the two temples appear; and two veins that are in two lacrimals of two holes that are called aspicientz; and the prepared vein in the middle place of the forehead, and the vein that is in the extremity of the nose; and two guidegi that are in the neck; and two veins that are in the upper lip; and two veins that are in the lower lip; and - these are the veins that are called algelic -; and there are two veins that are below the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so .v.; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	But the veins that are phlebotomized in the arms are .v.; But of those, one is a cephalic, and it is the wild latz; and the people call it "the vein of the head," and deaf, and it is a median vein, and it is composed of a branch of the basilica, and of another branch of the cephalic; and the people call that "vein of the whole body," and basilica is a vein which is placed in the domestic latz, and it is called "citillar," and the vulgarians call that "vein of the belly"; and funis of the arm, and it is placed over the focil, and it is that in which it is phlebotomized, and it is that which appears on the poutz by manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein that is between the said auricular and the smallest said, and there are two ramps in it.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And in the leg and the thigh there are three veins; one of those is that which is below the curvature of the denolh of the wild latz; and the second is sophena, and the place of it is below the thigh of the domestic latz; and the sciatic vein, and the place of it is below the thigh of the wild latz; and in the thigh there are other veins similar to those.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The juvament of the veins that are near the ears is to cataris ancients and emigranea and sahafati and ulceracios of the head bad ancients.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	And the quality of bleeding those is according to what I recommend to you: it is that it be rasped the head of the patient, and it be rubbed the head of the patient in the occiput in the place of both the veins with a wide cloth with good friction; then strangle the patient his neck with a bandage until they appear the two and the places of their being near the ears in two depressed places of the head; and you want that with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those with your finger, here it sends with the attempt.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then you take the cuticular lance, and it is that which is incident, and then you introduce that below the vein in the codena until the phlebotomy comes to the bone.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And then you raise your hand with the vein and the codena to the upper parts and incise the vein with an incident incision.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And be the length of the incision the quantity of two fingers adjusted or around that; and do thus of the blood as much as you want.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then strangle with poultices and leave that until it be healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already it has preceded at the beginning of the book the incision of those and their cauterization.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	But of the two arterial veins that are in the temples the juvament of the phlebotomy is to ancient and bad emigranea and obstinate ophthalmia and body of superfluities acute effused to the holes.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And the quality of phlebotomizing those is according to what I recommend to you: constrict the patient's neck mot until the two veins appear to the feeling by manifest appearance and be demonstrated the pulse of them below your finger; and then you send with the attempt.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then you raise the codena above the vein to the upper parts with your finger indicating, and introduce the incident phlebotomy below, and elevate the vein upwards; and incise that as you have done in the two other veins; and make run the blood according to the quantity of your necessity.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then untie the constriction of the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, and then place on that coat and poultices and strangle that above with a strong constriction, and leave that until it be healed.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And already is preceded the recollection of them, and of those the incision, and the attraction in the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And therefore the juvament of phlebotomy of the vein of the forehead is to the phlebotomy of the cephalic to the ancient ailments of the face and to emigranea and rigor and fetid ulcerations.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is according to what I recommend to you; it is that the patient constricts his neck with a bandage until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called fossori of which this is the form of it:
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Place the point that is at the head of the furrow over that vein and strike upon it with a pen or another cause in the manner of it, and let the blood run according to the quantity which you want; and then untie the perforation of the patient and strengthen that while it is healing.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And sometimes it is opened with a fleubotom, however, no that the fleubotom should be of acute extremity as the others, rather it should be of blunt extremity, and fleubotom that according to the transverse, because the bone is proper and strong, it would break it with the fleubotom when it is subtle.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	But the benefit of the two veins that are in the lacrimals of the two heels for scabies of the heels by rogor and sebol in the heels, and to the ailments of the face.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	And the quality of the fleubotomia is that the patient strengthens the neck with a bandage, and then fleubotom those, and you are standing over the head of it.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	And it is made the fleubotomia according to the transverse to longitude a little with fleubotom little, because in the place there is no flesh; and if the fleubotom is subtle, very much the extremity of it is broken.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then make run the blood as much as is to you necessary, and pause over those cuts, and strengthen those for a night, and then untie those.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	But the fleubotomia of the vein of the nose is conferent to acute fever and to soda vehement, and to the ailments of the face and emigranea and rogor that happens in the face, and more when it is old.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And the quality of the fleubotomia of it is that the patient strengthens his neck and then you take his nose with your left hand, and take the fleubotom subtle long and place it in the middle place of the head of the nose according to rectitude, because the vein does not appear to the feeling here, and because the blood begins to flow soon.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Cover that you ultimes your hand with the fleubotom little by little and make run the blood according to your necessity; and then tie it for a night, because that is restored lightly.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	But the benefit of the fleubotomia of the two guidegui to constriction of ale and to commencement of leprosy and to many ailments and inpetige and bad ulcerations corrosive as well as herpotromeno.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	And the quality of the fleubotomia of those is that the patient strengthens himself in each one in his neck with a ligament; and be the artifices over the head of the patient, and the patient be sitting on a seat.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And then fleubotom the vein at the long with fleubotom ample little by little; and then extract of blood according to temperate quantity or according to what times of necessity that is to what; and then make semblant of the other vein.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then untie the ligament and strengthen the two veins with stricture middling so that the patient not be pre-occupied, and let it enter into the morning when the plague is healed.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And the benefit of the fleubotomia of the veins algerich, conferent to small abscesses and pustules of the mouth and corruption of the gums and bad ulcerations and fissures, and to bad ulcerations that are in the nose and in the circuit of it.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	And the quality of the fleubotomia of those is that you make the patient to sit in front of you, and strengthen the neck of him with a bandage, and then you turn the lips of him and look at the two veins of which the one is of the right of the lip and the second of the left; and the demonstration of each one is by the blackness of each one of both, and this is more because in the circuit of those are veins little black; and therefore, inscise each one by incision inscident.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	But if doubt is left you, and you do not know which one of those is, then you understand to incision of the major of those, and of the pus manifest of those.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And make the semblant of the two veins that are in the lips above.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	But custom corr more to inscidir the two veins that are in the lip below.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	But of two veins that are below the tongue the benefit is to the fleubotomia of the cephalica to prefocacios that are in the guolayro, to the ailment of the uvula, and to ailments of the mouth.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And the quality of fleubotoming those is that you follow the patient between your hands in front of the sun, and elevate the tongue of him, and look below the tongue, from one side of it vein and from the other side vein, and the color of each one is declining to blackness.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	And then fleubotom each one; and guard yourself that you do not ultimes your hand in fleubotoming those, because below those are arteries.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And your veins that are fleubotomized in the groin are in those that corr custom in all men, and the fleubotomia of them is made according to two manners, or put with the fleubotom mirtilat or olive to subtility declining; or secsar with fleubotom cutellar, and appell it alnessil, and this is the form of it:
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And this alnessil is that convenes to seccio and of those so species latz and subtils according to the amplitude of the veins and according to the stricture of those.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	Method of Flebotomy of the Myrtle:
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	Make the patient lie as if asleep, and it is necessary to open the concave veins that appear full and large, and those that contain thick, turbid blood.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the method of Flebotomy of the Olive:
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And this flebotomy is of lesser width and of more subtle extremity, and it is necessary to perform flebotomy of subtle veins that contain subtle, citrine blood.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	But the usefulness of flebotomy of the basilica vein, which is one of three veins: that which extracts the blood from the ailments that are left in the throat and neck, and from which the feet and belly.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And it is necessary for the flebotomist, when performing flebotomy of that vein, to guard well and be over-fearful in that, because below it there is an artery, and if he errs and adjusts in the puncture of the flebotomy, he will cut that artery and there will be a flux of blood, so that he who flebotomizes that with flebotomy pungent, should bring it down as if it were a needle.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the basilica does not appear by manifest appearance, then it is necessary that you leave that and that you change to the other, or that you seek some branch of it; or that you flebotomize in the place of it at the end of the arm, because that one is manifest; and cut that with flebotomy needle as we have said.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	But if you want the flebotomy of the vein, then before the stricture of the arm, touch the place between that you know the place of the wrists, and then place your hand on it with tension; and then lie the arm and cut the vein with concave section with flebotomy needle as we have said; and guard yourself that the percussion for some space of the place of the artery.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when you see, as if you were stretching the ligament, inflation in the place that you have marked with tension, then that inflation is inflation of the artery, and therefore avoid that.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see the blood flow in the flebotomy as if it were the gold of a child, and the blood is subtle and red, then you know that it is from the blood of the artery; and then you cover and place your hand over that for a long space; and then stop your hand, and if the blood is abscindit, that is, cut off, then you stretch the arm and leave that.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And guard the patient from the moisture of him, and be over-fearful of him and do not harm him for some days until he is healed.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	But if the blood is not abscindit, and you see that you do not have present medicine for that, then you should cut the artery, if it appears to you; because the extremity of it is contracted, and the blood is abscindit; or that you take a piece of fig, and place that, and take the one majority and stretch that over the place of the vein at the stricture descending am ligament and am pulvils within the other day.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	And then if the blood is abscindit, it is well; and if not, then cure that with the water of which it is preceded to the remembrance of the place of the pulvils abscinding flux of blood.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the abscission of the blood of it is difficult in many dispositions because of the small place of the plague and the possibility of the ligament of the arm.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	But of the fusca vein the flebotomy is a usefulness that extracts the blood from the superior part of the head and from the part below the body; for that because it is composed of a branch of the basilica and a branch of the cephalica, as we have said.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And it is necessary for the flebotomist that one be over-fearful in the flebotomy of it, because below it there is a nerve; and therefore if he adjusts in the puncture of the flebotomy and touches the nerve, there will come to him stupor, and it is difficult the healing of it, and fort, it is not healed of all; and this nerve many times appears to the feeling; and if it is hidden to some men and it is subtle and not shown, then it is necessary that you pause the flebotomy with the one with which you flebotomize with section of the needle, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between two nerves, then you cut the vein in the length.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	The usefulness of flebotomy of the cephalica vein is that it attracts the blood from the head and comforts the ailments of the heels.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	And it is necessary in this properly, if you want that the flebotomy is done pungen with flebotomy olive or with flebotomy myrtle; because it is the safest of all the veins, because it is not below it the artery nor nerve.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	But however, it is necessary for you to perform the flebotomy that you guard that with the flebotomy you do not prick the head of the neck so only, and seek the place that is lightest, and do not touch it, if it is not touched with the first percussion that it be over that with flebotomy some times.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	But however, fort, it is an abscess in some men, when it is not flebotomized in the first percussion, but do not touch in re that abscess.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	But the quality of the flebotomy of that and its accidents are many, in which you must think about their rectification.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	The first of these is that you should know that flebotomy is not administered unless in the preservation of health and for the hope of it and the precaution of the coming of ailments, and that it should be flebotomy in one of the veins that are in the body, that is: cephalica, fusca and basilica; and that it should be flebotomy at the beginning of spring, after fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter near the meal, when there appear signs of repletion.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	And a phlebotomy is performed on the third day or after three hours have passed from the beginning of the day.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	May phlebotomy be administered, more when it brings convenience and necessity to it, either at night or day, at any hour and at any time.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	And that a child not be phlebotomized before they have reached fourteen years, and a woman who is pregnant not be phlebotomized until the fourth month until the seventh, and the elderly not be phlebotomized those who have already passed sixty years.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And since whoever wishes to be phlebotomized in any manner, they must cleanse their bowels before the phlebotomy with a lion's clyster, if in those there is much retained feces, so that the veins do not draw the superfluities into the phlebotomy of the bowels, which are purified, and that they do not harm the main limbs.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And they should not be phlebotomized those patients who are nauseous, suffering from indigestion, or who are recovering from illness or drunkenness until that is removed from them, nor those who are suffering from dropsy, and more that phlebotomy should be feared near colic, vomiting, and abdominal pain, and near multiplication of coitus and labor and exercise of fasting or vigils, and from every cause that dissolves the virtue, whether corporal or animal.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	And regarding consideration in the subtle preparation of humors before it, if the blood is thick, with foods and drinks, and with medicines if that is possible to it.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And regarding bathing if no cause prohibits it, or exercise by any exercise so that the blood is refined.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	And pause the phlebotomy from him in the foot of the day, so it is around the hour of terce, as we have said.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	And perforsa that the foot of that one be guarded on that day from all evils accidents animals, as it is anguish, anger, fear, and from all corporal accidents, as it is labor and superfluous pain and coitus and semblance to them.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And to his bed, let them make present the causes in the use of which custom of men with aromatics and scent and with balms and semblance to those according to the quantity of possibility.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And follow the phlebotomist upon a cushion that is softer than the cushion of him who is to be phlebotomized.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	And regarding extracting his arm, and rub that with his hand the phlebotomist two or three times; and regarding tightening the ligament with a strap and wrap that two times.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And let the constriction be temperate, for the constriction when it is not equal, or the constriction is with superfluity, then prohibit the flow of blood; or it is with softening, and then prohibit the body of blood ascent.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And regarding the constriction, let him who is to be phlebotomized rub his hands together meanwhile until the veins are inflated, and declared to the feeling.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And regarding the phlebotomist, anoint his phlebotomy with a little of olive oil properly; and regarding placing his left hand's index finger upon that vein, below the place of which he wishes the phlebotomy, so that the vein flee a little, and the percussion be seated, for of the veins is the one that atrophies as the cords flee, and of those is that which is full of venosity and when he pauses the phlebotomy upon that one it is contracted, and it is uncovered the phlebotomist; and the phlebotomy does not open the vein, and if it opens, that one is straitened.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	And therefore, for this, let the phlebotomist be halted and be solicited in all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And regarding pausing the phlebotomy, but if the vein is opened in one time, then well is it; and otherwise, you iterate that another time below that place a little, or upon it with a festinacio, if the place is not apostate.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the place is apostate, or the patient is frightened, then you leave it for a day or two, and do not tighten the ligament, for strong it will draw the apostate caut, nor enter into a bath.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	And regarding iterating the phlebotomy if the blood is good.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the aperture is small and the blood flows subtly, and you fear that it will not be the quantity of blood that you wish, then you iterate the phlebotomy in that tract according to rectitude and adjust in the aperture a little, and do that with a festinacio before the place is apostate, for the place is apostate in many men of little aperture.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	But if sometimes that is already apostate, then you do not iterate upon it, for it excuses you no cause; and pause upon that any part of the wound of oil, for it alleviates the body of the blood.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And it is better in this place than oil and than the other oils.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly administer a wound of oil in all phlebotomy with which phlebotomies the veins of which the prohibition of the course of blood, and do that tyriaca alfadoc and sagzenea when it is placed upon the place, for the blood is refined and is revolved when it is thick.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	And if in the place of the phlebotomy is generated a great apostate, for many times it happens, and most to him who has not been bled but that one time, or in the aperture of the vein little, and then you cover, and place upon the place a sponge infused in water and salt, a little scalded, and tighten that for an hour, for it is dissolved.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And now he must make this incision near the vein's opening with a compliment to it or another vein.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if it remains in the area for some days, some blackness or greenness, do not notice it; and if you want, place on that some cause of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of mint juice or calamint or something similar.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	And many times abscesses and swellings require phlebotomy of the basilica.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And then place your hand over it, and if it is soft, you must place your compression over it, then that prominence is bad and evil; and therefore, be careful that you place on it any cause of what they have said, because it will flow strongly from the artery of blood.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And make a plaster with that which is astringent, so that the place may endure, and then cure it with the other cure until it is healed.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And now he must extract blood from every man according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the color which appears on the blood.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	Because if the blood is black, then you let it flow until it is rough; and similarly if you see it thick, then you let it flow until it is subtle; and similarly if it is acute, until the sharpness of it is gone.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And now he must for one who is full and strong and has need of blood extraction in one time, that the phlebotomy of the vein be amplified and the phlebotomy be wide.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And for one who is frail, the opposite of that must be done, and now he must extract it in small portions, and that the cut be narrow.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of the vein is that it be the transverse section, not the puncture.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	And this manner of phlebotomy is safe from the flow of blood and from the incision of nerves, and is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy according to width and length.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	And to which it is customary to occur syncope before phlebotomy, and now he must cure that before phlebotomy with a little bread soaked in wine of millegrains or simple oxymel scalded; and extract from the one blood in three or four times.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	And if it is a cold constitution, then before phlebotomy, prepare a soak in a syrup of myrrh or in a syrup of honey flavored with spices like pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar, or in a syrup flavored and fragrantly smelling.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	And if syncope occurs during phlebotomy, and the cause of it is the emission of too much blood, then he must prepare to drink water of meat and fragrant syrup; and use aromatics with algualea, and be the one to rub their feet with it.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And use of the other causes that have been said in the division in the chapter of syncope by evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	And he who wants to have his arm opened and dissolve his blood according to the second time, must to him whose phlebotomy is by much evacuation, and the virtue of him is frail, that he evacuate the blood little by little, so it is according to the quantity of the virtue in the continuous days.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	But he who wants to have his arm opened, and take his blood a second time, and his body is strong, then do this about seven or nine hours from the first phlebotomy.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	But he who wants to draw the blood from his body contrary to the part to which it declines, must be opened on the second day or the third.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	But that body in which there is much blood already scalded and is acute and causes fever, must have blood drawn from it in one time and a large quantity be drawn, and the incision be amplified until syncope occurs, because you will have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and that you place your hand over the wrist of him from the blood, so that it does not become death in place of syncope, because many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And do not, when you want to open the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, as already the orifice of the vein is closed and it is made difficult the emission of blood, that you press over it with vehemence and curve it slightly, because this is too bad.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	Have the vein let go until it is phlebotomized properly; or remove this with the sharpness of the phlebotomy which is coagulated blood in the orifice of the vein; or place on it of tyriaca alfarach, or of sagzenea, and compress this with light compression until the blood is gone.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	And if the vein is inflamed, then leave that and do not touch it until the abscess is settled.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	And if necessity compels you to evacuate the blood a second time, and there is no excuse, then you bleed him on that spot or in the other arm in another vein.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And the vein called "funis del bras" is phlebotomized in place of the fusca or basilica, when those are not available or are hidden, because it is composed of those.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And the quality of the phlebotomy of it is that the patient inserts his hand in cold water until the focus reddens and the vein appears manifestly.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then it is tightened over it with a bandage with medium constriction; and phlebotomize according to the small transverse, not longitudinally nor according to the length.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	And make the incision wide and make your phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize that one on the joint of the hand a little.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you iterate the hand in the cold water and let the blood run in the water until you achieve your need.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	But if you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from the iteration of the hand in cold water, and the blood is placed on the body in cold water in times of winter.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than all the others, because it has no pulsating vein, nor nerve.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	And the phlebotomy of the saphenous vein of the right hand is convenient for the ailments of the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the quality of the phlebotomy of this is that you  strengthen the hand with a bandage or with your hand, because you have placed it in cold water, until the vein is inflated and is well demonstrated to the eye; and then phlebotomize that transversally; and if you incised that of all no it will not bleed.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And conserve that you do not finish your hand with the phlebotomy, because from there the nerves of the fingers are denuded of flesh.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And then iterate the hand in the cold water and let the blood run in that, because if you do not iterate that in the cold water, the blood will coagulate in the orifice of the vein, and it is prohibited from flowing.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And as it is extracted the blood according to the quantity of need, then you place on the vein oil and salt, so that it not be consolidated tightly; and similarly, it is necessary that you do in all straight vein.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	But the benefit of the phlebotomy of that of the left hand, is that it is convenient for the ailments of the spleen.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And do similarly in the phlebotomy of this as you have done in the other.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And the benefit of the saphenous vein of the phlebotomy is to the ailments that are in the part below the body, as well as ailments of the womb, and retention of menstruation, and to ailments of the lungs and ulcers of the thighs and of the legs old, and to their likenesses of the ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	And the quality of the phlebotomy of this is that the patient inserts their foot into cold water and makes friction upon that until the veins appear well; and lie upon the junction of the foot with a bandage; and the place of the vein the talon appears, and from that its ramifications in the face of the foot are motz ramps.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And therefore phlebotomize the widest ram or below the calf from the talon of that, because it is better and safer.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you phlebotomize that in the face of the foot, then you guard yourself from the nerves that are below that on the face of the foot, and place your phlebotomy with which you phlebotomize for the traverse, as if you wished to incise it.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And be the phlebotomy skillful.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	But if the flow of blood is prohibited; then you iterate the foot of him in the cold water and let the blood run in that until it is evacuated.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomist errs in the first attempt, then iterate with the phlebotomy in a little more, because the place is safe; and do not fear of that malice, but that you guard yourself from the nerves as we have said.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And similarly do of the saphenous vein of the other foot equally.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	And of the sciatic vein, the place as we have said is below the heel of the left side.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And the benefit of the phlebotomy of this is to pain of the hip when it is by blood caut.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the quality of the phlebotomy of this is that the patient enters in bath, and fastens and strengthens the thigh of him from the side of the wide up to the talon of the four fingers in a long and subtle bandage, so that it appears not by that.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	And therefore when it appears, then you phlebotomize that according to each engine that is to you possible and according to the traverse, and it is better; or incise that by incision or secces that by section, because the place of it is safe.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And she is in many men well-liked; and if you touch that, and it does not appear to the feeling of all, then phlebotomize some ram of it, and it is that which appears in the back of the foot in front of the auricular and the annular.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And guard yourself from the nerves, and make run of the blood the quantity that you want.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And then untie the constriction and place on the place of the phlebotomy cotton and strengthens the place, because lightly it is healed.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	Of cupping and the qualities of using those.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	Cupping is of horns, or of earthenware, or of copper.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	And cupping is done according to two manners: one of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is cupping without scarification.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And this cupping that is without scarification is according to two manners, because it is with fire or without fire.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And to the cuppings that are administered with scarification and extraction of blood there are fourteen places of the body, of which one in which cupping is placed is alnocrati, and it is the rear part of the head; and the middle place of the two parts of the neck together; and cupping of the chin below the jaw more below the mouth; and cupping of two spatulas; and cupping of alohoster, and it is on the end of the shoulder; and cupping of two focils, and it is of two arms; and cupping of two groins; and cupping of two thighs.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	And ventosation does not extract the blood but from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and therefore it does not catch the virtue through those, just as it is caught by phlebotomy; nor is it right that ventosation be done with fire or with fire in any illness caused by repletion until the whole body is evacuated.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	But if necessity provokes ventosation for illness or for continuous, administer it at every hour at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it and in any time it is.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	The cause is that of those men in whom the blood is multiplied within that which is indigenous to its extraction by ventosation and finds in their head heaviness and soda; and of those it is that finds repletion and redness in their face and in their head, and in their neck; and of those it is that finds pricking in their face and in their forehead and darkness and dullness in their eyes; and of those who vomit the place of their ventosation; and of those it is that their laughter is multiplied; and of those it is that finds taste of blood in their mouth, or that the tongue is coated and spits blood; and of those it is that their sleep is multiplied, and of those who dream blood in their sleep redness and nightmares and other causes to their appearances.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	And therefore when times in any cause of those, and properly if it is in the third or middle of the month, then command ventosation to be done because it has passed from the day of two or three hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And the benefit of ventosation of the neck is that when that confers the gravity to the head and to what is poured into the eyes; but it is right that this is after the evacuation of the whole body.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	And this ventosation is in the place of phlebotomy of the cephalic.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And it is not light that use of it that one who is of frequent congestion, or in which is catarrh, because it gives to that great harm.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And therefore it is not right that use of that the old, and in the heads of whom are frequent illnesses.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	But to that one who over that is continuing over it is done oblivion; and therefore it is right that you command the ventosator that pause his hand a little with the ventosa to the parts below, fearing the generation of oblivion.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	But ventosation of the ankle is in the place of phlebotomy of the vena fusca and basilica: and therefore confers on asthma, and on the constriction of the lung and on the fissure of the instrument of the lung, and on cough, and on repletion.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And it is right that the ventosation of the ankle be expelled a little, because if it is paused below, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And ventosation of the alhagdahan confers on the pains accidental in the head and on ophthalmia, and migraine, and pre-focus, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in the place of phlebotomy of the basilica.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And it is right that you command the ventosator that he not press his hand with scarification so that it does not pierce the artery and occur fluxes of blood.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And ventosation below the chin confers on alcohol in the mouth, and on corruption of the gums, and appearances to those of the illnesses that are in the mouth, and stand in the place of phlebotomy of aliheric that is in the two lips.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	But the ventosation that is done on the two spatulas confers on caphatan, which is made by repletion of heat.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And the ventosation of the two parts of the teeth of the focils confers benefit of phlebotomy of three veins, so it is of the basilica, fusca and cephalica, because that one attracts the blood of all those veins more numerous that are in the flesh, and those veins smaller of the other veins more thick until it reaches the attraction to the three veins.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the ventosator that too much he does not proceed in scarification, because the place is denuded of flesh, and below it are nerves and arteries.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And it is a ventosation with which is ventosated over those and confers on the hemorrhoids of the anus and on the ulcers more below.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	And it is right that you command the ventosator that it be a large ventosation, and that it be of eram, because the place indigenous to strong section; and strong leu so ventosations subtiles and be scarified with scarification.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	But ventosations of the limbs less by minutio manifest, because they attract the blood of the whole body, and confer on old pains of the ribs and of the mother, and of the bladder; and they provoke the menses, and confer on bothor and ademil; and they stand in the place of phlebotomy of two sophenas, and alahorcoben, and of two cavilhas.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	However, too much debilitates the whole body and causes syncope in many men.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And of the ventosations alahorcoben the benefit is proper to the benefit to the ventosations of two limbs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And the quality of the position of the ventosations is that you pause the ventosa at the beginning void and sucks by temperate suction, and do not prolong the position of the ventosations, but pause those lightly, and remain those carefully, and that the humors come to the place by advent equal.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	And do not cease to repeat this and continue until you see the area already reddened and inflamed and that the flow of blood appears.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you scarify and repeat the suction little by little, and then consider the disposition of the body.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	Because that man who has tender flesh, because you scarify him once and no more, so that the area is not ulcerated.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command the ventouse to amplify the scarification and press a little, and temper the suction with ease.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if in the blood is thickness, then you must scarify twice, because in the first scarification the way of subtility to the blood and its fluidity is opened.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	But in the second to the scrutiny acquired of the extraction of the thick blood.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	And if the blood is very feculent, then make the third scarification so that you can achieve the last.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And finally, when we want to extract the blood little by little or a little, it suffices us one scarification.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we want the extraction of much blood, we scarify with much scarification; and if we knew that the blood is thick, then we must scarify by pre-scarification.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And the term of scarification in which is the depth of the incision only so much.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	And if that one whose incision is thick, hard, dark, and whose pores are narrow, then the places of the ventouses should be anointed more gently, more open, more resolved; if it is in summer, as it is olive of aloes or olive of violet, or olive of double almonds, or olive of quince; and if it is in winter, then olive of narcissus, or olive of lily, or olive of chamomile, or of saint, and to those similar.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if the superfluity is thick, hot, then the oil should be of amaranth, or of balm, or of aloes, or of anise, and to their likeness.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	But if the ventouse has wide pores of tender flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and that those in the places of the ventouses near them, the suction should be washed with waters or with cold water of salwort, or with quince water, or with water of  borage, and similar to those.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And that one whose blood is of much humidity, washes their ventouses with vinegar, or with myrtle and sumac water and similar to those.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And of that one whose superfluities are thick, washes their ventouses with old vinegar, or with water of  sarsaparilla, which is marjoram, or of decoction of anise, or of chamomile, and to their likeness.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	And that the suction should be guarded before bathing; bathe it should be administered near the bath for an hour or for two, and that he should sleep near the suction.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	What is what must be done to regulate the ventouse before phlebotomy.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	At the beginning, you should consider: then if the ventouse or the one who is to be phlebotomized is choleric and windy, and has blood that is sharp and inflammation, then you should prescribe cooling causes, such as vinegar-soaked millet, endive with vinegar, lettuce, and  secale, and syrup, and to their likeness.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	And pause their foods as much as possible, and birds' meat, and foods seasoned with vinegar, and to their likeness.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And of that one whose complexion is cold, you should prescribe to drink syrup of althea, or syrup of  secale of seeds, and sumac, and strong-smelling vinegar between old and new; and that he should be commanded to use little drinking and eating, and pause the foods of his little, and canary, and sparrows, and small birds, and pigeons.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And that on the day of suction and phlebotomy, the drink should be greater than the food.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	And that some men should be given to drink, in some hours, tyriaca alpharac, or medicines of musk, that is, nutmeg, or alcelita before the suction or phlebotomy or near it, so that the main limbs be comforted and that the blood be subtiliated; and they should not take that scalfatz.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	But the ventouses that are scarification should be those that are placed on the liver, and on the spleen, and podagra, and on the navel, in the places of the joints, and the tip of the big toe, because these members do not suffer scarification upon themselves.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And it is not desired for those, but rather attraction of blood from the limb, such as placing a ventouse on the nipple in the illness of blood flow from the blood of the nose; and use of that so that it be dissolved cold and viscous air of the limb, such as placing on the belly and navel; because that rarefies the limb and scalfs it and removes the pain because it resolves the air.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And it is already placed on the boils when they happen in their opening or pimple, because by virtue of the strong attraction, the boil is opened and eradicates the pimple from its place.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly it does when it is placed on the liver and spleen of those who have wind enclosed in those.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these fumigations are administered empty with suction only; and some times are administered with fire.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	And some times are administered full of boiling water in the ailments of the liver.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	And this is why the fumigation should be filled and larger, it is boiling water alone or water in which herbs are boiled according to the convenience.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Method of fumigation administered with fire: its width of the orifice is two fingers, as we have formed it; and the quantity of the preon is the majority of a palm; and it is in the place of it, in the place that is in the circuit, the majority of it, the tract is small according to the quantity that enters it a needle.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	It is made of a ram's horn or a citrus, of thick edges, lion, equal and smooth so that it does not damage the limb of its position over it.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And in the middle of it a transverse bar of ram's horn or iron, on which a candle is placed with the fire.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And already this fumigation is larger than the one we have described; and the few less than that according to the ailments and the state of him who uses it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And the fumigations of the infants and exhausted are others than the fumigations of the young and of robust bodies.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of pausing this fumigation with fire on the limb is that it extends the fire with firewood decently in front of a small candle of wax, and places it on the middle of the transverse bar in the middle place of the fumigation, so that the fire is ignited around the part below so that it does not burn the body of the patient.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	And then it is placed on the limb of the patient, and the finger is on the tract that we have said, and as soon as we have the fumigations and do not indicate that we show the finger and that the vapor escapes on that tract, then the fumigation is immediately dissolved.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	And then prop the fire according to its manner, and repeat that if it is indicated.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	But in fumigation that is administered in the ailment of pleurisy, with water, in which there is no transverse bar nor tract, and it is not administered unless it is filled with water, and it is placed on the limb only.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	And this is the form of it: And this fumigation as much as it is larger, so much is better, because it can receive a large quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter .xcvii.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Bloodletting is not administered in all members but in the members in which it is not possible to position fumigations, because of the smallness of those, such as the mouth and gums and similar to them; or in a member denuded of flesh, such as the finger and the nose and their similar.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And the quality of using those that have been found leeches that are in the waters of double purification.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	And then they are laid in the day and the night in double water until they are famished, and that no cause remains in the belly of those; and then they are evacuated the body at the beginning with phlebotomy and with fumigations; and then they are rubbed the limb of the patient until it reddens; and then they are placed on it.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	And as they are filled and case.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to suction the place with fumigation, it is more beneficial in healing.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if not, then wash the place with wine vinegar and then with a lot of water; and it is rubbed and squeezed.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if the bleeding of the patient is prolonged after the application of the leeches, and this is the result, then you put a cloth of it in cold water, and place it on top until the bleeding stops.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	And if the bleeding is multiplied, then pulverize over it triacetic vitriol, or gallnuts and similar to them of the stiptic causes, until the bleeding is stopped; or are placed on the place the halves of boiled beans, and are laid until the beans adhere to the place, and the bleeding is stopped.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And then, if necessary, repetition of leeches, when it is possible to change those.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if the leeches are prohibited from suspension, then the place is rubbed with fresh blood or a needle is left in the places until blood comes out; and then they are placed, because those when they feel some blood immediately adhere.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you want them to detach, pulverize over them a little bit of triacetic aloes, or salt, or ash, and they detach immediately.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	Thus begins the prolegomena of the third part: of restoration.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is many times necessary in the art of medicine; and it is the restoration of fracture and dislocation accidents in the bones.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	O, son, know that these foolish physicians and the vulgar boast of this chapter and those who never at any time regarded the books of the Ancients nor read from them a single letter.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason it is made that this manner of the learned in our land is deprived; and you do not forget this at any time well of all; and I have not adopted this that I have learned, but by length of reading the books of the Ancients and study over the understanding of those, until I extracted the science of those.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And henceforth, direct yourself to experiment and study throughout the length of your life.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	And now I have described in this chapter all that my science contains and on which the best experiment has been passed; because I have shortened this for you others and freed it from the occupation of elongation; and I have shortened it at the end of shortening; and I have shown it at the end of declaration; and I have formed in this many forms of the instruments that are administered in it, as it has been done by addition of declaration, as I have done in the two preceding chapters.
Capitol primier.	First Chapter.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	Summaries and collections from the fractures of bones, from those whose preliminary explanation is necessary, before we begin the recollection of broken and diverse members of each one.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	Therefore, I say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters to the understanding of which at the beginning the artificers are forced and stand on the truth of those; so it is for you and those who are prompt to know or learn this noble art others than you.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	And therefore I say that when accidents happen to any fracture or dislocation or sprain or wound, then you must at the beginning apply yourself to phlebotomy or to leaven that, or one or the other, if no cause prohibits it, as much as the weakness of virtue, or the one to whom the accident happens is a child, or old in decrepitude, or the time is of vehement heat, or of vehement cold.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And then be content in his food of cold herbs and of bird meats and of crabs; and forbid thick meats and to fill him with foods and of all food that fills the veins with blood, until you are sure of the cauterization of the abscess, and if you do not fear the effusion of matter to the limb.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then return the patient to his first regimen to which he is accustomed.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	And therefore, as the broken bone begins to be restored, then the patient must be fed with nutritious foods of nourishment moist and thick in which is viscosity, as such as foods made of cooked wheat with water, and rice, and heads, and fish, and bellies of cows, and eggs, and fresh poultry, and thick fat and similar to those, and with this regimen is made coagulation of the fracture more easily and better.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	And know that the broken bones when they are in the men who are in the first youth and in the decrepit, it is not possible that they are continued and consolidated according to their nature by the drying of their limbs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And they are consolidated and continued according to their nature all times by the drying of those limbs, and they are continued and consolidated those that are of them at the end of the youth, as the bones of the little children.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But however, nature adjusts and amnesties over the broken bone from every part any cause seeming to glut in which is thickness that adheres and strengthens it until it is at the same time conglutinated and tied together, until they come to the end of fortitude and of firmness, as fire at the beginning, until no cause prohibits it from its works.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And for this cause it is necessary that you pause the foods of the patient, foods in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, as we have said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Many diverse varieties of fracture according to the diversity of the limb.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	And know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, because a fracture of the bone of the leg is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the head; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is diverse from the fracture of the bone of the hand; and similarly all the other limbs are diverse among themselves.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I come to the recollection of all species of fracture, explained in their distinct chapter from the other.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Many diverse varieties of fracture in itself.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	And they are diversified the species of fracture of the bone in their own; because it is made arched fracture another that happens in it stars; and some times it is made fracture according to the length of the bone: and in the fractures of the sagittal and asterisks and additions proceeding and non-proceeding, as it is done in the pen when it is prepared to write, and it is fracture with plaque and disruption in the head, and it is small fissure fracture.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And to every species is engendered or torment proper in the restoration of it according to that which will come recollection of it distinct in its places.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	Many signs of fracture of the bone.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	And for this it is known fracture of the bone: it is the tortuosity of it, and of that eminence and appearance of it to the touch, and so of it when you compress it with your hand.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	And therefore when there is not in the place apparent tortuosity nor so is not made by your touch when you touch the bone with agitation and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is not here fracture.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	However it is possible that there is tortuosity or small fissure, therefore you must not touch it with your hand and with compression of all; however pause upon it of the medicines of which comes recollection near that moment which convenes to the place; and then be straight by subtle constriction.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And know that the place when it is arched and is not split in two or another that does not happen in it sagittal, as it is remaugged all part of its comparison, then you must begin from your hour to rectification of it, however it must happen to it abscess cauterization.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And if a boil occurs to him, then leave it for some days until the boil subsides; and then treat it in whatever way you can with elevation and hygiene.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And know that the restoration of him and the piercing of him is lighter than of the bone in which the accident happened.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	And then strengthen him according to what will come the remembrance of him.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	But if the bone is broken, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from two parts, if it is the arm or the leg; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two cords or with one cord and the hand.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And be in the position with which you pause the limb located according to its natural figure, while the parts are extended from the broken limb, then you pierce that you make them return with hygiene and in whatever way you can in their places.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And guard yourself according to your strength that it does not happen to the patient by your operation pain or injury; and pierce yourself according to your power that you apply one bone with its companion according to their best forms.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	And cover that in that hour profitably you touch with your hand that, and if you see here any different cause, rectify that and treat it for the amount of your virtue.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	And avoid vehement extension and compression, as such foolish doctors do who, in their many practices, cause boils to occur by their operation, or cause contraction in the limb as we have seen by the operation of their many practices.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	And then annex, then equation and decent operation and constriction of that limb, and rest and tranquility; admonish the patient about this and make him swear that he will not harm it in the hour of his vigils and of his sleep, and watch his revolution and agitation, and guide his digestion, and guide all his movements with all his virtue; and wait until the position of the limb is in the position which is assured of the pain, which cause is when he feels in the disposition of the position of the limb pain or injury; then cover that you change it to another disposition of that with which he does not feel pain; and guard with this that the position of him that be straight and equal, so that the limb does not happen tortuosity when it is restored.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	And the quality of the constriction of the tranquil limb is that which I recommend; for that you know that broken limbs are diversified in their smallness and in their greatness and in the form of those.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And of those that are small as the arm and the hand and the foot and similar to those, then cover that the envelope be of very fine cloth.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	But those that are gross as the thigh or the leg, then cover that in those be envelope thick and hard, for the thick bandage connects the great limb and strengthens it with equal constriction, so that in it no macula enters.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And then begin, then your evacuation of equation, pause a convenient ligament to this, on the place of that fracture with three or four envelopes according to that the limb merits; and strengthen your hand a little with the ligament.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And then see in that to the part more sovereign of the place of the fracture, and strengthen less than not focus your constriction with which you have strengthened the place of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	And then elongate yourself with the envelope of the place of the fracture a little, and soften the constriction little by little, until you take from the place a great part.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	And then take another bandage and envelope that other practice over the broken place with the envelope, and then see in the envelopes to the part further from the fracture; and be your operation in the constriction of the envelope and in the softening of that according to what we have said in the first envelope below.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	And then pause between the envelopes of wool or cloth with which be equalized the tortuosity of the fracture, if in it is tortuosity; and if not, do not pause in it any cause.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	And then pause over it another bandage, and then treat over these envelopes stars decently made as soon as, if in the place there is no inflammation or boil, and then pause over it that which sits the boil that and that oste the inflammation; and leave it for some days; and then you strengthen over it the stars.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And be the stars of the majority of thick cane, and well formed wisely; or be of pine wood; or of palm ramps; and be the width of each star according to this form and this figure:
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	However, cover that the star that is placed over that fracture be thicker and thicker a little than the others stars, and the length of the star according to that is measured to the limb in magnitude and smallness; and then strengthen over the stars with another bandage according to your first constriction; and then lie below it with a faithful decent according to that we have said of constriction, and it is that your constriction be according to the place of the fracture more, and as much as it is lengthened from the fracture, it is less the constriction.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	And cover that the threads be middling in thickness and subtlety, and be of wool; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen by the operation of some foolish people placing their threads of cords of wool, and it is a great error, when cats the constriction outside equality.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And excessively subtle threads are not convenient, for you will not consecrate by constriction with those that which you want, and cover that between star and star there be less than a finger.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if the patient is said to be suffering from the extremities of the stars near the stricture in their place, then place those of wool or felt between them so that it does not cause injury.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Sometimes a fracture is accompanied by a plague, and an accident occurs in the bone, and you will find a remedy for this in the second chapter on singularity.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	And know that if a whole limb is broken, it is not straight with stars on the first day; the cause is that the limb, when it is large, should not be laid upon stars but rather about five days or seven or more, according to your certainty of the advent of a boil.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	And this is the manner of the plasters with which the ancients restored, those which are placed upon fractures and dislocations and twists.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	Manner of plastering common to the restoration of fractures, convenient to many complexities and mostly to women and children, because it is of this which does not bring heat nor cold: and it is that you take from the powder of flour, and it is the medulla of the flour that you must take from the movement of the mill on the sides of the mill.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And mix it thus, unless you sift it with album of egg, and place the confection of it not thick nor subtle; and then use of that.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Another way to plaster a fracture, dislocation, and sprain: take asafoetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is the root of wild millet, of all ana drachma x; of frankincense and aloe ana drachma v; alochil ana drachma xx; all be ground and sifted and be mixed with alichil water or album of egg if the patient's complexion is pale; and then use this plaster, because it is of good composition and restores the bones broken lightly, and confers to many men.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	Another way of plaster which confers to a fracture and sprain: take migrach and powder of white althea ana drachma x; of frankincense and aloe ana drachma v; of acacia drachma vi; of Armenian bole drachma .xx.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	All shall be triturated in a mortar with much contricio, and sifted, and comfitzed with water or album of egg and be administered.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	Manner of plaster to joints and bones separated from their places, and if pain occurs in those and in fissures and fractures: take wool suet and submerge it in vinegar and boiled oil and place it upon the place.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	More in this plaster there is not virtue of restoration, of boil caut and expels pains properly.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another manner of plaster that restores broken bones: take fig leaves and leaves of wild poppy; contrive all and make a plaster of them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida .i.; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Manner of plaster abbreviated administered  deves the restoration of fracture of bones and when you want resolution of the remaining boil: recipe roots of altea, of chamomile and flowers of violets, of ers flour, of all ana part .i.; All shall be triturated and comfitzed with wine, if the limb is not scaled.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	But if it is scaled, then mix it with humid coriander water or with water and use of it.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	Another manner of plaster more strong in resolution than this first, when accidents occur hard boil, deves the restoration of the limb: recipe of roots of altea and of seed of li, and of balaustia, and melilot, majorana, flowers of violet, of chamomile, of all ana part i engual; all shall be triturated and comfitzed with water of sauze or with sweet water or with wine, all that according to the quality of the limb and the repose of the color of it.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	But Ypocras does not say in his book that it should be placed upon the broken limb for the restoration of it unless cerot made of wax and oil and no other cause; and recommends that it be midway between thickness and subtlety.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	But Gualia has been seen that they should be placed upon the broken limb for the restoration of it and the causes in which is exsiccacio with little of heat so as such as myrrh, incense and similar to those causes that we have recommended.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	Manner of plaster that confers to lesion and pain: recipe migat, of cezes, of human hair unshorn or feather of bird, and of altea, and salt, parts equal; all shall be triturated and sifted and comfitzed, and be made plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	But the quantity according to which it should remain the liadura and then be untied, is that you consider if it does not occur pain nor pruziment nor the bone is broken no is bad of its place, then you do not untie for many days.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	And if there occurs to the place vehement pain or pruziment or imflacio, then you yourself take or untie that in the hour, and remove the plaster from it.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And take cloth from him and a sea sponge, moistened, and submerge it in tepid water, and with that wash the place until the swelling ceases and the pain is subdued; and then let him rest the limb for an hour; and then place on it a woolen cloth submerged in vinegar and oil or rose oil, and lay it on him for a night until you are sure of a cauterized abscess, and that the swelling of the limb is calmed, and the pain of it is subdued.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply that stricture subtly and a small plaster and do not tighten it with your first constriction, and more subtly with that until it is healed.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	And if you see that the abscess and the redness and the pain and the swelling and all the accidents are already subdued, and you want to remove the plaster and the stricture, then you apply it again as you have done at the beginning, equally.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o .vii.; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	And if no accidents happen to the limb of those that have been said, then do not untie it, but for three days or four or five or seven. And sometimes all this is left for twenty days, according to how it appears to you from the untieing of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and it approaches the coagulation of the flesh upon it.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	And then adjust the stricture more than in your first stricture, altogether, and adjust in the thickness of the patient's food, according to how the recollection of him precedes.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	But if you see the place of the fracture already dry and extend more than the bone, then you know that the nourishment is prohibited to reach there; and therefore embroca that with tepid water you must always that you heal it; and that in all three days; and alleviate the stricture a little, and for this operation, the nourishment runs to the limb, and it is healed slightly.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	But that which fools restorers of the fracture of the limb do another way when it is not restored at the beginning, according to the bone, and it is restored according to tortuosity, is error according to the operation of theirs, and great fear, and if it were straighter, that which enlarges the Ancients in their books and they have done with that.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	And I have not seen any of them do that, because it is more reasonable that they do not do that.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Chapter Second: Of fracture when it happens in the head.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	The species of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and their causes are distinct, for some fractures are made by the blow of a weapon, and the blow breaks all the bones within the skull, which is left the bone, as if it were done in the shaft, and for this reason this species is called ascial; or the weapon incides some part of the bone, and incides the flesh of it and does not pass the incision into the rear of it; and this species of fracture is called absolute levitation.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And the plague of these two fractures or is great or small, and of fracture that is contortion or attrition; and the cause of it is percussion with a hammer or a fall on a rock, and their likenesses.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And this fracture or is penetrating that already approaches the panniculus which is left the bone; or it is in the face of the bone, and the plague of these two fractures or is great or small.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And of fracture is that which is entwined in the bone, in the subtlety of the small hair, and for this reason this species is called capillary fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And is fracture that is made either by a fall or by percussion of a rock and its likenesses, which causes some lamina of the bone to enter into the parts within, and it is made in the concave place as if it happened to the payroles of a ram when it happens to their percussion and it is part of their entrance into the parts within.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	And most of all this is done in the bodies of wet bones, as if they were the heads of infants.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And to all these species of fractures, satagias, they are heavy as if stars separated.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And you will come with recollection of all this in its place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And we shall know all these species of fracture by detection upon those and by inquiry of them with tents and ostentation of corrupted flesh that is upon them.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And the capillary species is known because it is discovered upon the bone, and it is abstergit, and lined upon it with a tent, because the fracture appears black.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	But in the cure of fracture, consider at the beginning the accidents of the patient, and then if you see by the accidents that signify by manifest signification upon pain, as it is vomiting of bile, and extension, and loss of understanding, and abscess of voice, and syncope, and acute fever, and swelling of the joints and redness of those, and likenesses to them in the greatest dispositions, then adopt that it is not healed.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if you see non-current accidents, you hope for health, then you begin the cure of him.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	The cause is that if it has come to you the afflicted in the beginning as it is afflicted and this is in the days of winter, then you must study in the ostentation of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all disposition.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	And if it is in the days of summer, then you must study to see the bone before the seventh day, because that which is left the bone be corrupted from the panniculus, and that the accidents that we have recounted may happen.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	And if the fracture has already reached the membrane covering the brain, and it is in small pieces and shredded, then cover the small and rubbed piece, as I will tell you.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And you raise the patient's head, and uncover the bone according to custom and manner as much as possible according to the figure of the plague, and that it be light on the patient.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if it happens to you to see the bone, blood or pus flows, then you oppose it with what you cover, and that you fill the place with cloths infused in wine and rubbed oil, and make the patient rest until the pus is settled, and if you are sure of the blood flow; and then begin in the circuit of the bone and in its removal.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And this is according to one of two ways of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the one way is that you cut the bone with a straight incisor like this, and this is the shape of it: And then administer another incisor this one, a little wider than that; and this is the shape of it:
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then administer the wider incisor than the second.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And cover that you have to have a number of different incisors, some of which are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than others and are at the end of the sharpness of their extremities, and are of Indian iron or steel.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And use them with ease in percussion on the incisor so that it does not hit the head and damage it.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong, hard, then cover that you perforate in its circuit before you administer the incisors with the drills, which are called non-deep drills.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	And they are not called thus but because those do not pause the term of the bone of the test to what is about it, for as the drill is a round extremity or margin on which the head of it is left sharp like a margin or a small circle, which prohibits being submerged and passing the thickness of the bone.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you take of these drills a large number of which as many as convenient to the thickness of each bone,  and that it be to you present in all tests of the brain the extremity of which be sharp, the quantity in length and brevity be according to the quantity of thickness of this test.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	And this is the form of three species of drills: The quality of perforating in the circuit of the broken bone is that you pause the drill on the bone and revolve it with your fingers until you know that the bone is already penetrated; and then change the drill to another location, and pause it that is between all the tracks the quantity of the thickness of the ray or about that.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And then cut with incisors that which is between each tract of the bone, and make that as subtle as you can on it in the end of lightness, as we have said, until you eradicate the bone, or with your hand, or with some other cause for some instruments which you will have prepared for it, as such as tongs and subtle forceps.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And cover that you guard with all caution that the incisor does not touch any cause of the scalp.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And therefore as you will have circuited the bone, and if it is continued with it, and you will have that extracted, cover that you raise and smooth that in the roughness of it of that which is in the bone with another instrument similar to an incisor, but however cover that it be more thin and more subtle than the others incisors.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	And if any pieces of the small bones and splinters remain, then take that with ease with that which you owe you of the instruments; and then take care of the patient with liniments and ointments which we have said.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And the other way of operation is lighter, farther from pain, which says Gualia and the lauzec by great lausor; and this is the sermon of it: it is necessary to you at the beginning that you begin to discover the part of the bone of the place in which is the fracture most vehement and most manifest, until when you will have discovered that part and you will have placed below it the extremity of this incisor lent and light of which this is the form:
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	And it is that the lenticular part is long and do not cut any cause, and the acute part is of it in two sides forward in length, as sometimes; that the lenticular part be adjusted to the scalp with the face of it incident acute in the bone.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And then strike on the incisor of a part with a small mallet until you cut all the bone with ease as it is revolved, and you be sure of the membrane that no accident happens in it in any manner, and if the medicant14 was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, and if he were asleep.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	And now if any cause annexed to the bone of the membrane in some places of bone, cut that of it with the extremity of that lenticular incisor, and deliver that of it with ease, for it is delivered of it its harm and its pain.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the membrane, and that which is abscised or is stayed from the bone is the face of it, and remains in it roughness and subtle splinters, then cover that you raise that roughness and eradicate those splinters with subtle razors of which you have prepared the number, of various quantities so that it be to you possible to administer of those in every place the most convenient of them and the most right of them according to what in which you are losing your operation of that broken bone and its figure.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And as you administer in your reason with which roots the bones at the beginning the pus of those roots, and then use the most subtle of it, and do not cease to do so continuously until you reach to administer the pus thick and the most subtle of all those.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	In any of the other fractures, small and subtle, as you administer care according to what you perceive for the rectification of it.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And it is because it is not known about all those who have studied in that art.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And this is what we have shown written about great fractures.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if the periosteum is cut when you set the bones, then take cloth according to the quantity of the wound, and submerge it in hot oil, and place it over the orifice of the wound; and then take another cloth folded or tripled and submerge it in wine and hot oil and place it over the first cloth and do this as lightly as you can so that you do not injure the scalp; and then administer over this bandage, and do not tighten it except for the quantity that the wound alone has.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And leave this with this care for a day or two until you are sure of the abscess cauter; and then untie this and then administer medicines with which is superfluous dryness, such as root of linen and flour of herbs, and powder of incense and of aromatics, and similar to those.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	And it is that you make of these medicines powder that is pulverized over the wound, such as they are dried; and universally, administer in this all medicine of property of which it is that it cleanses and does not bite.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And guard yourself according to your virtue that the wound in your cure be clean; and not be in it dirt of rinsing nor other; nor let virulence be added to it; for when it is adjusted over the periosteum of the brain, it corrupts that and you can spoil it, and it happens to the patient according to that evil malice.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	And it happens in the scalp of the head, as from it is modified the bone and most when the cure of it is less considered, and it is blackness on the surface of it; and therefore consider then if it happens to the patient the accidents that we have said, know that it is pernicious if all is adopted.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas .iii., e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it does not happen blackness but from the medicine that is placed over it, and it is in virtue of that medicine that makes that blackness, then take of honey one part and of hot oil three parts. And in those liniments a cloth, and then place that over the scalp; and then cure this with the species of cure that convenes until it is healed.
Capitol .iii.	Chapter III.
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	Of the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Know that it is not broken of the nose but two parts together, or one of those sometimes, for in it you have two bones, for the part left is cartilaginous, and it is not broken and it does not happen to it but attrition and tortuosity and sinuosity.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	But if one of the two parts is broken, then take the said little one in the one's nose, and that you equalize that fracture from within with your said finger, and with the said point outside, until the nose returns according to its natural figure.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And be done this by you with facility, and guard yourself that no pain be caused to the patient by that your operation.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	And if the fracture is in the most sovereign part of the nose, and the said one does not reach to that, then let it be equal to the extremity of the ray in which it is small thickness.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	And if the fracture is in two parts, then you do the semblance of that.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And guard yourself with the restoration of it in the first day of the fracture, if it is possible; and if not, then the VII or X days of the abscess cauter.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	And then introduce into the extremity of the nose a wick of cloth from it, if the fracture is in one part, or put two pads, if the fracture is in two parts, and be in the pad thickness of as much quantity that it fills the groove of the nose.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And say some of the ancient restorers that the pads be encased in border, and be changed every day, but it has not been seen to me; have that the wick be encased in album of honey with powder of moli; and then leave the one until the bone be set and the cartilage be hardened.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes be introduced into the nose, in place of a pad, a pain of auca pus that is enveloped in cloth of lion; and be that already you have the fracture of the nose most vehement and that the patient be not prohibited from inspiration.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause is not necessary to you; and if you want, do this, and if you want, do pads.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if it happens another time abscess cauter, plaster the nose with cerot or with coto infused in wine and hot oil, or with diaquilon.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	But if it does not happen abscess cauter, then take to plaster that outside with flour of sesame and with powder of incense cofitz with album of honey; and then place on it lion's wool, and do not lie the nose with any cause.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	But if the bones of the nose are broken with small fracture or are comminuted, then take to split over those, and extract those with instruments that are convenient for those; and then close the fissure, and cure that with what encases and consolidates, and with plasters to that convenient.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	And if plague occurs inside the nose, then treat that with warm water and administer lead pipes while it is entirely healed.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter IV.
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	Of the restoration of the jaw when it is broken.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	When the jaw is broken and the fracture of it is not inflamed, then observe if the fracture is deformed only slightly, and not broken in two and curved at the parts inside, then its recognition is lighter.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, then you introduce your left index finger into the mouth of the patient; and similarly if the fracture is on the left mandible, then introduce the right index finger; and push with that the looseness of the fracture inside with ease to the parts outside, with your other hand from the outside of the bone; and thus decently equal that.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	And if the jaw fracture is already separated into two parts, then you must administer extension of two parts according to rectitude as much as possible the equation of it.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there occurs commotion of teeth to disruption, then strengthen those of which you hope will remain with a thread of gold or silver or lead; and then place on the broken jaw a cerot, and then place on it a doubled cloth, and place on the cloth a large splint made decently, or a piece of sole equal to the length of the jaw; and then tie that bandage according to how you are equipped with the tying of it and that it convenes the application, until it is not destroyed.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to use of rest and tranquility, and pause the food of him soft and lean.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you estimate that already is altered the figure in any manner, then you yourself untie it on the third day; and then rectify that which is already altered of it and plaster it with powder of meal, with album of egg, or with flour of flaxseed, because you will have obtained the cerot of it, and place on the plaster wool lean.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And therefore as it stands attached and adjusted that plaster on it, and the disposition of the bone is not altered, leave it, that you do not untie it until it is healed and strengthens the fracture; because many times this fracture is straightened in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And if another time occurs abscess caut, then administer that which we have said many times in the sedation of it until it is healed, and be removed that abscess.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is with plague, then consider if it is a piece of the bone separated or splinters, then you yourself subtilize that you remove those splinters with that which you deem appropriate to the removal of those from the instruments.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the orifice of the plague is straight, then you enlarge it with the fleubotomizing according to the quantity of your necessity.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	And then when you will have obtained those splinters, and of those no sir remains removed, then you close the orifice of the plague if it is wide; and if not, place on that one of the plasters that you deem appropriate to it and encase that, until it is healed.
Capitol .v.	Chapter V.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	Of the restoration of the clavicle when it is broken.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	Many times the clavicle is broken at the part in front of the muscle, and that fracture is made in one of three manners.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	Because it is broken, or separated, or is separated into two parts other that do not occur splinters; and it is easier to the restoration of it; or it is thus that occurs in it splinters, and it is difficult to the restoration of it; or it is thus that the fracture is with plague.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And the operation in that, when the fracture is with plague, is that you make to be present two ministers, so that one has the adjutori and follows the broken clavicle, and the other extends the neck with that part.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then encircle the fracture with your fingers until it is made the form of it according to what you deem, and not be in it little eminence nor concavity.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if you deem more of extension, then you must place beneath the patient's little finger a support of cloth or wool, and be the greatness of it according to the quantity of your necessity; and extend and elevate the clavicle and fix the support with your hand until you encircle the fracture according to what you deem.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot pull the extremity of the clavicle to the outside parts, because it is reached to the preon, then you must have the patient be supine on his neck, and place on the muscle of him a cushion medium in greatness.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And the minister presses the muscle of him to the inside parts while the bone of the clavicle is elevated that is in the preon in its, and then you rectify the fracture and encircle that with your fingers.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	But if you feel splinters of the clavicle and they are bad, then you must do on that and extract those splinters with ease.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is retained in the bone, then you must ingeniously make an incision of it with one of the scissors which you have equipped for it, because you had placed beneath the clavicle the instrument that serves the chisels; and it is an instrument of wood or iron of which this is the form of it:
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And it is similar to a culier of which this is the concavity; and be its latitude according to what you have need of it, according to the greatness of the bone or the smallness of it.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	Make the length of it according to what is possible for the operation; that there be two extremities thus as often, and one extremity be wide and the other narrow.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if the disruption of the plague which you have incised when you have extracted the splinter from the bone is wide, and it is certain of a purulent caut, then you adjust the two lips of the wound with suture.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if the disruption is small, or you fear a purulent caut, then you fill the wound with cloths and powders according to the quantity of the wound's cut.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	And if an abscess occurs, then you put a cloth in vinegar and rose oil and wine, and place it over it.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	But the stricture of the bone when it is the wound and its section, is that you put a plaster made of wheat flour with egg white, and put linen cloth over it, and then put the sphere of it over the little finger of it, if it is necessary of that, and then take a moist cloth, so is the one that has the Saracens, that be very long, and its width of it one palm or around that; and then put doubled powders over the linen cloth and the plaster; and then take a plate of fine wood of which the width of it is three fingers and in length seemingly; and then envelope that in cloth, and then envelope that cloth with the plate in the place over the place of the fracture; and then put moisture as it is revolute, and turn that over the neck of it and over the little finger of it, and over the little finger of the patient, and reduce that over the whole part, and whenever the stricture of the fracture with stricture descends, and this is what is not hidden over you.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And all, that not be bad the splint over the broken bone; and for so cover that you see the patient every day, that when the ligament is softened or times the splint already be remauguda, then you rectify that and strengthen the bandage.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And then put the patient's sleep on his neck, and put under the little finger of it, during his sleep at night a small cushion; so that with that, it is elevated the helper of it from the place of that, and therefore is elevated the fracture of the collarbone to elevation of the muscle; or the arm of it tied to the neck of that.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And do not untie the bandage unless an accident occurs in the place promptly or an abscess, within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And then renew the plaster if you have seen the face of it to that, and adjust in the stricture and restore that and leave it until it is restored and coagulated the fracture of the collarbone.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And it is strengthened and comforted according to the measure in twenty-eight days, and some times in some men it is done in less time than that.
Capitol .vi.	Chapter VI.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	Of the restoration of a fracture of the shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The shoulder blade is broken in the place of its side and not broken from it but its edges.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And therefore when it is broken the place of it — and it is broken in the middle place of it — and it is not known except by touch, then according to what is the figure of the fracture forces you the preparation of it and reduce that according to the natural figure in every manner of ingenuity which is to you possible.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	And then put on the place powder of wheat with egg white and linen cloth; and then put powder of doubled cloth; and then put on it a plate of fine wood according to the quantity of the shoulder blade all or maybe a little.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	But if the plate is concave in some of the places of the shoulder blade, then you fill that concavity with linen cloth, and then raise the plate according to equality.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And then strengthen above with a long moist cloth with constriction decent and firmness of the plate until it is not remauguda from its place.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the bandage every day; and every time that it is softened, tie another time and strengthen it and equal the plate if it is remauguda from its place.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	And put the patient on his side.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And therefore when this number is completed, then you dissolve the bandage, and that you know for sure that that is of the bones of which the beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you proceed from the place of the bone heavy and put under the shoulder, then you divide it over it, and remove it, and do according to what we have said in the fracture of the collarbone of the opening of a purulent caut if it occurs here.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter VII.
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot some times is broken in the middle place of it and that tartly; but the extremities of it mot indeve that are cicadas and comminuidas.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	And of the accidents of it when it is broken the middle of it is that it declines to the parts of the feet and occurs to it great pain, and difficulty in the walk, and cough, and fort leu and vomits blood; and it is declared in it cavity in the broken bone and it is not occult to the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And the restoration of it is that it be resupinated the patient on his back, and put between the shoulder blades of it a cushion; and then press to the muscles of it, and adjust the ribs of it with the hands of two sides, and subtly in the operation of it and in the equating according to every manner that is to it possible and that convenes to it, until it returns the figure of the bone according to what cove.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	And place a plaster and lint on it, and place above it a thin board of hazel or of caligae and of their likeness in elevation, because you will wrap that in cloth; and subtilize that in it on the broken bone so that it is not harmful; and go with the bandage according to the roundness of the back some times, and strengthen that with a decent constriction; and consider the bandage at every hour, and when it is softened strengthen that.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	And if necessity provokes the discharge of that which corrodes or prurience, the pain, the abscess that happens in the place, then you cut and untie that and eradicate the plaster and rectify what happens by that in a manner of cure of it; and then reduce the plaster, sometimes to that which the face; and adjust to it the constriction until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter VIII.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	Of the restoration of the back when it is broken.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Know that a fracture of the back does not catch except in thick places that follow the spine; and from the extremities of them of the part before it does not happen to those contortions except by that which they are cartilaginous.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And knowing of it is not hidden to the feeling, of it is the inquiry by the said ones.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And the restoration is thus that it aligns the fracture by the said ones according to the manner possible, within that it is engulfed according to that which cove, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bone with that, if it is needed of that.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And if the fracture of the back is declining to the parts of the spine, then happens to the patient violent pain and puncture, as puncture that happens to him who has pleurisy, and by that which the bones put the membrane; and happens to him difficulty of handling, and cough, and vomiting of blood; and this is of difficult cure.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And already the Antixs are ingenious in that with motz engientz.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	And of them it is said: cover that you pause viandas of the patient that engendered inflation and flatulence, for that the belly be inflated and be extended, and the fracture be impelled to the parts outside.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	May we not avoreyssem that for so that it not be cause leugiera to generate abscess caut, if it does not happen; and if it already happens, then helps to that.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And diyssero alcus of them that it be paused desus ventoza and that it is sucked with fortitut; and it is similar to ratiocinacio, mays empero it is temut that the ventoza atire the superfluitatz to the place by the debilitat.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	And diyssero alcus of them: cover that the place be covered with wool that is already submerged in caut oil, and that pulvils be placed between the ribs within that it be umplified, that it be the bandage aligned when it envelops that according to roundness; and that the patient be cured with cure of pleurisy of food and of medicine.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if cause vehement constrenh the patient which no sufferta, and the bones put the membrane with leading puncture, temem over the patient, then cover that they fenda over the place, discover from the broken rib, and then place over that instrument that conserve the ciphac, the remembrance of which is preceded, and that they inscidam the bones with facilitat, and extract that.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then that they adjust the two lips of the plague, if it is great, with sewing, and cure that with plasters within that it be healed.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if it happens dedintz abscess, then you cut and enfon pulvils in rozat oil and place over the place, and that the patient be cured with that which cove to the abscess dedintz.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And be ressupinat on the latz on which he sleeps, within that it be healed.
Capitol .ix.	Chapter IX.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	Of the restoration of fracture of the spondil of the back and of the neck.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	Sometimes it happens that fracture to the bones of the neck, and tart it happens to them attrition, and similarly to the spondils of the back.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And as this happens to some and you want to know if it will heal or no, then consider, for if sometimes their hands are already softened and stupefied and dead and cannot make those nor extend nor strengthen those and when you constrenges those with your said ones or you puncture those with a needle and do not feel in those pain, then you know that it is not healed, and in the worse dispositions it is mortal.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you feel those and feel constriction with the said ones and puncture, then you know that the neck of the bone is saved and that the patient will recover with cure.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you see in the spondils of the neck the semblance to that and you want to know if it will heal or no, then consider the feet of him.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	Then if you see that they are already mollified, it happens to those that happens in the hands, and when he lays upon his back, he feels flatulence and egestio ses his will, and sometimes he is ressupinat on his back and wants to urinate and cannot, then you know that it is mortal, and therefore do not work in the cure of him.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	But if it does not happen any cause of those, the cause is better and pus lighter.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And the cure of it is that you perforses to the sedation of the abscess caut that you place over the spondil atrissat oil rozat sol, or with mugols of huous asatz; place over that some times the day within that it be sedated the abscess caut.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then place one of the comforting and existing plasters, and press it firmly on that limb; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and that he does not sleep on the part with which he feels pain until it is healed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	And if it happens that the fracture of the bone has separated or any cause that has already separated from it, then cover it with a bandage and hold that bone; and then adjust the two lips of the wound, with sutures if it is large; and then take care of it with some ointment of the herbs, until it is healed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	But if the bone of the heel is broken, and it is the end of the foot, then cover it with a bandage and hold that bone with the other hand according to the second equation; and then place a plaster and bandage on it, if you need those, and press it firmly.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel broken bones in it, then you put your hand on it, and hold it, and cure the wound with the cure that was preceded until it is healed.
Capitol .x.	Chapter X.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Of the Restoration of the Womb.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	The bones of the womb are broken, and if they break, then the fracture of them is nothing but a communication at the extremities of those and are incised in the length and decline to the sides; and it happens to the patient pain in the place and puncture, and the leg is stunned when it is fractured.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over it while it is over the fracture which is the figure of it.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	And if the fracture is at the extremity of it, then you hold it according to how it is apparelled to you by equation hold until it is assembled to its natural figure.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	But if the fracture is in the long or which already declines to the sides, then you make the patient lie on their belly until it is prepared to you the restoration of that fracture.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	And therefore when you have held it, place a plaster on it, and then place a bandage of cloth or bandage on it, and press firmly so that there is no fear of puncture of fracture or removal of the splint.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	And hold the cavity with water that fills it while that pregna the stricture according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	But if it happens that a boil occurs, then you cease from extension of it and its restoration until the boil is settled, and place on it water that sits it according to what was preceded; and then return to the restoration of it, and press it as you covered.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	And if it happens in the bones or they are comminuted, then you treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter XI.
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	Of the Restoration of the Fracture of the Adductor.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	Adductor is that which is between the hip to the top of the shoulder.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which is the one that you take a splint of medium thickness according to this form:
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	And tie in two extremities two bandages, and then have it suspended from the elevated place.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And follow the patient on a chair; and then throw out their broken arm over the splint until it reaches the tip of it in the middle place of which is annexed the curvature of the splint.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And then suspend over it some heavy cause, or the minister extends it to the sides; and then the doctor and which the fracture with his hands together, until the fracture returns according to how it covered.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And the other way is that the patient be resupinated on his neck and suspend the arm of his collar with a bandage; and then command two ministers that one of them holds that which is above the fracture with his hands; and the other holds the pus below it; and whichever of them extends to their part.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want the extension to be more strong, then you press over the fracture with a bandage and over that with another bandage, and whichever of the two ministers extends to their two parts.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And therefore if the fracture is proximate to the extremity of the muscle, then it should be placed half of the bandage over the collarbone and the other below the fracture of the hip.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	And similarly if the fracture is proximate to the hip, then it should be placed the bandage over that place and over that hip.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Hold that with ease and work, and as long as it is held according to how it covered and is applied for good application, then press it if it does not happen that a boil occurs.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	But if it happens that a boil occurs, then lay off the splint within the seventh day, and place over it wool cloth soaked in vinegar and olive oil until it rests the boil, and then you press it.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And the way of pressing it is that you place a plaster over the fracture, and then place a covering of new cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm over that adductor, and place your hand over their muscle.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	And place the cloth and press over the adductor the arm so that the arm be in place of splints, if it does not prohibit from that any cause of the broken bone.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then use stars.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And it is that you pause on the fracture that star which is pus thicker and pus stronger than the other stars; and pause between each star the width of the finger, and let the length of the stars according to the fracture with the addition of three fingers of all part.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then strengthen over the stars with the structure which I have said at the beginning of the chapter.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And it is that your structure over the place of the fracture be pus straight.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And as much as the fracture is longer, the structure is less.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	And therefore if you see the situation of the stars and the structure as we have said in the hour in which you restore the limb to its position, then you do.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you fear abscess caut, then you leave the structure and the stars inside for seven days as we have said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the ligament in all parts for three days so that it does not happen in the place proximity or inflammation; or it is forbidden the food to arrive at the limb by disposition of superfluity of structure; and therefore rectify all that according to what we have said.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	But if you are over confidence that no cause of this happens, then do not untie the bandage until after three days or more.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And let the patient's sleep on their back, and their hands be on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And put on the adjuvant cooked full of wool evenly, and consider at every hour of the night or day that the figure of the broken limb be not loosened or dissolved, or that the ligament be softened, therefore rectify that all with your virtue.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And put the patient's food according to the order which we have before said, so that the food be subtle at the beginning until it is begun to strengthen; and then when it thickens the food of him.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Because of custom of the adjuvant and the bandage of it is that they be strengthened in forty days; and then when they are untied and be administered bath and be medicated with poultices which rectify that.
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is laid rubbed, then you do not untie that the ligament and the stars inside for a day or inside two months.
Capitol .xii.	Chapter .xii.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Of the restoration of a fracture of the arm.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	Arm is composed of two bones which are called two focils; of which one is small, and that is the one that sits the little finger, and the other is large and is the one that is placed below the little finger, from the part further down.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And often the major focil is broken alone, or the small one, and often they are broken together.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when the small focil is broken above, then the restoration of it is lighter, and the healing of it is lighter.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the focil of it is broken below the fracture of it is bad, and the healing of it is difficult.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And worse of that is when the two bones are broken together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore if the bone which is broken is the small focil above, then it is convenient to the doctor, must the restoration of it, that pause little extension with facility until that be evened.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	But if the large focil is that which is broken, then it must pause extension more vehement.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if the two focils are together broken, then it must you pause the extrusion more strong.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And must you pause the figure of the hand, you must the restoration of it and the extension of it extended over a cushion, and be the wrist of the hand to the parts above, more high than all the other fingers, and the little finger be lower than the other fingers, and the patient be centered on a chair fallen.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And be a cushion in front of him in the altitude or upright of him, so that the patient does not lean work.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And then the minister extends the arm from the part below with his hand or ligament, and another minister extends above seemingly.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And then the doctor evens the bones while reducing that according to the best figure that he can.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if in the fracture of the bone there are splinters, then you pierce to reduce all pieces in their place with your virtue.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if there appears in it a splinter separated that pierces the code and is not to your hope in the restoration of it, then you finish over it and oust that according to the manner which we have said above.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	But if the fracture is with plague, you have already done to this chapter singular, and therefore take the cure of that.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	And if there happens abscess caut at the beginning of your restoration, then you line a cloth with cerot made of rose oil and white wax, and be middle between subtlety and thickness, and strengthen cloth over that with subtle structure until the abscess is ceded; and then remove the cerot and pause plaster prepared of powder of mill with clayre of egg, and then pause stars; and be the star which is paused over that fracture pus thicker and pus stronger.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And know that the number of the stars of the arm are six in the major dispositions, or be the fracture in one focil or in two focils together.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And then place your bandage over the fracture site with force and vehemence, and when the bandage is tighter on the parts above the fracture or the parts below it, place the bandage a little looser according to what was said in the beginning of the chapter.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And the cloths that are wrapped over the fracture should be soft and moist cloths, and not hard or rough, and the thread with which it is tightened should be of its own proper middle between fine and coarse, as we have recounted.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the limb and the ligament for a few days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if any cause occurs for which rectification is necessary, as if the swelling occurs in the limb, then you must immerse the limb in warm water until the swelling ceases.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let the limb not be constrained until it rests, and then return the bandage.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	And if the bandage is already softened and the bone is already set and seems like that, then rectify all of it with your virtue.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	And consider more if the nourishment is prevented from reaching the limb by excess of bandage, for then you must soften that a little and let it for a few days until nourishment runs to it, and then tighten it.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	But if the patient does not experience any of the causes we have mentioned, then he should not be unbandaged for about 20 days or thereabouts.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And then the arm of the patient should be suspended by its own virtue of movement, and make him sleep on his back.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And know that this fracture is restored in 30 days or 32 days, or very soon it is restored in 28 days, and all of this is according to the disposition of the complexities and the dispositions of the virtue.
Capitol .xiii.	Chapter XIII.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the thumb and fingers.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that in the thumb and fingers, a fracture is rarely found, and it does not happen to them except for a few times.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And when a fracture or sprain occurs in the hand, then the patient should follow the same procedure as before, lying down and keeping his hand extended, and then place the hand of the patient on that extended one.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the minister extends the broken bones and the physician aligns them until they are joined with good concavity.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	And then you must place plaster and lint, unless there is a boil, cautery; and then place a splint above according to the amount of the place, and you have already enveloped that in a cloth of it.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	But if the fracture is in the parts of the fingers, on the inside of the palm, then make a kind of sphere of cloth, and command the patient to tighten that with his palm that is fractured; then it should be tightened with a long cloth.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And let the splint of leather be wrapped in cloth, so that the leather is applied to the palm; and tighten that according to what is necessary.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	But if the fracture is in the outer parts, then you must place a splint above and another splint from the inside part of the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; and then place the bandage, as if the hand is turned to the wrist between the fingers and ligaments.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if a fracture occurs to one of the knuckles of the fingers, then if the finger is straight, it should be aligned according to what is necessary and then tightened with the palm, and if you wish, place a small straight splint on it so that the fracture is elevated and not damaged.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	But if the fracture is in the other fingers, as in the middle finger, or the index, or the ring finger, or the little finger, then it should be aligned and tied with the finger that is next to it; or all of them should be tied according to continuity, and that is better; or place a small splint on it, as we have said in the thumb.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	And consider, in your restoration, and then that, the disposition of the boil cautery and oppose — in your operation — to that which is necessary when any of those causes occur, according to what is narrated about it.
Capitol .xiv.	Chapter XIV.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the bone of the hip.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bone of the hip is rarely broken and is declared to the feeling according to how it is converted to the front part and to the most sovereign part.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	And the restoration of it is done in such a way that the ligament is tightened over the fracture and another ligament below the fracture, and the patient is prostrate on his belly and face.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then the minister extends all the ligament to its part according to the quality, when the fracture is in the middle part of the bone.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	But if it is proper to the root of the hip, then the ligament is proper to the thigh at the part of the hip, so that the extension comes on top, and the other ligament below the fracture.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And similarly if the fracture is proper to the thigh, then the ligament is made proper to the thigh, and the extension is to the parts below.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And then the physician aligns the bones with both of their hands until it is reduced according to the natural resemblance and the bone is joined with good concavity; then you must place plaster and bandage, unless there is a boil in the limb.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	But if an abscess occurs in him, then you leave that for a few days until the abscess has subsided, and then return to your cure.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	The stricture of him is made thus: so that a hard bandage is wrapped over the fracture, and that is folded two or three times, and the superfluity is removed; and then the leg is wrapped up until it reaches the bone and the root of the thigh.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And introduce a long splint between the thigh and the leg near the knee to the sides, and the ends of the splint come from the sovereign side of the two parts, and then roll over the leg and thigh what superfluity of the bandage.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And then place on the thigh in the place of that fracture splints, and place one splint on the bone of the leg.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And then fill the spaces between the leg and thigh with soft cloths, so that the stricture is coagulated.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	And then begin with a strong splint on the place of the fracture with three or four wrappings, and the more you move away with the splint from the place of the fracture, the less your splint is and softer and more moist.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	And then extend the two ends of the splint to the sides until it reaches the heel of the foot, and strengthen both ends of the splints on the other side so that the splint does not be removed from its place.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	And then leave the splint on him, so that no corrosion or abscess or inflammation or similar things occur to the limb; and if any of those things occur, then cut the splint from him, and correct what has occurred again, as we have said many times.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	But if in the bone is heavy the bone which you put, then you must straighten it as much as is possible; and if not, then break over it and remove that, and cure with that of which the remembrance precedes until it is healed.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And sometimes this fracture of the thigh is strengthened with other things which are adjusted to it splints, as we have said in the auxiliary and in the arm.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	But however in the restoration of him in such a manner made, do not occur to the patient lameness; and if it is restored alone, then with other things which are applied to the other leg, then it is necessary that he limp from the one which is always.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And know that the thigh is strengthened in 40 days or a few more or a few less, and all this is according to the diversity of the complexities and of the other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter XV.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the kneecap.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	Know that a fracture of the kneecap is hard to heal, but it occurs to it many times attrition.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	But if it occurs to it fracture, then it is only a fissure or crack in its parts, and that is with a splint or several splints, and over that all is set with the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And the restoration of it is in such a way that what is broken of its parts is aligned with the fingers until it is joined and conjoined as much as is possible by equation and facility and fabrication.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And then place a plaster and place on top of that round splint, if you need it; and strengthen it with a splint as appropriate.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in the other fractures, as well as abscess or similar to those, so that it opposes to all accidents with what is convenient to it until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter XVI.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	Of the restoration of the fracture of the leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Know that in the leg there are two bones of which one is thick, and it is called by the name of the tibia; and the other is thin, and it is called fibula.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And it occurs to some of the species of fracture that occurs to the two bones of the leg, and for that reason is made restoration of it as well as restoration of the arm equally, and the operation of it is one.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if the two bones are broken together, the leg is converted to all parts.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the thinner bone is broken, the leg is converted to the front parts.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the thicker bone is broken, it turns back, and it is of those causes that are not to your liking.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then administer extension and equation and ligation of the splints according to that alignment.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But however, if the fracture of the leg is large having many stages, that the extension be less and lighter, and alleviate with your virtue.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	And in the leg there is some cause of operation over the arm, and it is when you align the splints and that completes all your operation, then you will take pieces of wood of pine which is placed below the causes which are placed in soles, and are made lengthwise of palm branches; some of those to which is small thickness, and not be thick of the handles, and be the length of them according to the length of the leg, and from the knee to the farthest.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then wrap over each one a cloth in two wrappings according to the length of it, and place one on the side of the leg of one part and the other of the other part, and be from the knee to the lowest part of the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And then place the two stars in three places of the two extremities and in the middle place, because with this structure the leg is prohibited from bending to the right and left, and it stands for good position.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	And already a splint of wood is administered according to the length of the leg; and it is placed in it the leg so that it conserve that of movement.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And most importantly, that you do this in a fracture, and when with that it is properly cured.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And then consider in each day the leg and study with that by behind study, and you guard it from abscess and from inflammation or from other causes similar; and when accidents any cause of those, then oppose yourself to it with that which cove within that it be healed.
Capitol .xvii.	Chapter .xvii.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	Of the fracture of the talus and the bones of the foot and of the said.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	To the talus, fractures do not occur entirely; but to the bones of the foot, fractures occur some times; and to the toes of the foot, few fractures occur, and they do not occur to them but attrition in the middle of the disposition.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And if to the bones of the foot, a fracture occurs and times those bones be elevated above each other, then the patient places his foot upon the earth prepared as if going.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	And then place one foot upon that which is elevated of those bones, and then step on those, and press, and equalize those within that they return to the places.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	And then place plaster and stop above, and place beneath the belly of the foot a small table to which there are two heads placed.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And then strengthen that with the foot in structure descent, because that you have enveloped that with cloths and with other causes of which I indigeys.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And when to it pass three days or four, then you untie the ligament, because you have found the bones equalized, or they are broken or they are dislocated, and the operation in those is thus as you know.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	But if some toes are broken, then restore those, and equalize those as I have and recommitted to you in the restoration of the toes of the hand.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And then place on the broken toe a splint according to the length of the toe, and it be a little wider than it; and then place beneath the foot this table which I have recommitted to you, and strengthen that with structure decent.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	But if that which is broken of the bones be two or three or more, then you place upon each toe a splint of its quantity enveloped in lion cloth, and strengthen the table in the lowest part of the foot, and let it stand upon one of the heads of the table through the belly of the foot so that it holds it with good retention.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And it is convenient to you that you do not forget that you do not consider all the causes which I have said to you in the other fractures of the accidents that we have said; and oppose yourself to every accident with that which cove.
Capitol .xviii.	Chapter .xviii.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	Of fracture of the hip of the woman and of the bone of the thigh and of the groin of the man.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the hip of the woman is broken, then make that cease in a well-placed cradle, and then incline that to the side of the back a little, and it be held behind.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And then the matron impales the hip with a cot, and it be made in the hip of it as she hopes; and then the woman be cupped, and elevate the back of it little by little, because all that is thrown out within that it be before the part of the hip as she hopes and the broken bone returns.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then place poultices upon the back of it, and when it wants to urinate, remove the cot with facility and then urine, and reduce and return that according to the manner according to which you have seen that at the beginning, and then return to its first poultice.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And do thus for seven days or around those, because that is restored.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want, take a bladder of sheep and strengthen upon the trough of it a tube of cane; and introduce the whole bladder into the hip of it, and then puff into the tube with virtue within that the bladder be inflated within the hip, because the fracture returns.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	And then be filled with cot and stay for some days according to that we have recommitted, within that it be healed.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And when the bone of the thigh of man or woman is broken, then administer in the restoration and splicing of it that which we have recommitted in the bone of the hip.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And that which is straight is not hidden in these proper fractures and that few become, mostly to that one who is some study and use and understands this my book well; because that fracture signifies to you in the major dispositions via right in the restoration and in the structure of it, and therefore understand well.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	But in the groin of the man when it is broken, take a guard of oak, and put the groin in it; and then place upon it wrapping of cloth, and it be enveloped, and then let it be left for three days or around those, and it be healed.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter .xix.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Of restoration of fractures of the bones when it is with plague.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	Convenient is to that one who has occurred fracture with plague, and mostly if the bone is large as it is the bone of the thigh or of the arm, or similar to that, that you take care of and fleubotomize it as soon as the conditions of fleubotomia to you or testify as above we have said.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	And if the plague flows blood, then you must strive to retain it so that you pulverize over it three times, if no other cause is present.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And about to start restoring the fracture in that same day, and do not prolong it, if not you will get an abscess.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	But if an abscess occurs, then you leave the restoration of it until the ninth day, until the abscess has subsided, and do not approach it on the third day and the fourth of all, for you will cause further accidents.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	But if the broken bone is prominent over the uncovered tendon, then you must strive to reduce it and align it with your hands with ease and with little extension.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	But if the extension is not to your prepared and the alignment of it with your hands, then you reduce it with your hands with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, the length of which is of seven digits or eight and the width of which is according to the quantity of the plague; and for this it is necessary for the physician to prepare of those three or four according to the quantity that indicates to this in the cure in all species of fracture.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And it should be round, and in it little thickness so that it not be bent, the comprehension over it in the hour of the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	And it should be of sharp extremity at which it is margin in its extremities; and the use of it to a thickness tending, and of the majority of it within to the parts.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And this is the form of it:
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And it is named in Greek “labre volentz atelarem”, so it is the small palette.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	So that the extremity of it may be placed elevated over the extremity of the bone prominent.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And impel it in one movement while the bone returns, and it is aligned with some alignment.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	And therefore strive to align the extremities of the fracture between them, and if the extremity of the broken bone is subtle, and does not take that the instrument for good acceptance, then you must insert the extremity of that bone while the instrument has power over it.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	But if you cannot reduce the bone of all with what we have recommended, then cut it with what you convey to it of the incisors which we have said; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever manner it is possible to you.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then smooth that which remains in the bone of asperities and of small scales.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And as the bone is reduced, and after the reduction the patient suffers vehement pain, then you know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; and therefore do what you confer to the patient great benefit.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	When is completed the restoration which you do to the bone, and then submerge a cloth in black stiptic wine, and properly if it is in summer, and do not place over the plague cerot or other cause in which there is oil, so that it does not cause in it to occur puss and corruption.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	And after the administration of stelas in the hour of your compliment of the restoration of the bone, and leave the plague uncovered so that you cut the trauc with forceps and uses of bandages according to the quantity of the plague.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	And guard yourself with all caution that you do not strain the plague with the fracture, for many times have done this the foolish physicians, and have caused to occur over their patients death or sickness corrupt or gangrene, so it is healed.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if your stricture lighter, soft, different from the stricture of the other fractures.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	And if the plague is great or is a bad plague, and you fear over that some accidents worse than the ones we have recommended, and you suffer pain in the place, then you must not place over it stelas, but make to that wrapping of hard cloths in place of stelas and strain it with those.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	And when after a day or two the plague begins, that in it be generated a brac, then you remove the cloth which you had placed over it with wine, and then administer calguas, ointments with which of our custom is that we medicate the plagues, as such as tetrafarmacon and similar to that.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	And it convenes to you that you untie the liament and consider the plague in each day morning and evening until it is consolidated and fixed, and that the member be prepared in such manner that the puss runs from it to the parts below with facilitated.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If to the plague pass many days, and it is not consolidated nor is abscindit from it the brac, then you know that here are satagias of the small ones for which you must inquire the plague with a tenta.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And of those satagias those that are separated remove and extract, those that of them are not separated and put the member and cause to occur pain, pierce yourself to cut those according to you that is possible.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	And if there occurs to the plague zuchem or eluchen, so it is stiomenios, or another species of corruption and putrefaction, then you must place to each of those with what convenes to it of the cure of which is preceded narration in its chapter.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o .xxx.; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And of this in which you must know the best sermon and you make present your pessa: when the bone is broken, emerges over the member as the bone of the hip and the auxiliary and similar to those of the large members, and that you do not presume traction of it, nor the extraction of it for many times accidents occur by that death; have left that within until you can, for very soon it will fall by itself after twenty days or thirty. And then treat the plague if you see it, and if not leave it.
Capitol .xx.	Chapter .xx.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	Of the cure of the swelling that occurs in the region of any fracture.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	Often this swelling occurs in the region of the healing of a fracture, and most often it is near the joints, and it is disfigured by it the figure of the limb; and very often it forbids the limb from its natural operation.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	Therefore consider if the swelling is recent and administer in that those medicines that have stipulated as such as aloe, and incense, and mira, and wormwood, and similar to those; in such a way that you take some of those or all of them, and combine those with vi stiptic, or with album of egg, or with vi agre, and place that over the swelling in a cloth, and bind those over it with a good constriction.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	And leave the constriction that does not untie that for many days; and then untie that and iterate another, until the swelling is reduced; or strengthen over that a plate of lead, because lead has the property of reducing everything that is inflated in the limbs.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if the swelling has already been converted into a fester and it is necessary to provoke to drain that wound, then cut that open along the most sovereign part of it, and incise the superfluity and eminence, or drain that with some reeds until it is reduced; and cure that until it is healed.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Of the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and then the limb becomes subtle and flexible again according to its nature.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a bone fracture is restored, and then the limb becomes subtle and flexible again, then this is not done except for many causes: of which one is the multitude of solution of the ligament and of the ligament of it made not according to what it should be; or for superfluity of constriction of the ligaments while the nourishment is prohibited from running to the limb; or for multitude of superfluous embrocation; or for superfluous movement not at the right time; or for lack of blood in the body of the patient and for weakness of it.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	And the cure of this is to give the patient to eat and make the heart of him tender until the blood is multiplied in him; and administer baths; and bring joy and cheerfulness over him.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	And then place a poultice on the limb, so that the poultice attracts nourishment to it, or continue embrocation of it with warm water, until the nourishment runs and returns to its natural figure.
Capitol .xxii.	Chapter .xxii.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	Of the cure of broken bones when they are restored crookedly and forbid the operation of them as they should.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	When it happens to the limb already restored during the healing of it from crookedness and eminence in the broken bone and swelling, and it is because of this that the form of the limb is flawed, but however the limb is not prohibited from its natural operation, then it is not necessary that you receive the word of that one who exists that member be of a new fracture.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	But already there have been many foolish physicians and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is very blameworthy, causing great fear, the sign of which is mortal.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	But if lameness and swelling are recent, then it is necessary that they be embrocated with warm water in which are placed softening herbs, such as are the leaves of altea and roots of it, and melilot, and similar to those; and make a poultice with a softening poultice such as diallaquilon well made; or that which is prized mulch of altea root and is contused with gray of dove or with oil of camomile, and be plastered with it; or that which are prized fat figs and are triturated with dove's dung, and similar to those of the medicines that are called amermans consolidation.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And sometimes it is dissolved with assiduous light friction that is with the moist hands, and be administered movement of the limb to all parts at all times.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	But if crookedness has already gone ahead and is made very strong and converted into a fester, and it is necessary to cure it with iron, then it is necessary that it be the most used, and the continuation of the bone is dissolved, and be incised that which superfluity of swelling of that part with the bone with subtle scissors, and be administered facility in that with solicitude and study.
Capitol .xxiii.	Chapter .xxiii.
De sermo en dislocacio.	Of the treatment of dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Dislocation is the displacement of any of the joints from its place, so that it is prohibited from movement, and the figure of the limb is disfigured, and it brings upon the patient pains and great injuries.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when it happens to someone a dislocation, then it is necessary to immediately perforate that it be reduced, and not delay that reduction, because if it is delayed, the place is apostematized and very much with that it is made difficult the reduction of dislocation.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for this, it is not necessary that it be bad or stretched in the hour of the apostematization, because many times it brings spasms and terrible pains.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	But when this happens, then it is necessary that you get to the flaubotomia of the patient, and then let it rest until the apostematize rests; and then the limb be embrocated with warm water and oil, and then be reduced with facility.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every member be cured with this, of which the memory will come back in its place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And you already have ordered the capitals of dislocation according to what is preceded in fracture; from the part of the body most sovereign to the part most left.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Chapter XXIV.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Of the cure of dislocation of the jaw left.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	So dislocated are the two jaws if no tart; and the dislocation of both is made in one of two ways: that or they are remaugulated from their places by little movement, and are softened a little; or they are dislocated by entire dislocation and complicated, until they are softened at the junction, until saliva of the patient flows and that he cannot have that nor can he close his mouth, and the tongue of him be enveloped in his word.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	But when the dislocation of him is little, then in the major dispositions it returns by itself with little cause.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	But if the dislocation is entire and complicated, then it is necessary that it be administered reduction of it lightly, and not be delayed at all.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And it is that the minister has the head of the patient, and the doctor inserts his finger of one hand into the root of the dislocation of the jaw from within his mouth, if the dislocation is of one part; or that he inserts his two fingers together, if the dislocation is of two parts, and the others of his hands are outside with which he grasps; and he commands the patient to cease his jaws and let those go from each part; and the doctor grasps the jaw and pushes the jaw until it returns to its place.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	And if it is difficult the reduction of it, and most if both the jaws are dislocated at once, then administer vaporization with hot water and oil, until it is made lighter the reduction of both and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And therefore when they return and are grasped, and the mouth of the patient is closed and is not softened, then place over those powders of cloth with cerot, and it is made of wax and oil rubbed; and then it is laid with ease with linen molds.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And let the sleep of the patient on his two sides, and the head of him be standing between two pillows, so that he does not hurt that to the right part nor to the left; and do not let him by force chew any cause; having his food be forbidden leon, until when the pains are remaugulated and the jaws are nozzled, then let him chew what he wants.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And this be administered with ease, and do not work on the opening of the mouth of the patient, the eating and drinking and spitting, until the jaw be nozzled and healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if it is difficult the reduction of two jaws when they are dislocated at any hour and are not converted to their places, then many times accidents happen fevers and continuous soda, and very much is alerted the belly of the patient, and very much and vomits pure colera.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see this, then you know that it is pernicious; and many times dies that one to whom this accident happens in X days.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter XXV.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the collarbone and of the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The collarbone is not dislocated from the place from within by its continuation with the feet; and sometimes it is dislocated at the outward part, and this is declared to the feeling.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And the restoration of it is that the patient lies on his two sides and extends his arms.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And then grasp the place with your palm with strong grasping, so that it will return.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then place over that plaster and powders and strengthen that.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	But the extremity of that which seizes the shoulder and is continued with it, is not dislocated in any day; then it is necessary that it be reduced and grasped according to what we have said and according to what is to your apparel.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And then place over that plaster, and powders, and constriction, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it be healed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And with this same cure is reduced the extremity of the muscle when it is separated from its place.
Capitol .xxvi.	Chapter XXVI.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	Of the reduction of the dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the muscle is not dislocated but according to three manners, of which one is that it is dislocated at the part of the upper arm to the part below.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And the second is that it is dislocated at the part above the muscle, and this is made tart; and it is not dislocated at the parts behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated at the parts in front by the nerves.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And mostly it is dislocated and outside it is emitted to the parts below the upper arm, and mostly in those whose flesh is few, it is dislocated lightly; but in those in which there are many flesh, it is emitted outside with difficulty.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And very much happens to some men by percussion or fall, and the muscle of him is apostate of apostate caut, and it is cured for that which already is dislocated.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Therefore it is necessary that you suppose this while you are over-serious about him, and then you process in the cure of him.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And the dislocation of the limb is known when it is at the sides of the thigh; so that you distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy muscle, because you find between those different manifestations; and you find at the head of the muscle a concavity and at the sides of the thigh the touch of the head of the muscle as if it were a ball, and the patient cannot reduce his hand to his armpit, nor move that for all movements.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	If it is dislocated, you touch the foot or leg, and then you find a manifest touch, and it is not hidden.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And from this dislocation is made light reduction when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the reduction of it is that the minister elevates the hand of him to the sides below; and then places his thumbs below the thigh of him, and elevates the joint with strength upwards to its place, and the minister elevates the hand of him, and extends that upwards; and then places that below where it returns slightly.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	But if for what we have said it does not return, and it is from the beginning that the dislocation occurred, many days, then it happens that the patient is bathed in warm water and is administered a poultice that softens and liniments as if it were cooked roots of  mallow, and fennel, and melilot in water, and is administered.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	And then the patient is laid on his back and placed below the thigh of him waiting for the wool that is equal between levitation and constriction, and then the physician places his heel on the sphere, and elevates the head of the muscle with virtue, and pulls the hand of the patient so that it is not bad to the sides, and another minister holds the head of the patient, so that it is not bad to the sides, because that instantly returns to its place.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	And if you want, reduce it this way: and it is that you make present a man who is longer than the patient, and is on the side of that leg, and interposes his muscle below the thigh of the patient and elevates the thigh of him to the sides while the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the sides of his belly.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	But if the patient is light, then it happens that with him that another cause is suspended, so that the heavy one, because the dislocation returns instantly.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And it is reduced easily in another way: and it is that a long rod is placed on the ground, the head of which is round in figure, as if it were a mortar, that it is not thick nor thin, and then it is placed below the patient; because when it is placed on the head of the rod cloths are placed, and the patient is standing according to the length of the rod, and then the hand of him is extended to the sides of the other part; and the body of him is extended from the other part with strength, because the joint returns to its place with speed.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult reduction of it for all the causes that we have said, then use this cure: and it is that you take a rod the quantity of which is in the length of two arms, and its width is four digits, and the thickness of it is eased in the middle of the thigh according to this form:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And on the rounded head, cloths are placed so that the rod does not injure the patient.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	And then it is placed below the thigh of the patient, and the hand or arm is extended over the rod between the sides, and the rod is tied over the assistant and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	Then the arm is placed on a step of a ladder according to the width, and the hand is extended to the sides, and the other body is suspended from the other side, because the joint enters instantly.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And as the entry of it is completed according to whichever manner that is possible to you, and then it happens that you place below the thigh a sphere of wool of equal quantity; and then place a plaster prepared of powder of ground with eggs and album of hen over the whole muscle, as if it were rolled upwards, and then strength below the thigh with decent constriction; and the bandage is rolled over the plaster, and the hand of him is attached to the neck of him, and is left, and the hand of him is not moved for seven days.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And it happens that the food of the patient is placed little, while the limb is comforted, because it is lighter to the healing of it.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And then the food is given more after seven or five and is exercised a movement; and therefore if it is stopped and is not softened, then it is already healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	But if the joint is dislocated many times because of humidity that happens to it or for another cause, then it happens that in that one is administered cautery with three burns, according to that which was said before in the chapter of cautery.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if all this is done and after seven days the bandage is loosened and the joint is not fixed, and the plaster and constriction are reduced over it several times, and it is not fixed and catz and cannot elevate that arm to the sides, then you know that the nerves of him, which are at the head of the muscle, are already cut or extended or softened, and know that the joint will never be fixed in its place.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	Of the dislocation of that which is made of the foot and the thigh or the parts behind, the reduction is made with impulse and extension with the hands, until it returns.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And the other constriction should be administered in that, and take care of that until it is healed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if it happens that healing gravitates in the limb and slowness in its movement, then the patient uses baths, many times, until that heaviness is relieved and it returns to its first nature.
Capitol .xxvii.	Chapter .xxvii.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	Of the cure of dislocation of the hip.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Know that the hip joint is dislocated with difficulty and returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated to all parts, and more so in the front part than in the back part, and the dislocation of it is not known until it is touched or felt, according to which figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated hip to its place, this is declared to you manifestly, because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm, nor touch with its own muscle.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	And cover that hip, and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before an abscess comes to it, because if it comes to an abscess, it is difficult to reduce it, and it is not healed of all; and especially when it is in the back part, because it is the worst of all kinds of dislocations, and of greater pain, and many times they leave to it death.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	And the restoration of it, when it is possible to reduce it, is that the hand of it be extended with two fingers, and the arm of it be expanded, and the hands of the physician be over the hip and below it, and he pushes the joint with the tips of his fingers, or at the root of his palm, until it returns to its place.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	But if the dislocation is in the front part, then it returns as if you bend the hand with your hand, until you strike the hip with the root of your palm.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the dislocation does not obey the reduction, then administer vehement extension and strong force.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold that elevation of the ministers so that it is not removed from the extension.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And then, having revolved the arm completely, because it is enveloped in a long folded cloth over the hand, or bandage.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that this is the cause of those which help in the lubrication of the joint with facility; and then push the joint with a vehement impulse until it returns.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	And after the reduction of it, cover it so that it be placed upon that plaster in which there is stiffness and application of egg white, and be extended with a descending bandage, and the arm be suspended from the neck, and be left for some days.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	And after it is loosened; and therefore if the joint is formed in its place, then you untie the bandage of it and leave it.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	And if sometimes the joint does not become stronger, then you repeat the plaster and bandage, and leave it for some days until it is extended; and after it is loosened.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	But if it happens to it heaviness after the reduction of the joint, and the disposition of it is in movement, then administer moisture in baths and subtle friction, and compression, until it is relieved; or rest upon the joint relieved, so it is a cushion of greasy motion; and then be bound, and leave it over the bones day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And after you have placed it, and put it in a bath; and when it is dry, then you rub the joint with temperate friction, and then repeat upon it the cushion, so it is a cushion of motion, once, and the second, and the third,
corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denolam intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Corruption has already arrived on the tooth inside the mouth, while it is still lining.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish, place upon it a piece of damp cowhide scraped with border and strengthen upon it; and do this several times, because it is moist and reduces it to its disposition.
Capitol .xxviii.	Chapter .xxviii.
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Of the cure of dislocation of the wrist, that is, of the joint that is between the arm and the hand.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	Wrist dislocation sometimes occurs, and the reduction of its dislocation is lighter, and the opposite is true of other joints, but however, cover that it is velocity in the reduction of it in the hour in which it is dislocated, before the place is suppurated or that which happens in it suppuration.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the hand of the patient upon a table and the minister extends the hand of that, and the physician places his hand or his palm upon the prominence of the joint, and pushes it until it returns to its place.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	But however, cover that it is considered if the palm is already placed on the back of the hand, then the patient places the back of his hand upon a table with the extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is preceding of the back of the hand, then be the position of the hand of that intrinsically upon the table, so that the hand of the physician sits upon that prominence of the joint.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And therefore if it returns quickly, it is good; and if not, then strengthen it with a bandage yielding the suppuration and leave it; and do not repeat this, because if not, it does not suffer nor can you upon the reduction of it more than passing to it days.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	But the joint is straightened according to its crookedness; and no cause is given to the patient, except that the hand is softened and cannot tighten any cause; then you know that the nerves are cut or torn, and then there is no need for it except to tighten it with a cautery near the place of it and firmly apply water to it, and give no cause.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	Therefore, when the bad flesh is returned, then place a poultice on it which we have prepared, and let it be left and tightened for 5 days; and then remove it and let it be left and the hand of it be exercised.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	But if the movement of it is stayed and there is any heaviness in it, then gently moisten it with warm water and with friction several times, until it is relieved.
Capitol .xxix.	Chapter XXIX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	Of the cure of dislocations of the joints.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Sometimes joints are dislocated in every part.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when a finger is dislocated of those in the palm of the hand or on the back of it, then straighten the finger and impel the dislocation of it with the thumbs, until it returns.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then support the head of the finger, and suspend that part to which it is dislocated, and let it be for two days.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then suspend that and extend that until it is straight and equal in that day.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when night comes, tie that according to that narration, and do not cease to untie that in the day and exercise with movement, and tie that at night; and do this for some days until it is straight.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And do similar with this, if it is dislocated on the back of the hand, and tie that to that part and do with this your first operation, until it is healed.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly do with this when it is dislocated in the other parts.
Capitol .xxx.	Chapter XXX.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	Of the cure of dislocations of the vertebrae of the back.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	When there occurs to any of the vertebrae of the back or of the neck a complicated dislocation, and the movable vertebrae are removed from their places, then in that there is no cure, because death seizes the patient.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And a sign of this is that the digestion of the patient is outside of its will, and it cannot retain that; and many times are softened some limbs of it or two legs of it or two arms of it, or one of those; or is removed a vertebra from its place, because many times is removed and many times is made the removal of those in four parts.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, that is already removed to the rear parts and is called gelbozit.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	But the cure of it is that then you consider if the gelbozit occurs from puerility, because then in that there is no cure nor is there healing of all.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	But in that which comes from accident or from percussion or similar to those, the Ancients already said the ways of cure with verbose sermons, of which the most returns to prophecy; but I have already abridged of that of which the little is excused by the excess of it, for my better proximity to the better understanding exposition, with which I have this explained and formed from diverse instruments of that with which I will show this and expose that.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And I say that in gelbozit that occurs from the front part in the feet, there is no need nor healing of that; and similarly in that which is made to two sides.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	And of those, there is no cure except that which occurs in the back properly with that which I have recounted.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	And it is that the patient be extended on his face, with his legs straight and close to the wall, and be extended below him, with a soft covering so that the feet of him are not lifted.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And then a straight stick be placed, fixed in the ground at the end of the leg near the head of it, and another stick in the opposite direction of the feet of it at the other end of the arm.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	And the minister holds the stick, and it is not fixed in a ditch; and another minister holds the other one according to that form.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then envelop over the head of the patient and below the titillated limbs, lean firmly; and extend the extremity of the limb to the stick which is opposite the head of it, and tie that in it; and then tighten the other limb over the hips of it the denols of it, and opposite the legs of it; and then adjust all the limbs and tie those in the other stick which is opposite the feet of it.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And then the minister, having covered the limb to the part of the stick, and not being removed the two sticks and the limbs from their places in which they are fixed, but however, are not fixed as we have said.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	And the doctor places his palms over the vertebra with force until it returns, or that which is placed on it a table, and then that he adjusts on the table his feet until it returns.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	But if it does not return by this form, then he takes a table of which the width or length is opposite three arms, and hollows in the part of which we have said that it is near the patient a place in which enters the extremity of the table.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And then places the majority of the table over the vertebra, the doctor places his feet on the other extremity, and tightens well until the vertebra is compressed and returns to its place.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you wish, open a turn which is revolved with the hand; and that you fix on the ground the head of the patient in the rear of the fist two rods, the length of which be of an arm, and fix the head of him in the rear of the fist also two rods; and be the length that is between each rod a palm, and already is made in each rod a turn in which runs the turn, and each one be fixed on the ground so that it be not bad.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	And be it a rod round in which is the turn, and be revolved in the two rods of the two rods.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And in the extremity of it is a rod in which is formed the rod, the length of which is a palm with what is revolved; and in the two other rods is similar to that.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And then strengthen the ligaments that you have straightened in the foot of the patient in the rod which is of the head of him, and the ligaments that you have straightened in the thighs of him in the turn which is of the feet of him.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And then of each turn and stay a minister that twists the turn with his hand, and the doctor aligns the spine according to what we have said.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the form of the turn:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	And as soon as the spine is returned, and the place is aligned, then cover with a paste made of dried albumen of egg, and then with cotton; and then place over the paste a board of wood whose width be three fingers or about those, and the length of it be as much as the width of the place of the swelling, and on the part of the spine its.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And then tie it with the ligament which we have said, and use the patient of subtle nourishment until he be healed.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	And if there remains any swelling in the place at the end of the healing, then cover that with medicines that soften and cleanse with administration of the board for a long time, which we have recommended; and already is administered in that place a plate of lead.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	And some times it happens that swelling occurs in the rear of the two spondils, and it is cured by that dislocation; and it is that bone which already swells because it should not be done with this medicine, for it will very much cause you to die.
Capitol .xxxi.	Chapter .XXXI.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Of the cure of a dislocated hip.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the muscle should not be dislocated only, and it does not happen to those what happens to the other joints of small movement and concavity.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	And the joint of the hip is dislocated in four ways, for it is dislocated to the front parts, or to the back parts, or to the front parts, or to the back parts.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And most often it is dislocated to the front parts, and few to the front parts or to the back parts.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And the sign of the dislocation of it to the front parts is that, when you adjust the leg of the healthy patient with the sick one, it is longer and the thigh is more prominent than of the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend his leg towards the knee, and it is the place that if the knee is bent, an abscess forms, because the head of the thigh has already arrived here.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And the sign of the one to which the dislocation happens to the back parts is that the accidents of it are contrary to this accident.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	And the sign of the one to which the dislocation happens to the front parts is that it expands its thigh according to its completion, however it does not bend that which causes pain in the thigh, and if it tries to go and cannot go over that to the front parts; and the urine of him is retained and the groin of him is formed with an abscess, and the ambulation of him is on the heel.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	And the sign of the one to which the dislocation happens to the back parts is that it does not expand the thigh, nor can it bend that which bends the groin, and the thigh of him is shorter than the other, and the groin is softened, and the head of the thigh is of that place.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	But the reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you consider, then, if the dislocation is old and antique, that is already fixed with that having it, then you administer reduction of it and it remains according to its disposition, then it is not in that cure of all; and therefore it should not be done with this.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	But in the one whose dislocation is recent, and is one of the four species of dislocation, then you take care to what you return the joint and extend it to the front parts and to the back parts, and move it to the right and left, for very much it returns and does not need other cure.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	But, if it does not return in this way, then you must prepare a strong minister and extend the thigh of him from the farther part, or with his hands, or with a ligament which is tied above the thigh; and another minister extends the hand of him from below so that it puts his hands below the buttocks of him; and then tighten with a ligament on the root of the thigh, and hold another minister the extremity of the ligament.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And be extension of him or from the front part to the groin to the furcula, or from the back part to the part of the buttocks.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And the extension of all those in a single time while the patient is raised with their body from the ground and remains hanging.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this kind of extension is special and common to all four.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And therefore if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to all kinds of what I will say of the proper cure.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	In the reduction of it own, when it is dislocated, and the dislocation is at the parts between, so that the patient is laid back on their side; and then place the ligaments over the root of the thigh in that place which is between the head of the thigh and the place that is left the groin; and then extend the ligaments upwards from the part of the groin to the highest part of the clavicle.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	And then another minister strongly presses the arms of him, and  amerges the thick part of the thigh of the patient and extends to the forward parts by vehement extension, so that that returns to its place.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this kind of cure is of the lightest with which this limb is reduced than the others.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	But if it is excused over you and do not obey the entrance with this kind of cure of all, then it is necessary that the two feet of the patient be laid together with a strong, light ligament, on both the ankles and both the knees.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And the length of each of its parts is the quantity of four fingers, and the leg of the patient extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And then the patient is suspended over the head of the pole, and that it is in the middle; and the length of him from the ground is the quantity of two arms.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then command a strong young man to pull the head of the thigh, and that it is suspended with the patient another young man, and the other young man pulls the thigh with strength and impulsion, so that the joint returns to its place with speed.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	But in the proper reduction, when the dislocation is at the outward part, so that the patient lies on his back as we have recounted in the having a gelbozit; and be strengthened the ligament over the leg of the patient properly and over the feet of him.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And then two poles are placed, one at the feet of him, and the other at the head; and then poles are placed adjusted in the middle of the chest laid upon which damp cloths are enveloped, so that the patient is not harmed because the pole is between the thighs of him, because you must the extension to the forward parts not be pulled.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	And then each minister extends to his part, and the doctor with his hand engulfs the reduction according to the art.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	Therefore, if you obey the reverse, it is good greatly; and if not, pause over that diligently and thus as we have said in gelbozit for that engulment.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	But so that the patient lies on his side.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And when the dislocation is at the forward parts, then it is necessary that the leg be extended slightly, and it is according to this same narration about chest; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand over the groin of the patient, and then shortens that with the other hand, and with that shortening places that extended to the forward parts to the part of the knee.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	And if the dislocation is at the backward parts, then it is necessary that the patient be not extended to the forward parts, and it is elevated above the ground; having it necessary that it be placed upon a hard cause, as well as if the displacement is at the outward parts, according to what we have said of the placing of him upon two planks; and it is upon his back and the ligaments are extended, according to what we have said, there is no harm.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And so that compression be administered with a table over the place where the joint is.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	Therefore, as the reduction is complicated according to what is necessary—the sign of the reduction of him is not hidden from you, and it is that you extend from the patient two legs, and when you see those engulfs and the patient extends his leg and expands that ses excusacio, then you know that the limb according to what is necessary is returned—and then you adjust two thighs and place plaster and extend with a bandage so that the width is not harmed in any of the parts; and adhere the patient to rest for three days or for four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	And then untie the ligament and the plaster, and compare one leg with the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	Then, if you see those engulfs in good condition, then you know that the dislocation is already healed, and therefore leave the patient to go.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause of mollification, then you return and plaster that, and extend that according to your first structure, and leave that in three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And then untie that, and make him delay in ambulation over some for some days, until he is comforted.
Capitol .xxxii.	Chapter .xxxii.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	Of the cure of dislocation of the knee.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The knee is dislocated according to three ways, for it is dislocated at the outward parts, and at the inward parts, and at the forward parts more to the backward parts; and at the forward parts it is not dislocated.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	And the sign of dislocation of him is that you command the patient to apply his leg to the thigh; then you know that the bone is dislocated.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And the restoration of all the manners of him is that you make the patient straight, so that already extends his leg, if possible; adhere your two hands to the face of him, and pause his foot between your feet; and then make adhere the bone of him to your palms, and retain those between your fingers on the bone of him with strength, and another minister extends his leg while the bone returns to its place.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And the sign of return of him is that his leg adheres to the thigh with light no-laborous.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then bandage that and make adhere the leg to the thigh, and then tie those together immediately with a bandage for three days or four, and then untie those.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	And do not use the patient of walking for some days, until he is healed and comforted.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	But if the reduction of him to you is excused, then administer strong extension with ligaments of which in the cure of the hernia preceding narration.
Capitol .xxxiii.	Chapter .xxxiii.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	Of the cure of the dislocation of the talus.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	The talus some times is dislocated by small motion, and some times is dislocated according to compliment, and the dislocation of him is made either to the parts behind or to the parts before.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And the sign of the dislocation of him is that sometimes the talus inflated proceeds to the part to which it is dislocated.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	But the cure of the dislocation of him is of light reduction, and it is that it be extended with ease with the hands and be enveloped while it returns.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	But in the cure of him when it is dislocated according to compliment, cove that you make the patient straight, and have that one strong and valiant minister of the part behind of that in the middle place of him.
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And then you with your right hand the foot of the most sovereign part, and with your left hand of the part most behind of the foot in the place of the cavity.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	And then pull the foot to you with your right hand, and with the left two times, and then extend with the left; and push the foot of the foot with the right, so that the leg works.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And do this twice according to that we have counted.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then push the foot of the foot to the leg the third time, and you are in the cavity.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	Therefore if it returns in one time or two according to this manner, and if sometimes the foot enveloped, it is good; and if not, then over him iterates the operation, that he returns.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	But if to you is forbidden the reduction of him with that we have recounted, then make the patient lie on his back on the ground, and stretch a piece of cloth on the ground firm, and that it lies between the thighs of him, and you already have enveloped over him cloth so that it does not scratch the patient.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	And then the minister of him hold his thighs, and another minister extends the leg with his hands or with a ligament that lies on the neck of the foot; and then extend that each minister against extension of his part, and the cloth be extant between the thighs of the patient retaining that, so that the body of him not be pulled to the parts behind of his extension.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And then the physician envelops the dislocation with his hands, and another minister holds the sound thigh to the parts behind, so that the dislocation returns with ease.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And therefore when it returns the dislocation and is declared to you the health of the reduction of him, then pause plaster and stretch that with strong ligaments, and tie the foot with ligaments to the leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And cove that you fear or you guard yourself of the nerves which are behind on the talus, so that the ligament over that not be vehement and hurt that strongly.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	And then leave that for two days or three; and if the ligament is softened, stretch that.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then untie that on the third day or the fourth, and prohibit the patient from movement for 40 days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	But if it is forced to go before that space, it is not done safe that the dislocation not be over him dissolved and corrupted, and then that which does not receive cure.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if it happens to him abscess caut, then cove that you administer in the reduction of him that in the place where we preceded our narration, in another place of cure and embrocation, until it is remauged.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter .xxxiiii.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	Of the cure of dislocation of the digits of the feet.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	It cove that the one which is dislocated be enveloped with little extension ses trebal; and that which is not difficult, abantz is leugier.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	But if the dislocation is in some joints of the leg of the foot, then cove that you make the patient his foot on a flat place of the ground or on a table, and be standing thus as if he was going.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	And then you stand on weight, and pause your foot over that which imineys of the joints, and then step that with your foot with virtue until it returns, and that you see that already enveloped and does not appear in the place eminence.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And then place under the patient's foot a board that supports the entire foot, which has two ends, and then strengthen it with a structure decent and firm for three days; and then untie it and make the patient refrain from walking for several days, until it is healed and the recovery is assured.
Capitol .xxxv.	Chapter XXXV.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Of the kinds of dislocations that are made with plague or with fracture or with any of them together.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When any of those causes occur, and you immerse yourself in the cure of it and in its restoration, many times death occurs.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	And for this reason, no one should presume over the cure of it, but rather he who is wise in the art, of long usage, merciful and compassionate, tardy, not rash nor presumptuous; and who uses in the beginning of medicines that cause abscesses only so much, and leaves the patient to the divine judgment, but rather to him whom you hope for salvation from perdition, with the alleviation of the disease, and in which appears some hope.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	And therefore, strive as soon as possible to make the reduction of it at the beginning of the cause, before it becomes a cauterized abscess.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And therefore, if the limb returns as we want, then administer the regimen which causes a cauterized abscess and cures the plague with what is convenient to it of the dried herbs.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if the dislocation is with a fracture and the broken bones are separated, then you penetrate the stem of them, and do what we have said in the simple ailments of this which is preceded in the places of those.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And guard and avoid according to your virtue that of the instrument in the ways of fear according to what has been preceded to you my preaching; for this is better to you, you should owe your Creator, and more permanent to your glory, and more greetings to your true body those in your time.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	Thus ends the words of Albucasim perfectly of which may God be the benefit.
Amen.	Amen.
