O children, since I have fulfilled this book for you, which is the last of the science of medicine, and by its completion its end has been reached, and by its chapters and its explanations it seems to me that I should supplement it with this treatise, which deals with manual operations, i.e. surgery.
For the art of manual operation is prostrate in our region and time, almost entirely neglected, so that its science has perished, and its traces are hidden; and nothing remains of it but a few brief descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have been altered by their owners, leading to errors and misinterpretations such that the meanings of these descriptions are obscured and the force and art of this manual operation are prolonged.
And it seems to me that I should revive this with the arrangement of this treatise according to the method of exposition, explanation, and abbreviation; and let it come with the forms of cautery tools and other instruments of the work, as well as their addition in the explanation, and their preparation, which is necessary for this cause.
But the cause why there is not found a good artisan of manual operation in this our time is that the art of medicine is long, and its practitioner must first be exercised in the science of anatomy, which Galen understood to mean knowing the joints of the members and their shapes, as well as their conjunctions and separations; and having knowledge of the bones, nerves, and tendons - their numbers and arrangements; and of the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the places where they emit.
And thus says Hippocrates with his own name that it is not a little thing in work, but especially in the art of manual operation.
But we have already said in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said regarding anatomy will certainly fall into error, which has caused many deaths among men, as I have seen many times; for some are formed in this science and yet depart from it without knowledge or experience.
For I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor incision an escrophulous abscess in the neck of a woman, and cut some arteries of the neck so that much blood flowed out, causing the woman to die suddenly.
And I saw another doctor who took it upon himself to remove a stone from a man who had reached that state, and the stone was large, but he came and removed that stone with a piece of bladder, so that the man died on the third day.
And I had already predicted that he would die, and saw that because of the size of the stone and the disposition of his illness.
And I saw another doctor who was paid twelve ducats from our land to perform surgery, and he undertook the case of a blacksmith who had fractured his thighbone; but because of his ignorance, the doctor prepared the fracture with splints and wedges with great force, without leaving room for expansion.
And he set the bone according to his desires, and set it in traction, and left it like that for some days, commanding that they loosen the bandages; but it was done in such a way that the thighbone became inflamed with pus, leading to its ruin.
And I was called to him and prepared to loosen the bandages, but there was no calm or relief from his pains.
But the corruption was already established in the member, so that I could not stop it, and the corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until the patient perished.
And I saw another doctor who pierced a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated within a few days, causing the evil to spread throughout the man's body.
This is because the cancerous ulcer is full of black bile, so it should not be treated with fire alone, but rather with something that can counterbalance it in the affected member.
And therefore, my children, it is necessary for you that manual operation be divided into two parts: one for operations that are associated with health, and another for those where danger lurks in the most severe dispositions.
And I have already mentioned this throughout the entire book wherever an operation involving error and fear is discussed, so that you should guard against it and leave it alone, so that foolish men do not find an opportunity to speak and dishonor you.
Therefore, take up your arms with diligence and protection from God, and treat your illnesses with happiness and firmness.
And use the best way to achieve health and success with the grace of God; leave behind difficult illnesses that are hard to cure; show your arms against what makes you afraid, so that your faith and your name may not waver. For it is more pleasing to remain in glory, and thus it will be later on earth and in heaven for your sanctity.
For as I have said in some of my books: “Do not treat serious illnesses unless you are skilled doctors.”
And I have already divided this book into three chapters.
Here begins the division of the book, and first the first part. Chapter One is ordered here concerning the weights of the instruments, their forms and the irons for cauterization, and what is necessary in surgery.
The division of the second part. Chapter Two on dry and wet cupping, perforation, and extraction of arrows and similar instruments, all ordered with their forms.
Chapter Three on reduction and dislocation, and treatment of torticollis and similar conditions; ordered with weights and forms of instruments.
It is necessary that I speak about the qualities of those who perform cautery and its instruments, and in what complexion it is prohibited to perform cautery.
Therefore I say that the discourse on the qualities of the surgeon performing cautery and its instruments is long and complex, subtle by science, and secret. Many wise men have already spoken about it, and they disagree among themselves; but for me, a brief mention will suffice to avoid lengthiness.
And therefore I say that cautery is beneficial for all complexions universally, both with matter and without matter, except for two complexions which are dry without matter.
In the dry and hot complexion with matter, opinions are divided. Some say that cautery is beneficial for it, while others say the opposite, that cautery is not suitable for illnesses caused by heat and dryness, since fire has the qualities of heat and dryness, and it would not be appropriate to treat a dry and hot illness with something that is also hot and dry.
"And he says that which is contrary to that, that by cautery it is done rightly in all dry and hot illnesses that come into the bodies of men, because when you compare the body of man and its humidity to the composition of fire, you find the body of man cold."
"And I say according to the speech of that one, that I have experienced this many times in practice."
"But it is not necessary that he should come upon this who has already been examined and practiced in the chapter of cautery by recent exercise, and knows the diversity of the composition of men and the condition of illnesses in their members, and their causes, accidents, and duration."
"But in other compositions there is less fear of you, and especially in hot and humid illnesses, because all doctors agree on these and are not disagreed about the judgment with cautery in those."
"And know, my son, that concerning the secret of curing by cautery with fire and its goodness, it is about cautery in burning medicine, because fire is simple, whose action only reaches the member that is cauterized, and does not harm the other member joined to it except with little damage."
"But the action of burning medicine reaches those members which are close to it, and often it brings illness to the member with difficult healing, and often it departs."
"But fire, because of its sublimity and goodness of substance, does not do this except to superfluate. And it is already known to us through experience and the length of service in study with the art about the truth of causes; and for that reason I am excused from the length of the sermon. And if it were not that my book is not read by you in this pause, to you would be hidden the secret concerning fire, and the quality of its operation on hearts and its expulsive power through which it expels illnesses, demonstrated with philosophical speech, which would sharpen your wits."
"And know, my son, that they disagree about the time in which it is convenient to perform cautery and consider the best time to be in spring."
"And I say that cautery is convenient at all times because the harm caused by accidental time is submerged in the benefit of what is attracted by cautery, and especially if the cautery is for pains or necessary remedies for pains, strong and fistulas, which cannot tolerate delay because it is feared that malice may come, which is greater than little harm entering through time."
"And also do not keep this in your minds, my son, for that is not esteemed except by the common people and foolish doctors, because it is said that there are illnesses that are cured by cautery at any time, and they pause there."
"And the cause is not as they think for this reason, because cautery is only in place of medicine that alters the complexion and dries out the humidity which are the cause of pain."
"But nevertheless cautery is superfluous over medicine because of the volatility of its value and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord."
"And it is possible that its illness returns at some hour of time according to the complexion of the sick person and the location of his illness, and the virtue of cautery and what has been prepared in his body from the aggregation of superfluities therein, and what has been brought to him in its acquisition through foods and similar causes; but the illness in which cautery is administered is a subtle illness in members with few superfluities and humidities, thus like cautery for toothache and similar ones it is possible that that pain does not return in him, but this happens rarely."
"And moreover common speech says that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, and it is true speech because there is nothing else that they understand in it, because they believe that there is no cure that profits by medicine nor by any other cause before cautery."
"And the cause is contrary to this; and the intention that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when administering the means of cure in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not confer benefit, and therefore cautery is administered at the end of the disease, and it profits there." "And from here on I say that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the intention which the vulgar and many foolish doctors understand."
"And they said in ancient times that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance."
"And they said that the place of cautery does not make a scar, as it is not absolutely true, because I have already proved and demonstrated that this is only done in some bodies without the others, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron as they said; but however when you perform cautery with fire with gold, it is not declared to you, because it becomes ignited according to the quantity that you want due to the heat of the gold, and prepares to receive friction; and if you adjust over it ignition the gold will be melted by the fire, and some thin sheets fall into the fire for the occupation of the artisan."
"And therefore cautery with iron should be done more gently and more prudently to the correctness of operation."
"And I have already ordered this chapter on cautery according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head among the feet, so that later when asking for something about it, you can find what you want."
Chapter one.
"This cautery confers benefit to the humidity and coldness on the second accident of which these two causes are the root, such as excess of phlegm and flux calledorrhea from the head to the parts of the eyebrows and ears flowing, and excess of sleep, and toothache and headache, and universally all illnesses that come from coldness, such as paralysis, soddenness, and apoplexy, and similar ones in those illnesses."
"The form of this cautery is as follows: first command the patient to be evacuated with laxative medicine purging the head for three or four nights according to what you require based on the virtue of the patient, his age and his habit."
"And then command him to shave his head with a razor and then make him sit between your hands on a cushioned bench and have him hold his breath."
"And then place the blade of your palm next to the bridge of his nose between his eyebrows." "But however, when your finger has reached the middle place, mark that spot with a point and then heat the olive cautery which is of this form:"
"And then place it on the marked spot in such a way that it descends slowly while your hand becomes gradually contracted and you rotate it."
"And then raise your hand lightly and look at the spot and if you see that some of the bone is already exposed on the head like the size of a grain of barley, then raise your hand; but if it does not return to its place with that iron, take another one which has cooled down so that what I have said to you can be seen."
"And then take some salt and dissolve it on the spot and leave it there for three days."
"And then place a piece of cotton dipped in honey around the edge and leave it there until the scar from the fire has healed." "And then treat the spot with fourfold ointment until it is healed."
"And it was said that when the wound remains open, it is better to bind the arm, for it is thus better and more healing."
"And some of them said that the spine should be cauterized within the bone, and that the cautery should be held until it burns any part of the spinal cord."
"Therefore it should be scraped with this bone which is burnt, and therefore it should be treated."
"And others said that when the cautery reaches the end of it, it should press firmly onto the bone until the bone cracks, and this is the method of small cauterization." "They consider that place where the vapors of the head expire."
"And if the wound remains open for a long time, it should be treated until it is consolidated."
"More than that, I have not seen these two kinds of cauterization in any person, except in some men according to their fear; and let it be, it seems better with health when they are; for the head is weakened by the solution of continuity from such a wound as we have testified in other members, and more so when the head of the sick man is of weak nature."
"And the first kind of cauterization is safer and better in my opinion, and for that reason it is healthier."
"Chapter Second."
"Of the Cautery of the Head."
"When there occurs chronic and long-lasting pain in the entire head, and this is prolonged illness, and remedies are used such as lotions, poultices, compresses, plasters, bandages, cataplasms, and similar things, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that does not prove beneficial for any of those causes, then consider whether the head of the sick person is of strong constitution in its nature; and if it is not weak but rather robust, then cauterize with another cautery, but not too much." "And properly cauterize there on the horn of his head with a cautery until the bone is broken." "Incise the bone and expose the quantity of bone that we have mentioned, and cauterize there with a cautery at the last part of the head where it is called 'vas', which is the place where cupping glasses are applied." "And ease your hand in this, and do not expose the bone, for by doing so it causes much more pain than all other cauteries of the head."
"And I tell you this cautery in its place, for it is necessary to use the cautery with which one cauterizes the horns of the head and the occiput, which is more subtle than that with which one cauterizes the middle part of the head; and this is the form of it."
"Chapter Third."
"Of Cautery for Non-Classical Migraine."
"When there occurs sudden pain in the part of the head or a prolonged pain within the ear, let it be evacuated with medicines that clear the head, and let the other treatment that I have mentioned in the sections on diseases be administered, and if it does not help at all, then cautery is to be performed in two ways: either cautery with an acrid burning medicine or with iron."
"But cauterizing with a burning medicine is to take one handful of saltwort, and grind that up finely, and separate the extremities of it on both sides." "And properly incise the location of the pain in the temple with a sharp lancet until it reaches the bone, but so that it remains concealed."
"And then strain over it with a tight bandage by means of continuous compression, and leave that for the space of three hours; and properly remove the bandage and squeeze out the saltwort, and let the wound heal for two or three days, and then compress again on the submerged spot until the place becomes hard."
"And finally cure it with an ointment until it is healed."
"And if you wish, do this with some burning medicines which I have written about in the second book on burning medicines."
"But cautery with iron is performed in this way: first, heat a cautery of the following shape:"
"And it is called 'clavis clavorum', for the head of it is like the shape of a nail with some curvature, and in the middle part of it there is a small elevation."
"And then place it on the location of the pain and hold your hand steady—so that the cautery does not stick to what is left—and turn the hot iron gently with speed."
"And if much of it sticks to the bone in this way, then raise your hand for fear that the artery which is left should not stick, lest blood flow."
"And then immerse the spot in saltwater and place it there, and leave it for three days; and then compress it with mustard plaster, and finally cure it with an ointment until it is healed."
"And if you wish, cauterize with the point of the cutting instrument according to this cautery, and beware of incising an artery in this migraine which is properly non-ancient."
"Chapter Fourth."
"Of Cautery for Ancient Migraine."
"But when you are treating migraine with what we have said about the previous treatment and also what we have said in the sections on diseases, but that treatment does not help, and if the disease is such that it does not respond to what has been said about the first cautery with medicine or cautery with fire, then heat the cutting cautery until it becomes red-hot, since you will mark out the location of the pain with a line of its length, or else guess where it is; and then place your hand for a moment and press down hard until you incise the artery and reach the bone."
"However, it is necessary for you to guard against damaging the continuation of the mandible, which is moved during mastication, and that the cartilage should not stick and the nerves which move it should not be damaged, and that no spasm occurs."
"And if it is about the caution and care regarding the flow of blood from the artery that is opened, since there is fear in its opening, especially for one who does not know what he is doing and is not studious and skilled; and let the operation begin."
"And I will bring to mind the regulation of accidental bleeding from an artery according to its manner in its proper place in this book."
"And if you see that this disease does not respond to this cautery and that the patient's constitution is tolerable, then cauterize him in the middle of the head as we have described, and cure the wound until it is healed."
"And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on arresting bleeding with cautery using two tweezers, since this is better cautery and more effective."
"Chapter Fifth."
"Of Cautery for Earaches."
"When in the ear there is pain from friction and it is treated with laxative causes and other treatments which I have mentioned in the section on diseases, but the pain does not subside, then heat the cautery, and this is called 'punctum', of which this is the shape:"
"And then make punctures around the ignition, and let it be moved around the entire ear like a wheel is turned, or in the circuit of each one if the pain is in each." "And go along with the cautery of the radius of the ear little by little until you have felt out the spot with the tip."
"And if you make ten punctures all over the ear and it still hurts, then treat the spots until they are healed."
"Chapter Six."
"The cautery of a tumor."
A tumor that is cured by cautery is only one of the species which comes about from blood, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
"Avoid cautery of the species that occurs due to dryness or spasm of the nerve."
When you cure that species of tumor with herbs and capperdines and guarguarisms, and your treatment does not work, then you must cauterize the disease with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
"And pause your cautery where it meets its opposite, for softening occurs only in the part that appears to be healed."
"And the manner of cauterization is that you cauterize it with a cautery in the right of the tip of the ear, a little above the horn of the head, and on the temple, its length being according to the length of the aforementioned finger, and then pause your hand with cautery until about half of the substance of the cautery is consumed."
"And this is the manner of the cautery, which is specific to surgeons, and its form is flat on one side." "But nevertheless it is more subtle than that which you have seen; and it is necessary to cut away excessive roughness with a knife."
"And then cure the place with what is usually applied until it heals."
Chapter VII.
Of the cauterization of ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and treated with what we have said, and the patient's medicine does not agree, then cauterize them with four cauteries: over all the horns of their head; and with a cautery on the middle of the head, as we have said; and with a cautery in the throat. And the manner of cauterization is done as has been said above.
And once cauterized over the mouth of the stomach, it becomes more severe; and then it should be treated with what proceeds from you.
Chapter VIII
On cauterization for forgetfulness caused by phlegm.
Let the patient be given large jars and pills to swallow at the beginning.
"Then shave the patient's entire head and place it on the cushion described in the treatise of plasters."
"And pause that some times, for that is the manner of cautery." "Then do this according to that method which I have already described."
"And then, if he is healed well with these, otherwise do three cauteries on the last part of his head, which should be descending from the most elevated part of the head towards the lowest part of the neck." "And pause between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and then dress the cautery with that which is produced."
"But if you want to add and the illness is tolerant of it, then do one cautery in the middle place; but if you want greater addition, then cauterize those over both horns."
"Dress that while it is healing; and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to the form given before."
"Chapter IX"
"Of Cauterization of the Parietal Bone and of Softening of the Whole Body."
"Therefore, if you proceed in moistening the head with compresses and with that which we have said; and then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize it with one cautery in the middle place of the head, and with one cautery over all the horns of the head, and with one cautery over the last part of it, and with three cauteries over the spine of the neck."
"And if it is necessary in the illness of moistening the body too much and the illnesses tolerate it and the illness is strong, then cauterize those with four cauteries over the spine of the back, and afterwards with one cautery where the muscle of the neck has been fought, and raise the hand higher." "And then dress that while it is healing, and let this be an olive-shaped cautery."
"Chapter X"
"Of Cauterization for Epilepsy."
"It is not cauterized in epilepsy unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm."
"It is necessary that you clean the patient's brain at the beginning of treatment and in another cure, as stated earlier when the patient is severely ill except for their refusal of medicine."
"And if it is a child who does not tolerate medicines, then administer purgatives and masticatories to aid digestion, beforehand for several days, with care in food preparation."
"And then shave the patient's head and cauterize it with one cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, another on the back of the head, and cauterize each horn of the head separately." "And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize them with those same cauteries mentioned earlier, having first paralyzed and softened the body over the vertebrae of the neck and back."
"And apply cautery with olive oil as previously described."
"But if the patient is a child, then pause cauterization using this method."
Chapter XI
On cauterization for melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humidity and thick phlegm, then cauterize them with those same cauteries we have mentioned earlier, having first caused paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is declining excess and the body of the patient is humid, then give them to drink that which cleanses the brain according to what has been mentioned earlier in the division on this topic.
And also shave the patient's head, and then apply a plaster made from tortoise appropriately prepared around its circumference, and then place it in the middle of the head.
And let the patient keep quiet, and be held down on all sides.
And then apply a liniment, and afterwards it is appropriate to apply an ointment made from sheep's fat. And warm this over the fire with moderate heat according to the measure that the patient can tolerate when it is applied to them. And then place it in the middle of the patient's head within the circle, and let it remain until it has cooled down.
And do this with the patient once a week until they are healed, with the other regimen of lu being followed for their health; or if you wish, cauterize them with small points according to their condition, but always keep your hand on such an ordered cautery: this is a species of cautery which moistens the brain evenly.
And then apply that ointment compounded in wax or grease of swans.
Chapter XII
On cauterization for water descending into the eye.
When it has been declared that water is beginning to descend into the eye according to the signs which I have mentioned earlier in the division on this topic, then begin and give the patient to drink something that cleanses their head, and keep them from all humidity.
And have them sit in a warm bath for several days.
And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head; and also cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of water descending into both eyes, or on one side if it is only one eye.
Make incisions with a cautery along all the veins and arteries that are near the neck, and let the cauteries be in that length at the level of the temples.
And be careful not to cause fluxes of blood when cauterizing, and if you see any fluxes of blood, stop them with some medicine that is available to you.
And I will come with skill in the extraction of arteries and the removal of those, and caution regarding fluxes of blood.
Sometimes it is cauterized on both sides of the two bones near the neck with two very pointed cauteries.
Chapter XIII
On cauterization for old lacrimation (excessive tearing).
When lacrimation from the eyes is excessive and continuous, through the veins and arteries that are in the manifest location of the head externally, and it has been verified that this is a superfluity of bloody humors, then cauterize it with the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on the beginning of water descending into the eyes, and also with one cautery in the middle of the head and two cauteries on either side of the temples, and two cauteries on either side of the two bones. And if you need to add more, then cauterize it also on all sides of the cheekbone over the extreme end of the eyebrow with small cauteries.
Chapter XIV
On cauterization for bad odor from the nose.
When you try to treat it with what we have mentioned in the division and your treatment does not succeed, then prepare and give the patient cochlias (shellfish) to drink for three nights; and also shave his head, and cauterize him with a medium cautery and an olive cautery. And also cauterize it with a clove cautery with two cauteries on both eyebrows just above the hair.
And be careful not to cut that artery (the nasal artery).
This is the form of the clove cautery:
Chapter XV
On cauterization for relaxing eyelids.
When the eyelid is relaxed due to illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with a cautery using this lunar cautery, and this is its form:
"If you wish, cauterize that above both eyebrows using two cauteries placed apart, away from the temples." "And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow."
"Press not too hard with the cautery, but according to the amount that one-third of the eyelid should be burnt."
Chapter XVI
"Regarding cauterization of the eyelashes when they grow inward and strike the eye."
"When the eyelashes grow inward and touch the eye, cauterization should be performed in one of two ways: either by cautery or with medicated fire."
"If cauterization with fire is chosen, tell the patient beforehand to lengthen his eyelashes like those that are plucked out, until they become long and hard. And if they touch the corner of their eyes, then stretch the eyelids with a bandage so that they may not be harmed while the eyelashes grow."
"When they have grown long and hard, then place the patient's head on a high table, and holding a tent-like instrument over the eyelids with one hand, make an incision with a scissor-like tool near the base of the eyelashes."
"And then place cotton soaked in egg white or mucilage of pomegranate seeds on the eye."
"Then ignite the cautery of which this is its shape."
"Then cauterize the figure that you have drawn, gradually in several views until the surface of the cord appears like the leaf of myrtle."
"The sign of health of your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and its hairs raised above the puncture."
"Then raise your hand and leave that for three days. Afterwards, pause over that place with the border until the scar has disappeared." "Then dress it with ointment until it is healed."
"But if the hairs return for some cause, then remove them again and if the eyelid becomes softened, do the cautery once more just as you had done initially."
"But if the hairs do not return on the eyelid, then cauterize it until it is raised to its natural position and covered up so that the hairs do not touch the eye."
"But during cauterization with medicine, order the patient to let their hairs grow until they are prolonged and covered up, and then make a paper or cloth shape like the leaf of myrtle."
"Then take known soap and live coals separately. Take both quickly, mix them well together with haste so that they do not cool down. Then spread this mixture onto the paper which has been made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, place it on one or both eyes. Let the eye area be covered with cotton wool soaked in egg albumen and let the patient lie still with their head on their back."
"Then place your finger on the medicine and press it gently without moving it until the patient feels the biting sensation of the medicine, for this sensation is like that of fire."
"Then when you perceive that the sensation of biting has begun, then remove the medicine and wipe it with your little finger; then when the sensation of biting has stopped, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water. Then observe if sometimes the eyelid is raised as it should be washed away by the contraction with fire or incision, for then it will be well done. And if not, apply the medicine again to the place where the medicine did not adhere, until it becomes covered up completely."
"Then place your finger on the site with its edge until the thread of adhesion is eliminated, then heal it with ointment or with another means so that it is healed."
"And it is necessary for you to guard with vigilant diligence that no residue of the medicine falls into the eye. And if the eyelid becomes softened after several days and some cause of the hairs touches the eye, then apply your medicine again to that place where the eyelid is softened, exactly as you did at the beginning. And then avoid it until it is healed."
"And this is the shape of a myrtle leaf."
"And know that men's eyes are diverse according to their size and smallness, and therefore your contraction should be made accordingly."
"And it will not be hidden from those who study this art correctly."
"Chapter XVII."
"Of the cautery of a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye."
When you treat a fistula as we have mentioned in our division of diseases and your treatment does not succeed, then you must cauterize it in this manner: Command the patient to place their head on their left side, and hold their head with some servant between your hands so that it is not moved or agitated by their head.
And then place cotton soaked in oil or wool grease on the wound.
"And then ignite the cautery whose form is as follows:"
"whose shape is hollow like a reed or an eagle's feather pen at one end where the cautery is made."
"And if you wish, it should be penetrating within the other extremity." "And if you want it to come out like this:
"However, that which is cauterized is better for one's work."
"And then press the fistula if it is open and remove from it pus and moisture." "But if it is not open, then open it and squeeze out the pus."
"And then place the cautery, which should be well ignited, on it, and hold it with your hand but a little below the cautery at the opening of the nostril, so that you do not burn your hand or cause the patient discomfort. Then pause the cautery in the gristle of the nostril and cauterize that."
"And then if at the beginning of your cautery it enters the bone, that is good. But if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice if necessary, and leave it like that for three days, and then apply a cloth with dry ointment around it until it is healed."
"But if eleven days have passed and it has not healed, then apply a caustic medicine that will expose the bone and rasp it according to what is convenient in its chapter."
"And here is another method of cauterizing a fistula that was first described: enter the opening of the fistula and dig into it with a thin camphor stick that has this shape: And on that, pour in the quantity of one dram of molten lead. Then hold it with your hand with good retention, so that the molten lead does not reach the skin of the patient; and cover the area around the opening of the fistula with powdered egg whites or water, because the lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it wonderfully."
"And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cautery and treatment, that is good. But if not, then it is necessary to perform a tracheostomy and reduce the fistula into the throat according to what will come in its proper place."
"Chapter xviii."
"On the cautery of the opening of the buttocks."
"Fissures often occur on the lips, more commonly in infants."
"So when you treat those fissures with what we have said in the divisions and your treatment does not help, then use a small cautery knife in this manner that is shown to us:"
"And it should be concave like a needle's tip."
"Approach the incision carefully into those fissures until the cautery reaches the center of the fissure."
"And then dress it with cerote until it is healed."
Chapter XIX
"On the cautery of a fistula in the mouth."
"When an abscess forms on the uvula or palate or on the roots of teeth and it breaks open, and it becomes old, and pus flows out forming a fistula, and you treat it but it does not heal, then you should cauterize with fire according to the size received in the fistula. Then put that burning iron into the track of the fistula, and hold your hand so that the hot iron reaches the center of it. And after doing this once or twice, then dress it with what we have said for its treatment until it is healed."
"And if the bone is resected and it heals, then that is good. But if not, then it is necessary to discover the place and remove the rotten bone according to what comes up in its chapter."
Capítol sobre la reduccion de luxaciones en les articulacions.
"Treatment of teeth by cauterization and softening of veins."
"When veins are softened by humidity and teeth are aching, if you treat them with medications and they do not improve, then pause the head of the patient on your thigh, and promptly bring the cautery instrument here described, so that you place the cautery cup over the tooth and insert it quickly into that area, removing your hand a little before the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth."
"And promptly remove your hand, and again apply the cautery several times according to what you desire."
"And then the patient should rinse his mouth with salt water and keep it for an hour, and afterwards spit it out, because the aching tooth is fixed, the softened gum is strengthened, and the humidity that causes decay is dried."
Chapter XXI.
On the cauterization of toothache.
When tooth pain is caused by coldness or decay, if it does not yield to medicine, then cautery in that case is done in two ways: either cautery with the border of a cow's horn, or cautery with fire.
Take the border of a cow's horn, heat it in the fire; then quickly take it out and wrap it around the end of an iron rod. Then heat that border-horn quickly, and apply it to the aching tooth without delay while it is still hot.
And repeat this several times until the power of the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
If you wish, dip wool or cotton in the border mentioned above and place it on the aching tooth, then hold over it a red-hot iron until the iron reaches the front of the concavity of the tooth.
But in any case, the cautery with fire must be done carefully and slowly, making sure that neither the coal nor the iron is too hot to touch, so as not to cause injury to the mouth of the sick person.
Then heat the cautery to its proper shape and apply it to the tooth while you hold your hand over your mouth until the cautery has cooled. Repeat this several times, either on that day or the following day, until the pain has subsided.
And it is necessary that after this cautery, the sick person should rinse his mouth well with good water and hold it for one hour, then spit it out. This is the shape of the cautery.
And cauterize according to your will, as far as it is possible for you.
And this is the form of the cannula:
Chapter XXII
Of cautery for external fistulas.
When external fistulas are filled with phlegm and humors, and do not heal despite medication, and you wish to cauterize them slightly for digestion's sake, then heat the cautery to its proper shape, which has two sharp points, so that smoke can exit from one point while the other is heated. Apply it once or twice, as needed, until it reaches the front of the fistula.
And if the fistula is small, then apply the cautery according to its size. Leave it alone for three days and then wash the area with warm water until what was burned by the fire has healed.
Then dress it with ointment, bandages, and cloths until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
"For the cautery of ulcers of the throat and for the constriction of the windpipe."
"When humidity comes over the channel of the lung, especially when it is accompanied by coldness of temperament, then at first medicines which have a laxative effect should be given to the patient, and also the region around the uvula should be cauterized in the depressed area."
"And be careful not to go too far with the cautery on the uvula or burn the root of it, but only a little bit."
"And burn it with another cautery on the joint of the neck at the last vertebra." "And the cautery should be made according to the manner previously described."
"And then cure it in the same way that was described earlier so that it may heal."
Chapter XXIV
Concerning the cautery for illness of the lung and cough.
When there is coughing and lung disease from moist phlegm, and the illness has no fever or spitting, and it is an old illness, cauterize it with two cauteries on the furcula at the depressed locations of the shoulders and elbows; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts; and let the cauteries be made according to the previous manner.
"And if you wish, let your cautery be puncturing with the cautery called punctum, whose form is described in the punctuation of earache."
"And they should be punctured to those locations; and then cure it with what was described earlier so that it may heal."
"And if you have the cauteries without branches, for cautery there are three: with one device you can make three cauteries according to this form:"
De cauterizacion de dolor de cap.
"On cauterization of the titillic, which is the head of the helper."
"When the head of the helper is dislocated due to slippery moisture and isn't secured during its return, it's necessary to reduce its dislocation before it can return. First, gently lift up the shoulder blade that sits behind the titillic towards the top using your left hand if the joint is dislocated inwards."
"And similarly, the cautery has two heads; this is its shape:"
"And also cauterize the shoulder blade until it penetrates into the other side. And now comes the figure of cauterization with four cautery heads."
"And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and for that reason there are eight cauteries."
"And also pause on the cautery for about five minutes with salt, and then make sure the dislocation is adhering to tranquility, so that the limb may not be moved for some time until it is comforted."
"And if the dislocation is upwards and tart has been done, then cauterize on the muscle with a claw-shaped cautery or with pointed cauteries, because the joint is confirmed and the moisture is removed and the dislocation is healed."
"Chapter XXVI."
"On cauterization of the stomach."
"When there is heat and much humidity in the stomach that exceeds its capacity and if you continue with careless treatment without confirmation, then it's necessary to place the patient on their back and extend their arms and legs, and then cauterize them with three cauteries: one on the left side of the navel with a claw-shaped cautery about the size of a finger joint, and two on either side of the ribcage so that the figure of a triangular cautery is formed; and elongate those that are not properly placed to prevent burning."
"And if the depth of the cautery equals two-thirds of the thickness of the shoulder blade."
"And if you want to use this cautery figure as an addition, then cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this shape. And this is one cautery according to the circular form according to this shape:"
"And the stomach should be punctured with that one who is afraid of this cautery: And you should prick the stomach with a tentacle according to the quantity you want, and then cauterize those points with a cautery; and then treat it with the cure that is previously mentioned until it is healed."
"Chapter XXVII."
"On cauterization of the fatty liver."
"When there is pain in the liver due to coldness or excess humidity or windiness causing it to exceed its normal capacity and if the condition has been treated with what was mentioned previously without confirmation, then it's necessary for the patient to lie on their back with their head elevated, and prick three cauteries according to this shape and quantity measure on the liver on the right side of the hypochondrium where the ribcage curves."
"And the space between each cautery should be according to the thickness of a finger, and the cauteries should be according to the length of the right side of the ribcage."
"And do not press down with the cautery too much."
"And if the quantity of what is cauterized equals the width of the specificity of the shoulder blade and it is not properly adjusted; and if the condition is standing on its feet; and if it is not standing, then let it lie down, having already extended their arms, and elevate their elbows."
"And if it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a scalpel cautery, then do so with subtlety and caution in the art."
"And be careful not to proceed too much in the cautery, and make sure to cauterize the entire shoulder blade so that all of the body is cauterized and enters into the vessels, for the shoulder blade here is subtle; and know this."
"Chapter XXVIII."
"On perforation of an abscess of the liver with a cautery."
"When there is an ulcer or abscess in the liver and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its capsule, then if it's in the flesh of the liver, the patient will have severe pain and heaviness without sharpness."
"And if it's in the capsule of the liver, there will be sharp and intense pain that often causes physicians to tire of treating it."
"Therefore, the patient should lie on their back; and then prick the location of the abscess with a tentacle; and then ignite the cautery which is shaped like a rake, the shape of which was previously shown on another page." "And cauterize with that cautery until all of the abscess is burned away, so that it reaches to the cauda and so that it heals in a manner like embers."
"And then treat it with the usual cure for other abscesses until it is healed."
"And only those who have prolonged their study in the art of medicine and have encountered many illnesses should use this form of cautery. Although some may have experimented with it a few times, yet it is better to leave that to those who know, and not to attempt it oneself."
"Chapter XXIX."
"Of cautery for pleasure."
"They said that the ancient cauteries of the roots of aristology for pleasure were made according to this manner: and it is this, that you take from the roots of aristology a dry root pointed at one end, and thick as a finger."
"And you should immerse that in oil and then heat it on the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery at that place which is between the continuation of the furcula and the neck; and with two small cauteries, one inclined slightly towards the right side below the beard, and with two cauteries inclined between the fifth rib and the sixth, inclined slightly towards the back; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest; and with another on the stomach; and with three cauteries on the back parts; and with one cautery between the two shoulders; and with two cauteries on both sides of the chest, below the cautery which is between the two shoulders."
"And you should not hold your hand over the cautery, but rather let it be done in open air."
"And they said that the ancient cauteries of those men which use to cauterize with an iron instrument similar to a rod and heat it in that place which is between the ribs until it arrives at that aposteme and let it be opened, as we have said in the aposteme of the liver."
"But in this perforation with cautery there is no fear, because even if it happens suddenly, it occurs in the place of a fistula which is not healing."
"Chapter XXX."
"Of the cauterization of the melon."
When you treat the illness of the spleen according to what has been said about its treatment in this division and do not deviate from your treatment, then cauterization on it is done in three ways, all of which are correct. One way is to make three or four cauteries along the length of the spleen according to the figure of liver cauteries, whose shape has already been described.
And between each cautery the thickness should be that of a finger or slightly more, and the manner of cauterization should be done in the same way as described for liver cauteries.
Do not press your hand against the cautery; let the illness be evident on its own spot.
And another method of cauterization is that you ignite the cautery having turned it twice in its own length, which causes a movement that has been described in the chapter on dislocation of muscles, and raise the coat that lies over the spleen where the seat of left-sided illness resides.
And your elevation should be such that you raise the coat along the length of the body so that cauteries can be made according to the width of the body.
And having inserted both vermifuge ends, ignite it quickly in that opening where you have pierced the coat from the other side.
"And then extract the cautery; thus four cauteries are made."
"Furthermore, cauterize with a cautery having three openings."
"And then cure the cautery since it has been lying there for too many days, because it is more harmful than other causes of injury in the treatment."
"Chapter XXIX."
"On cauterizing hydrocele."
"A cautery should not be placed on the scrotum except properly prepared [albeit]."
"When you cure the hydrocele with the methods of treatment that we have mentioned in the division and your treatment does not confer, then it is necessary to cauterize him with four cauteries around the navel, one cautery on the stomach, another cautery on the liver, another cautery on the spleen, two cauteries between the shoulders blades, one cautery on the right side of the buttock, and another cautery on the stomach." "And let the quantity and depth of the cautery be proportionate to the thickness of the skin."
"And remove the cautery immediately after it has been applied, lest it remain there for too long a time."
"And do not remove the patient from treatment immediately after the cautery has been applied, lest he should lose two intentions, and healing will be delayed."
"The form of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be claviform according to its preceding form, and that with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped according to its preceding shape."
"Chapter XXXII."
Cautery of feet and thighs.
When the feet are swollen with dropsy and full of serum water, it is necessary to cauterize the backs of the feet near the area between the little toe and the big toe, raising your hand above the cautery and not twisting that; and raise your hand, and do not return that until all the serous fluid has been removed.
The cautery is done in this way: Then make two cauteries on both thighs, and on each thigh make a cautery with the pointed end of the cautery. And let the cautery be made along the length of the thigh, leaving one below the kneecap and another below the middle point of the thigh; and on each thigh make two cauteries.
And let the wound remain uncovered until healed for some time to prevent any serum from remaining in it.
Then treat him with those causes which we have mentioned.
Chapter XXXIII
Of cautery of the belly.
When the belly is affected by friction and humidity within, which weakens the virtues, so is the digestive virtue and retentive virtue weakened, which are in the stomach and intestines, it is cured with these means of treatment and not otherwise; sometimes the illness suffers cautery of virtue being exhibited, at that time cauterize him with a large cautery on his stomach according to what has been mentioned in the cauterization of the stomach, with a circular cautery and four subtile cauteries around it, with a pointed cautery; and with cautery on the bladder over the pubis, or with two cauteries.
And if sometimes the excessive humidities and the illness are tolerating it, at that time cauterize him on the navel and on the intestines, and strongly joining two cauteries on the stomach and near the groins, for this is a perfect cure by which you will not err.
De cauterizacio de budels per malaute del flac e per colica.
"Of the cautery of hemorrhoids."
"When there is a final hard hemorrhoid or one of thick humors rubbed on it or corrupted moisture, and they are cured with what we have said in the division, then cauterize them with three cauteries over the buttocks near the two small triangular ones, and place another cautery above the navel."
"If it seems that the stomach is cold and the food undigested, and the face appears pale, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cautery as previously mentioned; place another cautery on the liver, and yet another cautery on the spleen using a pointed cautery, leaving the cauteries in place for some time until the inside is healed."
"Chapter XXXV."
"Of the cauterization of chilblains near their ulceration."
When you cut the artery, then ignite the cautery that is assembled like a ray. Bring that ignited cautery to the cut artery and seal its end until you see blood flowing from the vein it connects to.
And do this once or twice, because if there are too many (arteries), then cauterize each one separately according to what we have discussed, and afterwards cure those that you can with what you have at hand until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery over certain parts, it is more dangerous in judgment.
Chapter XXXVI
Of the cauterization of fistulas that are made naturally in the skin.
When nature does not obey the work which we have recommended in its place, and the patient is frightened by this, it should be healed with cautery.
Therefore, when there is some fistula formed naturally in the skin, and it is old and corrupted with matter and corrupt humidity, then what is more proper than to probe that with a subtle tent, and also know the quantity of its depth with the aforementioned tent.
And then ignite the cautery that is like a ray. And then insert that ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the quantity in which the tent entered.
And keep the cautery on that until those corrupted tissues are consumed once or twice or three times according to your necessity.
And be careful not to burn the nerves and veins; or if the fistula goes into the body of the bladder or the body of the bowel, then be careful about all those places. And do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy place and you think it is not penetrating.
And then heal that place until it is healed.
And if the place is sealed up and all the matter has been removed from it, and it remains like that for a long time, then know that it is entirely healed.
And if the matter has not been entirely removed from it, then know that it is penetrating or in the presence of some corrupted bone, or because of those causes which will be mentioned later.
Chapter XXXVII
On the cautery of warts.
When pain invades the lungs due to heat or excessive windiness, and thus the patient's heart is weakened, then it is necessary to cauterize that area over the lungs with a pointed cautery on each lung, using one that has been prepared beforehand.
And then cauterize with the second one a little further down, so that three lines form, and then finish off with the others for better effect.
Chapter XXXVIII
Of cauterization of the bladder.
When debility and softening occur in the bladder due to heat and humidity so that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize there near where the pubic hairs begin, cauterizing with one cautery on the right side and another on the left.
And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of heat in the bladder; and cauterize there with one cautery near the lowest part of the back, or with two if necessary.
And let the cautery be pointed according to what is appropriate.
Chapter XXXIX
Of cauterization of the uterus
When there is heat and humidity in the uterus, causing infertility, corruption of menstruation, delay in their onset, and pain during their occurrence, then that area should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel region, as we have described for bladder cautery; and also cauterize above the lowest part of the back with one pointed cautery or two if necessary.
Chapter XL
Of cauterization for dislocation of the ankle
When moisture or mucus is effused around the ankle joint causing dislocation there, and a sign of this is that one bone is prolonged over another when they are compared with each other, then: "The location of the dislocation can be found in the thigh bone."
"Then you must cauterize the patient on the edge of the anus opening with a circular cautery device, because when you have felt around the circumference of the opening like this, and because the opening falls in the middle of the circle."
"And it should be the same cautery device as mentioned earlier used for cauterizing the stomach."
"If this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize with three olive-shaped cauteries."
"And perform the cautery according to the size of the inflammation throughout the entire spine. Afterwards, carefully dress that wound which has been healed."
"Chapter Forty-one."
"Regarding the cautery of the sciatic vein."
"When pain occurs in the sciatic nerve due to friction and moisture, the patient is cured with what has been said above and not otherwise. First, you should remove excess humors from the patient using foul-smelling pills or artificial pills. Then cauterize it."
"And the manner of cautery in this case is according to two methods: either cauterizing with burning medicines, or cautering with fire."
"According to two known methods: one is to cauterize the area over the hip joint with three triangular cauteries arranged like this, ensuring good depth." "And let the space between each cautery be equal to the thickness of a finger, and if the cautery is oval or round."
"But sometimes it may happen that the cauteries are placed directly over the hip joint, in which case there will be four cauteries."
"And if you wish, cauterize with the circle that precedes the shape of the cautery in the case of dislocation of the hip joint, so that it may contain and burn the entire length of the tendon."
"And this is the manner of cautery for sciatica when pain adheres to the hip and does not extend into the groin."
"But if it extends into the groin, then cauterize there with two cauteries over the groin at the point where the pain is felt, and one cautery over the knee on the outer side about four fingers below."
"And if the cautery is made with a knife, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the length of the tendon."
"And if the pain extends to the lower leg near the ankles, then cauterize there where it extends with three or four cauteries or more as needed."
"And if the pain radiates down the front of the thigh near the groin, then cauterize there with a knife cautery."
"And in all cauteries, be careful not to end with the cautery on any nerve or large artery, lest you cause harm or contraction to the limb."
"And I have seen some of those who cauterize over the knee and end with the cautery there, and the leg became swollen to such an extent that the swelling reached the thigh, and it was punctured and corrupted throughout." "And moreover, in appropriate cases of diarrhea, this remedy is also useful for that purpose."
"And if the pain is on both sides at once, then cauterize each side according to this manner."
"And some authorities say that in cauterizing the hip joint, the cautery should be made like this: it should resemble a circle of iron whose circumference is about the width of one's palm, and its point should be as thick as a finger bone or slightly less."
"And within that circle there should be another one-third of it; and the space between them should be about the width of a hazelnut shell; and those circles should be made of two parts; and their length should be about one or two nutshells, and they should be filled with suitable iron filings."
"Then heat it in the fire until it becomes hot and begins to emit sparks, and then place it on the part of the hip where the pain is felt, with the point of the cautery lying on the flat surface." "And thus cauterize there with three cauteries in one session."
"And then leave it alone for three days; or apply a plaster there with grease and leave the wound uncovered for too many days; or else treat it with ointment until it is healed."
"Albucasis says: 'O son, we have used this kind of cautery very little because of the fear of causing harm to it, and therefore we have found few cases that require it.'"
"Nevertheless, some patients undergo burns from these cauteries, and find them useful in that part of the body."
"However, cauteries with medicated ends should be made in this way: two circles are made having a hole bored through them into which the iron doorstop is placed; let the thickness of their walls be about two nutshells or somewhat less."
"And if the space between each one is about the thickness of a finger; and they are open below and above; and if they contain this shape between them:"
"And then place the cautery on the part of the hip where the pain is located, with the point of the cautery lying on the flat surface; and press your hand firmly upon the part of the hip; and then take boiling water and pour it between the two circles, and gradually heat that water over a fire for about an hour, until the patient feels the sensation of heat and biting, as if from fire — for this causes biting like fire — until the biting sensation ceases."
"And then raise your hand with the cautery and wipe off all the boiling water from around the hip joint with lukewarm water."
"And then leave it alone for three days and apply a plaster there until the blackness of the burn is gone, and leave that on for a few more days, and then apply poultice."
"Then treat it with ointment until it heals."
"And if the pain extends to the thigh or buttock, do as was done for the hip joint."
"This is how hot water is prepared, and I have already written about this in my treatise on the correction of medicines." "Take quicklime and unslaked lime in equal parts, mix them together, grind them finely, and place them in a new earthenware vessel with a small hole bored through its bottom part, according to the amount that is needed."
"And place another inverted earthenware vessel under the first one, and pour over it cold water mixed with quicklime and unslaked lime until it covers them by about the thickness of a finger; then press them firmly with your hand, and allow the hot water to drain from the hole in the bottom of the first vessel into the inverted second vessel."
"And then strain all that water, and pour it over fresh unslaked lime and quicklime again, because that water will now be very hot and can be administered in many medical operations and in the cautery of other limbs, as this operation works like fire."
"And here are some medicines with which the hip joint is cauterized, such as pitch and honey mixed with vinegar and quicklime, well combined."
"Guido of Arezzo recounts an operation and cure with which pain in the hip joint and sciatica were treated by one of the ancients, and he greatly praises it, saying that no other treatment is necessary, for it was healed in a single session, as he himself had experienced."
"And if you have difficulty obtaining centaury seed, fresh figs can be taken instead; they should be ground with a little salt and applied to the hip where the pain is felt, or to the thigh or buttock, and bound on."
"And it should be left on for about three hours, or until the pain ceases due to the heat of the plaster."
"And then remove it from the body and wash it off with warm water; then put it back on again while it is still warm, because this will relieve the pain and cure it."
"And know that these medicines should not be used for cautery, but rather only for evacuation of the body's humors."
"But Dioscorides says that when the sciatic nerve is cauterized with a hot iron, it should be done carefully; and this is how he recommends cautery:
Take dry goat hide, warm it over fire until it's heated through; then place it on wool and lay it upon the patient so that it's evenly spread. And continue doing this until the sensation of the bite reaches the ankle and the pain subsides.
This method of cauterization is called cauterization by firebrand.
Chapter XLII
Of cauterizing pain in the hips.
Sometimes pain occurs in the back due to several causes, such as by injury or blow or excessive evacuation, and for similar reasons due to the infusion of moist and hot matter.
Cauterization is not appropriate except in this single case which is caused by an outpouring of hot matter.
Therefore, first perform evacuation of the illness with pills made from figs and similar drugs, placed on the back where the pain is felt, three lines across according to its width. Then make cauteries or more, depending on the amount of tolerance for the illness and the strength of the drugs used.
And cauterization should be done with a point cautery.
"If you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or with four using the middle pronged cautery according to this form:"
"Chapter XLIII."
"About cauterization at the beginning of jaundice."
Many times this illness happens to little children; the sign of its beginning in children is that they suddenly fall ill and their structure rises up and moves.
Moreover, you can see this disease begin in the lower back and in the nape of the neck where it starts to rise above the other vertebrae.
And so when you find that, and wish to prevent its progress, cauterize there with a circular cautery according to this form: ...that the cautery should cover the entire joint of the vertebra evenly.
"And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a pronged cautery having two or three points." "Let the points be close together."
And then cure the wound, which should be healed by what we have said.
"Beware that cautery should not be administered in swelling caused by nerve spasm."
"Chapter XLIV."
Of the cautery for gout and joint pain.
When joint pains are caused by humors rubbing together which have become congealed in every member of the body, then when pain comes into the feet, it is customary for doctors to call this gout proper.
And therefore, since gout caused by friction is cured by means of treatment and yet the pains are not removed, then cautery should be used.
And you should cauterize that area appropriately for evacuation in the circuit of the ankle joint using hot irons.
And it is cauterized with olive oil, whose form is thus:
And if points need to be made on the fascia of the foot, then do so with a cautery point. And if the pains go into the innards or to other joints, and oftentimes it happens so, then cauterize that area with three cauteries or four all around with this olive oil cautery.
And if many cauteries are needed and these cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize that area without pressing too much with your hand on the cautery before, it should be just around the circumference of the bone.
And if the pains go into the big toe, then administer the cautery which we have spoken about in its chapter.
And if the pains are only on one side and it is called "sacra," then prick around the channels thus as they revolve, pricking two lines.
And if there remain pains in the said places, then prick around the channels over each knot and over the palm of the hand.
And if the pains go near to those joints or to the muscles, then cauterize each one on all sides of the helpers.
And do not evacuate the illness with bad regimen and reception of medicines, for if it is done well and the inflammation is evacuated with this cautery alone, God helping, it will be healed.
Chapter XLIX
About the cauterization of broken bones.
When there happens a broken bone in the limbs and intestines sending forth blood before the horse's genitalia, and this is how it begins to approach, then you should command the patient to let his food rest on that day and use gentle remedies so that the wound opens from his belly.
And then follow the patient between your hands over his big toe and command him to hold his breath so that it is forced out or appears the anus or the intestines.
And then return that with your hands and search for the rupture over the bone of the knee joint, signaling the end of it which should be like the majority of the circle in the upper parts of the body.
And then ignite the cautery of which this is the form:
"When there is much heat and it throws off sparks." "And then gently reduce the hernia or return it to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the hernia from coming out again."
"And you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion under them, while another servant stands on one side of the patient, another on their chest, holding their hands."
"And then place the cautery on that sign with your right hand, and when you have done so, gently introduce the tip of the penis into the middle of the anus; repeat this again if necessary until you succeed in the second attempt."
"And carefully observe the feeling of the hernia during your cautery operation, taking care not to burn the hernia so that it does not cause harm or great injury to the patient."
"And know this: if you do not catch the tip of the penis with the cautery, your operation is invalid."
"And it is necessary that the cautery used on children be small according to their size and measurement."
"And then take care of the cauterized area for three days, washing it gently with warm water to remove any scabs from the fire scar."
"And then dress it with other ointments so that it may heal."
"Let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the wound and the scab are sealed."
"And it is necessary that the patient's diet be restricted according to the length of time for their treatment, so that the intestines do not prolapse due to the effort of healing."
"And then when it is about forty days since the cautery, administer appropriate food gradually and keep them for another forty days."
"And they should be restricted from physical labor, overeating and drinking, and loud voices, because if they follow this regimen of healing entirely they will heal completely."
"And I will now speak about the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen. First, if it is necessary to cauterize the rupture, do so with a round cautery according to its size and extent, from the navel downwards like the third part of the belly. And then dress it as we have said before."
"And some earlier authors have said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery, because it is shaped like this: \[...\]"
"and it is divided by a line that runs across its width on either side of the rupture, and another line above it. Then place your hand with a small pointed cautery on it, but use the first cautery more gently and carefully."
"And he should avoid coitus for forty days after the cautery."
"On the cautery of a hernia."
When pain occurs in some limbs due to bruising or injury and persists for a long time without alleviating with medications, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And the cautery should be applied according to the size and smallness of the limb, its strength and weakness, location of the torsion and severity of the pain.
If it is healed by the first cautery, that is good. But if not, then apply the cautery again; for such pains are often punctures of a limb near to the one in which it hurts, so it is necessary to continue with cauteries until the illness is cured.
Chapter XLVI.
Of the cautery for leprosy.
Some lepers are occasionally treated with cautery but with little benefit, and it is harmful if the species of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
And therefore when you want to cauterize that one, consider if the leprosy is as described and treat it with what has been said in the division, and do not give it, nor this, and beware of the illness so that corruption does not spread throughout the whole body and entire complexion. Then cauterize it on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and the second a little below it, even to the end of the hair; and both on the two horns; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
And lastly press your hand on the cauteries a little until it impresses on the bone and causes some blisters to appear, so that the expiration of thick vapors may be alleviated from it. And cauterize the breast according to what is necessary.
And if the leprosy has already spread over the illness and appears manifestly, then it is necessary for you to cauterize that one with those cauteries which we have spoken of in the head; and with cauteries on the tip of the nose, and two cauteries on each cheekbone, and two cauteries on each shoulder blade, and six cauteries on the lumbar vertebrae, and one large one on the vertebrae near the buttocks, and one on the buttock itself, and two on the ankles, and one on each ankle, and two on the knees and one on each knee, and two on the elbows, and two on the wrist joints; and cauterize it over all the joints of the said members and feet, and on each heel of the feet, and on the hollows of the hands.
And beware of burning the nerves which are situated above the sole that you do not burn those.
And sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the sternum, and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more closely you apply cauteries, the greater is the benefit and efficacy; and know that the illness does not feel pain from the cautery, as people do, because its body is already stunned.
And it is necessary for the cauteries to be large or small according to the members and joints as has been described in the species of instruments.
And afterwards, cure the cautery with finely powdered barley meal mixed with honey, and with the other remedy until it is healed.
"Chapter 48."
"Regarding cautery of a boil."
If a limb is paralyzed or numb and treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but not healed, then cauterize that paralyzed limb with a cautery according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
And insert your cautery into the incision of the spine slightly. Then dress it with ointment until it heals.
And sometimes certain numbness is cauterized which affects the arms and legs, and the vertebrae of the back and those that move that limb, and the numbness is removed.
But do not presume to do this except one who is knowledgeable in the anatomy of limbs and the exit of nerves throughout the body moving them.
Chapter XLIX
On cauterizing warts that are mole-like.
When a wart is old and does not disappear with any of the ointments of medicine, then cauterize it with a preheated cautery slightly according to the quantity of the thickness of the skin so that its whiteness and color are removed, and its color is changed.
And then dress it with flour of earth and lentils with rose oil and leaves of greater plantain, and with pigeon's blood or hen's blood, giving each one a part and mixing all together, and then apply a cloth and place it there until it heals.
Chapter L
"On cauterizing a boil."
When cancer begins and you wish to burn that tumor, then cauterize it using a circular cautery around the edge of it just as it is turning.
And the wise men say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery in the middle of the tumor. But I have not seen this, because I fear that it might ulcerate, and I have already seen it done several times this way.
And it is more correct to cauterize around its edge with a circular cautery as we said before, or with several cauteries.
Chapter .li
"On the cauterization of warts."
When a wart is delayed in its maturation, whether due to the superfluity causing it or because of the state of illness, either from being old and decrepit with little blood or simply due to time passing, and you wish to hasten the maturation of the wart; then cauterize around its edge using small puncturing cauteries and leave that alone until it has matured.
But if you wish to burn it with a cautery, then heat the cautery of which this is the shape: and afterwards place that in the middle of the wart until it penetrates the chain.
And if the cautery is placed too deep, such that the flesh of the arm is relieved, then dress it until it heals.
De cauterizacion de carnacuras.
Cauterization of decaying flesh.
Corrodent is wandering corruption in the limb, which corrupts it just as dry wood consumes fire.
Therefore if you wish to cauterize that corrosion with fire, first ignite several small and large cautery irons according to what is suitable for the location of the corruption.
And also cauterize it completely throughout until you eradicate all the corrosion and leave no cause of it remaining.
And then let him rest for three days, and dress the cauterized locations simply with oil mixed in until all scars are eradicated and all corruption is gone.
And then treat it with fresh flesh-generating ointment.
But if after three days the flesh does not grow healthy and free from corruption, then you should repeat the cauterization on what remains in the corrupted locations.
And corrosion is sometimes treated with an acute medicine, because that is half as severe as cautery. But cautery with fire is the lighter remedy to use.
And I have already discussed the treatment of it with acute medicine in the division on that topic, so take that when you begin [the treatment].
Chapter LIII.
Of Cautery of Ulcers and Similar Conditions.
Many times in the parts of the body there appears an ulcer called a "claw," which is a thick, deep wound that causes pain. It is treated with two kinds of cautery: cautery with fire and cautery with hot water.
"A hot cautery is one that ignites like a bird's feather, made of iron according to the size that contains the keyhole of the whole part, and is of fine edges."
"And then pause that ignition on the keyhole, and immediately rotate your hand with the cautery in the circuit of the keyhole until the cautery reaches the depth of the keyhole." "Leave it for three days until it begins to grow skin." "And then apply that with wild mallows crushed with salt, and leave the plaster on it for one night, because it will eradicate its roots."
"Then treat the place with a genital ointment until it is healed."
"If it is not converted [to flesh], and sometimes it happens on the surface of the body, more often on the thighs and legs, then you should administer cauteries with water, taking a spoonful of wax or iron or bird's feather and pausing it over the keyhole; then pour in the spoon some cold water, raise your hand, and rotate that with pressure from your whole hand, so that the edge of the spoon presses into the root of the keyhole, allowing the cold water to flow onto the front of the keyhole's root; wait for a little while until the pain caused by the cold water passes for about an hour, then remove it, because the key with its roots will be eradicated."
"And thus do to those until all of them in their place in the body come together."
"And then treat those with ointments that make flesh grow, because the roots of the keys have been eradicated."
"Chapter 49."
"On Cauterization for Tremor."
When trembling occurs due to coldness in the nerves or fever caused by coldness, or similar cause, then you must cauterize them with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, between each vertebra; and one cautery on the foot, and on the stomach.
If the trembling subsides, it will hasten the recovery from the cold illness.
Chapter 50
On cauterization of certain accidental conditions in the body
When there are boils on the body, and pustules with openings that are filled with thick, corrupted matter, then at the beginning when they appear, they should be cauterized on top of each fistulous head with a thin cautery made from myrtle wood, the end of which is heated over fire; or with a long probe of erestology; or with a lenticular cautery.
And when such boils are seen again, they should be cauterized at the beginning of their eruption in this manner; and they are not believed, and the superfluity is dissolved by doing so, and they heal from it.
But nevertheless, it is necessary that this be done after evacuation with phlebotomy.
Chapter 51
On cauterization of accidental flows of blood by incision with an artery knife
Many times there are accidental flows of blood that gush out through the skin which is torn open, or through an incision of an aposteme or cautery of a member; and then they seem difficult to heal.
Therefore, whenever such an occurrence happens, then you should quickly take your knife for cutting arteries and press it upon that place with your finger stretched out so as to stop the flow of blood from there beneath your finger and prevent it from gushing out.
And immediately place on the fire olive oil cauteries, both small and large ones, by number several, and blow upon them until they are hot enough to use.
And then quickly take one of those cauteries, small or large according to the place and size where the artery has broken open, and apply it upon that vein with haste once you have removed your finger, and hold it there until it becomes adherent and stops the flow of blood.
And if blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove your finger and press on the cautery, then quickly take another cautery carefully from those which are being prepared on the fire, and do not cease doing this until the flow of blood is stopped.
And be careful that you do not burn the nerves that are nearby, lest some other harm or mischief ensue.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the flow in those cases unless by one of four ways: either with cautery as we have said, or with extraction if it cannot be extracted, because when it is extracted, the ends of the muscle are burned and the blood is stopped; or it should be tied with a thread or with linen by strong binding, or some medicines whose virtue is to stop bleeding should be applied upon it, and they should be pressed with a bandage with proper compression.
But he who administers binding properly with linen and with bandages or by position of cauteries and the like does not deserve anything but praise.
But if such a thing happens to someone and there is no physician present nor any medicine, then one should press with the tip of the finger upon the opening of that vein as we have said, and hold it tightly so that the blood is stopped from flowing out from the highest point of the skin where the artery has broken open; and once the finger is removed from the artery, cold water should be sprinkled upon it until the blood is coagulated and thickened; and afterwards one should see whether cautery or some medicine is necessary.
Of Incision, Perforation, Punctures and Venesection, and of Veins and Their Kindred
We have already said in the first chapter all the illnesses in which cautery with fire is appropriate and with medicine that burns, and the occasions and causes of them, and the instruments necessary for those things with the forms of the cauteries; and we have arranged the chapters concerning the superiority of the head down to the feet.
And we will proceed in this chapter with that same method, so that whoever wishes may be helped thereby; therefore concerning that which shall be asked.
Before we begin this, son and pupil, know that in this chapter is included that which is in the first chapter concerning cautery.
And because caution is necessary in the operation which is described in this chapter, for often there occurs evacuation with blood, with which life is devoured, such as aspiration of the vein or incision upon an abscess or opening of an ulcer or curettage of a wound or extraction of an arrow or incision of a stone and their like. And all these are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in most cases death ensues.
And we warn you that upon yourself does not fall that which involves doubt, for sometimes you will have to employ the ways of men with many ways of illnesses. And among them are some who will become angry with their illness and it is easy for them to bring about death upon themselves, because of the vehemence of that which they find in their illness, and because of the length of time that the illness has lasted, and because of the fear which that illness brings, which means death.
And among them is he who gives you his wealth and promises you, while you are waiting with that one in health, but his illness is harmful.
Therefore do not consent to that one who comes to you with this way of acting; and let your caution be greater than greed, and your rapacity less; and do not undertake any case unless you have certain science which can verify it for you, and upon whom success is likely.
And use in the cure of all your illnesses prognosis and indication of him whose health has been restored to him, for in this way you will be helped toward the acquisition of fame and renown, of praise and glory.
Oh son, may God inspire his understanding in you and not take away direction and protection from you, for this is in his hand.
And we have arranged this chapter divided into chapters according to what preceded in the chapter concerning cautery, of the cure from head to foot, so that it may be easy for you to find whatever you ask about and of which you stand in need.
First Chapter
Of the Cure of Water Which is Contained in the Head of Children
Know that this illness often happens to children during childbirth, when the midwife squeezes the head of the child without its softness.
And sometimes it happens because of some hidden cause which is not known.
But we have only seen this illness in children; and of all those whom we saw, the death was hastened, and therefore it seems to us that this work is useless for them.
And we have seen that the head of one child was filled with water, and his head was continually swollen to such an extent that he could not lift it up because of the greatness of his head, and more water came forth until death occurred.
And this humidity either collects between the nape of the neck and the bone, or collects above the bone upon the crown of the head.
For the operation in that case if the humidity is between the nape of the neck and the bone and the swelling is small, it is necessary for you to make an incision in the middle of the head with a cut in the width, and let the length of the cut be two fingerbreadths so that the humidity can run out, and this is the form of the spatula:
"And if then moisture has increased more and the abscess is greater, then there are here two incisions made in this manner:"
"And if the moisture is gone, the sign of this is that you see the commissures of the head opened completely and water is squeezed out when you compress it with your thumb on the inside, and this is not hidden from you." "Therefore you should make three incisions in the middle of the head in this manner:"
"and soon all the moisture will be extracted from the incision; and soon afterwards stitch up the incisions with bandages and cotton wool; and then on the fifth day sprinkle wine and oil on it from above, and then remove the bandage and cure the wound with warm fomentations and dressings, and cover the head evenly; and let the sick person eat dry food with little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed."
"And there is another manner of incision to consider when the abscess appears large and filled with water, for sometimes it is larger in the occiput or in front or on the right or on the left; therefore make the incision where the abscess appears and the collection of water, and do this according to what seems best to you."
"And observe that you should not cut the artery, nor cause bleeding of blood, and thus harm the sick person through that flow of blood with evacuation of moisture."
"The chapter on the second".
"When all else fails - cataplasms or poultices on the eyes or chest, and it is not improved by this, then the last resort in this case is the incision of those two arteries."
"And therefore when you want to cut those [arteries] that cause the patient's head to swell, and close by rub with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and close by strengthen the patient's neck with some cloth; and consider where the vein pulses; and the locations of each one above the locations which are near the ears below, and so they do not appear unless in certain men."
"And therefore search for the artery with your finger, and therefore cut each one with the sharp point of each bone saw with a cut entering into the bone, and let this be done through the width of the head."
"And if you wish, insert the saw from above the artery and cut it off at the incision points."
"And let the length of the cut be about two fingers wide, for when any vein is cut, blood issues forth with a pulsating exit, which jumps forth by frequent jumping."
"But if the artery does not appear to your senses, then measure from the ear the quantity of space of three fingers' width, and therefore search with your finger and feel inside the bone."
"And therefore what quantity of blood to remove is one vessel's worth, and more or less depending on the strength of the person, and all this depends on the quantity that appears from the virtue of the patient and the fullness of the artery of him."
"And therefore consider the wound, and if there remains on the bone any cause for a cyst, then cut that off so that it does not turn into a cauterizing ulcer."
"And therefore strengthen the wound with cotton wool and bandages of linen cloth, and therefore cure it with ointment within until it is healed."
Chapter III.
Of the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
When ancient migraine or sharp pain occurs due to humid and cold conditions in the temples, it is treated with medicinal remedies but this does not help. Therefore, we resort to extracting blood from the temples' arteries or cauterizing those vessels as shown previously.
The method of operation and extraction is as follows: shave the hair on the temples where the artery to be operated on is located. Understand which artery appears in the temple according to its pulse, as it may not be visible in some people due to excess hair growth.
If the artery is not visible, then apply pressure to the patient's neck with some cloth and vigorously rub the area with a rough cloth or pour boiling water on it until the artery becomes clearly visible. Then, take the scalpel which has this shape: Next, carefully cut through the skin with the scalpel until you reach the artery. Then, gently lift it up and extract the blood from its upper branches until you have extracted enough blood to reveal the underlying tunica adventitia of the artery, making sure not to cut too deeply into any other tissues.
But if the artery is too small to grasp with forceps, then carefully incise a section of it according to its size and length, making sure not to cut all the way through. This will allow blood flow to be controlled and prevent excessive bleeding.
Then, using a sponge or cloth, remove as much blood as possible from around the area within three minutes.
If the artery is large, you should ligate it in two places using strong sutures or catgut ties to prevent leakage of blood and promote healing. Be sure not to tie too tightly initially, as this may cause tissue necrosis before the wound can heal.
Then, trim away any excess skin and fatty tissue between the two ligatures, and do this promptly to prevent blood loss and promote healing.
If desired, you can cauterize the exposed artery using a hot iron or caustic agent to seal off any remaining branches and prevent bleeding. This can be done instead of tying the artery if it is too small or difficult to ligate.
It is better not to use cautery if the patient has fever or is in a state of hot complexion, as cautery increases heat and moisture, which can exacerbate the condition. It is therefore preferable to avoid this method in such cases.
After the removal of any exposed arteries, it is important to apply powder or other antiseptic agents to the wound area and dress it appropriately with dry dressings. This should be done immediately to prevent infection and promote healing. Keep the wound clean and use dry dressings until it has healed.
If during the procedure you encounter bleeding from the artery that cannot be controlled with ligatures or cautery, quickly apply pressure to the wound site using gauze or other materials. You can also use your fingers or other instruments to clamp off the bleeding vessel until it is secured and the bleeding stops. If no cause of bleeding can be identified or controlled by the above methods, then apply pressure with your finger over the site until bleeding stops. Then, rinse the area thoroughly with cold water to help reduce inflammation and promote coagulation. Finally, dress the wound appropriately according to its severity.
When extracting an artery, it is important to cauterize the vein alongside it using two hot irons or caustic agents after tying off both ends with sutures. This ensures that the intervening segment of the vessel is completely sealed off, as cautery alone may not be sufficient to seal off the entire length of the vein.
Here is how cautery is typically performed:
"Let sharpness of both knives be tested." "But if the sharpness is less than that of two knives, it is better to use two knives, for if they are very sharp like two knives close together they will cut the flesh quickly without injury."
Therefore, with those [knives] there is some thickness, the heat of the fire is held in them, and the flesh is gently severed.
"And this work is better than all other works and much easier."
"Let the space between two knives be equal to the thickness of a finger."
Chapter Four
On the treatment of sudden and severe pain in the eyes.
When the tears are acidic and it is a case of those veins above the forehead pulsating and causing discomfort in the face as if there were ants walking on it, and the eyes are reddened, exhausted, wet to the point that the eyelashes are stuck together and the corners are raw from the acidity of the tears, the ancient remedy for this condition is as follows:
First, command the patient to raise their eyebrows. Then, make three equal incisions on the forehead parallel to its length. "The length of the slit should be such that one is equidistant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second follows the length slightly behind the movement of the eyelids which are in the lacrimal area, and the third from the other side."
"Be careful of the arteries that lie on both sides and stretch your hand along the continuation of both jaws." "And if the space of each incision is equal to three fingers wide."
"And if you have a sponge wrapped in cloth or dry, crushed towels with which to absorb the blood."
"And then insert the spit made of two pointed extremities between them, of which this is the shape of the incision:" "This is for the partition of the temples into the second incision." "Excavate with it all the chain that is between two incisions up to the bone that is on top of the skull, and then do this from the median incision into the second incision." "And then insert this spade and again enter the first incision with another instrument called a scalpel, sharp on one side and blunt on the other."
"And pass the sharp side of it down through the flesh attached to the chain and then enter the bone on one side of the median fissure and use it to cut all the vessels that descend from the head to the ears."
"But make sure that the incision is continued until you reach the chain and then do this in the median fissure into another fissure."
"And since much blood flows from it, compress the places of the bleeding sponges together."
"And then put in each wound a piece of cotton wool soaked in vinegar and oil and vinegar, making sure that there is no burn resulting from cauterization."
"And on the third day untie the stitches and administer a large infusion of cold water or decoction of tormentilla, and then dress it with basil ointment with rose oil and other remedies until the wounds are healed."
"Chapter .v"
"Of the treatment of lacerations by caustic substances and of the ears descending from the partitions inside the head."
"When someone comes with caustic substances that are sharp and continuous, and the ears of the sick person are thin and small, and their function is debilitated, and the eyelids are ulcerated and from them fall hairs, and there is acute painful sensation in the forehead with consequent swelling, you should know that these materials and caustic substances do not come from anywhere else but from small veins proceeding from inside the partitions."
"And the best treatment for these is this: order the sick person to raise their forehead, and then make an incision in it in the middle of the forehead, a little one on the left (and begin with the incision on the left temple entering the right temple; and let the incision be within the bone; and lengthen your hand through the lacertians of the temples which are thickened by mastication), until the bone is uncovered."
"Dry up all the blood with sponge or dry cloth and then fill in between both lips of the wound with cotton wool or linen." "And then sprinkle on top with powders soaked in vinegar and oil so that there is no burn resulting from cauterization."
"And when you remove that and see that the aposteme has decreased, then it is necessary to rub the bone where the flesh begins, and then dress it with a drying remedy which makes the flesh appear, for example if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and make an plaster from them and apply it to these wounds on newly born flesh."
"Chapter .vi"
"Treatment for that which falls into the ears."
"Every cause that falls into the ears is of four kinds, for either it is a mineral stone or a similar cause such as iron and copper, or it is from a plant such as chickpeas or broad beans, or it is a fluid cause such as water and vinegar and their like, or some kind of creature."
"And therefore when a stone falls into the ear or another cause similar to those causes that do not fit nor grow in the ear, and blocks the ear canal, and sometimes the stone is ground down, at times it distills into that some cause of olive oil or sesame. And then promptly administer its extraction, and make them sneeze under conditions, and plug their nose with the onset of sneezing." "And promptly plug the ear canal with some pieces of cloth or wool, and extend the ear outward from these parts, for many times it is forgotten with such causes."
"And if it is not removed, then promptly administer its extraction using the instrument called the subtile epicicarian gesture, of which this is the form:"
"And if it is forgotten with gestures, it is better so. And if not, then promptly administer its extraction using a thin hook of doubled thread."
"And therefore if it is not removed by this, then make a cannula of lead and insert the extremity of the cannula into the passage of the ear, closing around the cannula with wax and softened oil so that only the cannula may be inserted." "And promptly extract it using a small wind with strong attraction, for often this is how it has been related to us."
"But if it is not removed in this manner, then take a heated halaka or sometimes prepared with which birds are taken by the foot in small quantities, and place that on the extremity of the ray, promptly wrapping it around that well-placed spot." "And promptly insert that into the passage of the ear with ease, and promptly remove the ear from moisture."
"And therefore if it is not removed with all the causes which we have related, then you should cut that before it becomes an aposteme caut or spasm."
"And the manner of cutting that is: first sanctify the vein sephasica and extract the blood according to its virtue, then make that cut between your thumb and index finger, converting the ear outward from these parts, and finish with a small fissure in the root of the ear, placing the greys of it in the well-pressed place of it." "And let the fissure be made in the shape of a crescent moon that reaches to the pear, and once the pear is attained, remove it if possible with appropriate instruments; and promptly close the fissure at that hour with speed, and care for it until it is healed."
"And if the cause of pain in the ear is one of those greases that has increased and swollen, then promptly administer its cure and extraction. But if it does not obey your examination, then you should take a thin subtle spatula according to this form:" "and use that for the excision of that grease which has fallen into the ear."
"And do not do this when you think that it has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear, and pause until it is dry in several pieces, then promptly extract it with tweezers or subtle gestures, or with excision as mentioned above, for its extraction will be relieved."
"But in the water that enters into the ear, it is necessary to use sternutation with caution at the beginning, and fill one's ear with a little wax, and place it over that ear in which the water is located. And if it does not remove it, then promptly take thin pearls of lionstone according to the length of your finger, heat them in the fire slightly, and have the patient insert one of those into the passage of his ear and press on one side of that part with his little finger while striking another pearl over the pearl that is inside the ear." "So continue doing this until all the water has been removed."
"So continue doing this until all the water has been removed." "And if the water cannot be removed in this way, then take some paper or cotton, insert one end of it into the ear and extend the other end with fire until most of it is burned."
"And promptly take another cotton and do this several times until all the water has been removed, then extract that with a cannula as mentioned above regarding the extracting pear."
"But in the extraction of a beast that enters into that ear, if it is a small creature, do thus and treat it in the same way as mentioned in the division. But if it is a large creature that causes fear at its sight, then promptly extract it with gestures and tweezers, for this cause is lighter than all other causes that occur in the ear."
"But in the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it with what has been said in the division and in the treatise on distillations and your cure does not succeed, then it is necessary that you examine the ear towards the sun."
"And then if any cause of worms appears here, promptly extract it with gestures or subtle tweezers. But if no cause appears, then take a cannula of the form below:" "I insert the tip of a thin instrument into the ear according to what the patient can tolerate; then I suck strongly with it, and repeat this many times until all the worms are removed."
"If you do not follow the aforementioned instructions, then seal and close the opening of the tube with wax as mentioned earlier. Then administer distilled drugs that have been proven effective in previous treatments for worms, and you will find this information in the treatise on distillation."
"And here is your procedure to pour medicinal oils into the ear using the instrument, whose shape is as follows:" "And make it of silver or brass, narrow and straight, with a small hole at one end and flat on top."
"So that it may fit into the concavity of the cannula used here when necessary." "And if you wish, take the reed and wrap it around the tip of the instrument decently, and then pour oil into the concavity of the funnel, or juice from some herb, or any other medicine that you want onto the cannula — which is in the ear — and then insert the reed with its tip downwards and squeeze gently with your hand until the oil is expelled into the concavity of the funnel and the disease feels the oil inside."
"And whatever is poured into the ear should be heated gently over fire." "And be sure that the cause you are treating in the ear is not too hot, as ear medicines do not tolerate heat excessively."
"Chapter VII."
"On the treatment of ear infections."
"Sometimes children are born from mothers' wombs not fully pierced, and this has happened to some men, deafness in the ear for plague or birthmark present there; and this deafness sometimes occurs on the front of the ear canal which does not affect hearing, and sometimes it is outside the ear parts."
"The one that happens in its front, which does not comprehend hearing, is among the most difficult dispositions to cure."
"And in that where it succeeds in comprehending, you should place the patient's ear to the sunlight and look inside it." "Therefore if deafness appears, open with a thin spatula of which this is its shape:"
"If the tip of it where it should be small in width, one part sharp and the other not; and the spatula is of two lion sides for that it does not make injury to the ear."
"And therefore if the deafness is due to skin born in the ear or in its canal, then you should use thin scissors and cut it out with great ease until all the skin is removed."
"And if deafness is in front of the ear, then take a thin lion iron and heat it a little on fire, and quickly place that into the canal of the ear."
"And therefore if you perceive deafness with what the patient finds easily, due to gravity of hearing, ease its oppression with care; and make sure that you do not injure the nerves of the ear."
"And immediately place a dressing on the ear according to the amount of width of the canal that you have involved in the Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or else take wax, heat it, and pulverize it over it three times and use it; and if the ear becomes inflamed then it is necessary to cleanse the wax and replace it with another wax which you will envelop in cerot made with sweet oil until the inflammation has been cauterized; and immediately cure it until it is healed."
"But if it happens that there is a flow of blood, then immerse a sponge or cloth in warm water and place it on the ear, and use the other cure which restrains the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation."
"Chapter VIII"
"Of the cure for atrophy that occurs on the eyelids."
"Some people's eyelids have been moistened occasionally, sometimes they are dry."
"Therefore you should have those hands ready to handle the intestines or the hernia, and carefully spread out their edges with your fingers as explained."
"But if there is pain from a blood flow, then cauterize it immediately with an anticlinal cautery."
"And the best cauterization is to burn and close up wounds that return several times due to some cause of their edges; but when they are burned with fire, those edges get burned off and do not return."
"Chapter IX."
"Treatment of swelling that comes to the eyelids."
"Many times there appears in the eyelids some cause that resembles hardness and toughness, which is called swelling due to its hardness."
"And it is an aggregation of thick humidity in the left eyelid above."
"Therefore, if the swelling appears on the outside of the eyelid and is swollen all around, its cause is light."
"Therefore make an incision over it along its width, carefully excise all around with ease, and suspend and cut off that cause."
"And if its size is large, then adjust it with a suture; and dress it until it heals."
"But if it is small, you will not suffer any harm from it since the ointment for it restores that and makes it grow again."
"And if the swelling is declining towards the inner parts of the eyelid, then open the eyelid and suspend that swelling with a needle, except where you need to make an incision. Then press it all around, and if the eyelid is lengthened by the incision, it does not matter."
"And after the incision, wash the eye with salt water; and dress that place with whatever makes it grow until it heals."
Chapter X
On the treatment of swelling above the eyelid.
Axcirnath is a growth that occurs in the tissues of the eyelid above, and it happens more often in children. It aggravates their eyes and affects their sight so much that they cannot tolerate the brightness of sunlight because tears flow from them.
And therefore they make them wear patches on their faces all the time and while sleeping. And there are tears flowing from the eyelids of their left eyes which have already become inflamed and swelling is imminent in the eye; and you can feel the swelling when you press that place with your fingers.
And one way of operating is for the person to hold his head upright with his chin down and place a cloth on it and over the eye. Then make a circle according to how much swelling there is all around, and place that over it and press all around with your fingers so that swelling collects in the middle of the circle. Then make an incision in the middle of that humidity with a sharp instrument along its width, but the incision should not be bigger than the one made in phlebotomy.
But when you cut through the skin completely until you reach the swelling, for in most cases it comes out through the incision like white cheese.
Then take that out with cloths which you have wrapped between your fingers and roll them between your right and left hands until it has all come out.
And be careful not to sew the incision too tightly, lest with the instrument you reach the eye and damage it.
If it does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, then insert a small wedge with ease within that processes arternach; and then extract as we have said; and then overlay cloths with water and vinegar on the area and press them there and strain those with powders.
Some people crush salt and place it in the concavity of the fissure so that any remaining moisture is absorbed.
And then dress that wound once it has healed
But if an abscess occurs in the cauterized area, then cure it with cedatil plasters until it is healed.
Chapter XI
Of methods for handling the sick.
When the eyelids of the sick are swollen due to excess discharge and become inflamed, then they cause unpleasant conditions such as persistent tears and softening of the eyelids and tissue that may lead to destruction of the eye, which is called inflammation of the eye, and it is cured in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or with sharp medicine as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cauterization; or it is treated by incision and suturing; or with ointments as I will explain.
And therefore, you should first examine the head of the sick person in its entirety; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it is turned, that's good; but if not, insert a needle into that part where there is an excess discharge below the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with thread above, and when you have — close to the edge of the eyelid where the hairs grow — close to the hairs, then pull the thread upwards with the eyelid turned towards you.
Then cut into the part underneath the eyelid where the excess discharge is with a sharp probe inserted from the large lacrimal duct into the small one; then extract the thread and compress it beneath the eyelid using small pieces of cotton or cloth, and then press down on the eyelid with your fingertip in the shape of a myrtle leaf.
But however the shape should be determined according to the amount of swelling of the eyelid, for that varies among individuals, and those who require a large incision of the eyelid according to the amount by which it is softened.
And then cut with the probe along the two lines that you have marked out, beginning from the large lacrimal duct into the small one. And if your incision is close to the natural hairs, then it should be as wide as the thickness of a hair.
And then place a clamp on one of the two ends of the thread, and then cut off all of it, and then sew up the two lips with wax or fine wool thread, and wipe away the blood, and make what is superfluous of the threads adhere to both eyebrows with some sticky substances, if you wish to do so; otherwise, do not worry about it.
And then leave the stitches in for three or four days, and then take them out and cure it.
"And if you wish, leave the wound without stitching, and heal it with something that dries and constricts."
"But he was solicitous about the patient, acted well, and did not act out of fear."
"And another method of stitching is to cut the eyelid like a myrtle leaf and raise it with three separated and gathered needles thus:"
"But if that is not possible, then hold the needles, and this does not matter. Then take a needle with thread and put it in the middle of the figure, and put the other thread near the larger lacrimal, and the second thread near the smaller lacrimal, and adjust between these said threads with equality, and raise your hand with an equal elevation, raising all the chain on which it is cut as we have recommended."
"And then join the two lips of the wound with stitching, and heal that part which has been stitched up."
"But if an abscess forms after your incision or wound, cauterize that abscess with pitch and its like, and with fire."
"And sometimes it happens that the hairs of the eyelashes are turned inwards, so then you should use what we have said about incision, but stitching is more artificial."
"The method with a needle is as follows:" "And it is that you turn the eyelid and cut the figure which is beneath as I have described; and then make two needles or two thin astels, of which the length should be according to the length of the eyelid and the width less than the width of the spatula." "And you have already incised at both ends of each parted part, where you hold the threads."
"Then bring each one together with subtlety over what is superfluous of the eyelid of the hole, and tighten the needles of both parted parts with strong pressure, and leave it like that for a few days, because the chain will die from the tightening and fall away and fall inside where you put it."
"But if it is delayed, then cut it with scissors, and then heal the wound where it has been healed."
"So when it is healed, the eyelid is elevated and the hairs do not irritate."
"And this is how you make two needles according to this method:" "And have the quantity of length and width neither more nor less."
"Chapter XII."
"About raising irritating hairs in the eye with tweezers when the hair is hard."
"When hairs are not natural, hard and rough and irritating to the eyes, then the operation in it is that you take a fine tweezers and grasp with it that single hair of cedar or lion, and then adjust its ends very subtly without touching them." "And let the length of the hairs be about a palm."
"And then you make another fine hair from it in brief, and use its ends if you wish."
"And then grasp the sick person's head with your left hand, and let it be near the sun so that your work is clear, because this operation is delicate and fine."
"And then insert the tweezers into the root of the grasped hair which has needed to be removed, and make it penetrate into the eyelid quickly until you remove that from above the natural hair."
"And then pull out the hair from above and insert that one in its place, and let there be one or two or three hairs and not more."
"And then pull your hand with it until the hair is completely removed from the eyelid with the hair in its place on the eyelid with the natural hair."
"But if it is pulled out and the hair is not removed, then you pull it out from both sides with the hair that you have made with it until it is completely removed from below."
"And then examine it with the vision of the eye because then you will remove the tweezers and the hair, rinse both well, close them and leave the eyelid for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows over it good flesh."
"And if the hair is too short, then you adjust a long one of the natural hairs and elevate it with that, or let it grow until it is lengthened appropriately some space, and then elevate it."
"Chapter XIII."
"About treating the swelling that occurs on the eyelid above."
"When swelling occurs in the eye, and is contraction of the eyelid when it contracts above on the right or left side due to poor healing of wound or section or burn, and it is called leporina, and this swelling is either natural or accidental, and is done by healing a wound or section or burn, or by resembling their ills."
"The manner of operation in it is that you cut through that consolidation and separate its lips and apply to it a wick of linen soaked in water and tie those until they are healed."
"And do not use remedies that dry and constrict it because if you do it returns to swelling worse than ever before."
"Use on it causes that soften it like fenugreek, and steeped in the water in which it is cooked and washed or diacynthon, which should be melted with some oil, and immerse the wick in it and cure with it."
"And the treasure of your remedy is that you perforate all that has not healed according to the form that was at the beginning."
"And this operation which we have said is nothing but a certain correction of swelling that does not return to its original form."
"Chapter XIV."
"About treating the swelling that occurs in the eyelid below."
"This swelling that occurs in the lower eyelid is truly called swelling; and it is either natural or accidental."
"But accidental is caused by wound or cut or burn or other similar causes."
"And the way of operating on it is that you take a needle with a double thread and insert it into the flesh and make it pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh."
"And then extend the flesh above with the needle and close it with the needle and cut it open with a broad spatula." "And then if the shape of the eyelid returns as it should be good. And if not, take the ray and place it in the cut figure and with that turn over the eyelid and make both incisions on the side of the lower eyelid."
"And let both ends of the two incisions be at two angles of the incision you have made so that they meet and form an angle between them when they come together to make a figure."
"And this figure is the Greek letter lambda (Λ)."
"And then remove that flesh by the amount that is on the sharp edge of it below where the eyelid meets."
"And then adjust the separated parts and close them with a wool thread, and then cure those with what we have said about softening medicines and compresses until it is healed."
"And if swelling occurs again due to fissure or suture or burn, then you should make a flat incision on the skin of the eyelid as previously mentioned." "And then separate with compresses between two lips according to what we have said."
"When it comes to the final words of the treatment speech for a patient who is above or below, let the operation run according to what has been prepared in the form of Alcathrat's method, which is in the form of many variations."
"And the wise artisan prepares in every possible manner to make the patient's figure return to its natural form or near it, according to what is convenient for the operation and tools in their most suitable positions."
"Chapter XV."
"Of adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or cornea."
"When this adhesion occurs in many people, such that the eyelid is solidified upwards with the skin of the eye, and its movement and natural functions are hindered, then you should insert the tip of a needle under the eyelid and raise it up, or extend it using tweezers."
"And then you should cut the adhesion with a fine spatula that is not too sharp, having made it slightly obtuse so that the patient is not disturbed by the operation. Be careful not to let the spatula slip and harm the eye with its sharpness."
"And may your incision be such that it easily cuts through the adhesion, so that the eyelid returns to its natural shape and all of the adhesion is healed."
"And then you should put salt water in the eye, with which you rinse it out; or dissolve honey in water and use that to wash it instead."
"And then separate the eyelid from the eye with gauze and press on the eye with wool infused in egg white. And on the third day use consolidating remedies so that it may heal."
"Chapter XVI."
"Of Incision of Nail and of Protrusion of Flesh from the Lacrimal Ducts."
"Know that there are two kinds of nails: one is nervous and resembles hard cartilage; the other is not nervous and resembles congealed white moisture. When you touch this kind with a knife, it can be easily grasped with tweezers and cut off without the tweezers becoming stuck in it."
"And both of these species begin from the larger lacrimal duct, which gradually extends until it covers the eye and prevents light and movement."
"But the method of operating for this incision is that the patient holds his head steady by placing it against the table, and then you open his eyes and lift up the eyelid with your hand. Then you grasp the nail with tweezers using few duplicates and extend it upwards." "And then take a needle and insert it under the nail a little bit using a horsehair or cowhair or pig hair or similar thread, or strong string. Then duplicate the tip of the needle little by little and insert it into the middle of the nail, pierce it with the needle, tie the nail with string, extend it upwards, and cut off the side of the nail that covers the pupil using the thread." "And then follow this method behind it as well."
"And then cut off the remaining part of the nail in its root with a subtle spatula or small forceps and lift up the flesh of the natural lacrimal duct so that there is no continuous flow of tears from the incision."
"And sometimes you can also grasp and extend the nail with only one pair of tweezers or string as we have said earlier. And then cut off the remaining part of it using a lion-shaped spatula whose shape is like this:"
"And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal tunic and cause a rupture in it, or pierce the pupil."
"Then place a little bit of salted water or thin dough made from flour and sinapis into the eye and leave it overnight. Then rinse it with clean water until it is healed."
"And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot insert the needle into it or grasp it with tweezers, then sometimes this type of nail can be treated with medicines and healed as described in the division."
"But if you want to incise it, then open the eye of the patient and take a subtle lion-shaped spatula with acute edges like this:" "with subtlety." "And if sometimes it becomes rarefied and congested and stuck in its root, then distill from your mouth into the eye some thin dough made from flour and sinapis or egg white or salted water, and close the eye overnight."
"And then repeat the operation until all of it is removed. But if a contrary aposteme appears in the eye, then leave it alone and cure it at the beginning so that it heals."
"And then continue your operation on it with reason until it is healed."
"The prominence of the lacrimal caruncle, if it causes great discomfort in the eye, should be suspended with tweezers. Then cut off one part of it and do not extend the incision too much to avoid cutting the tear ducts."
"And then distill some egg white and flour made from sinapis into the lacrimal duct until it is healed."
"Chapter XVII"
Of Incision of an Abscess and of What is Born from Adherent Tissue in the Eye.
Sometimes in the eyes of some people rough flesh is born, which covers the pupil or approaches and adheres to the eyelids and presses them together at their edges like a column.
But the operation for this is that the patient holds his head steady on the table, and then opens his eyes and grasps all of that flesh with appropriate tweezers or forceps or cesterne, and incises it at the beginning until everything is finished with the scalpel. But be careful not to hurt the eye during your operation.
And your incision should be done with the scalpel with which you cut those nails or with the lion-shaped spatula mentioned in the chapter on cutting the nail, or with small forceps using a scalpel according to what is appropriate for this chapter.
Therefore, when your incision is finished and all of that flesh has been removed, then fill the eye with salted water or distill into it rough powder similar to corrosive medicines, and compress it externally with a bandage made from wool until it is certain that there is no cauterization.
And if there remains some cause of abscess and it is swollen but not cauterized, and you fear cauterization, then leave the eye alone and cure that abscess with what will help it heal. Then repeat your operation on it until it is healed, and do similarly for adherent flesh that occurs in this type of eye.
But you should avoid all cure of the eye by natural means or accidently done with iron instruments. Do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that that member can withstand such an operation.
Chapter XVIII
Of Extraction of a Foreign Body from the Eye.
Rough foreign bodies that are stuck in the eye and hinder its vision require an operation to remove them, which can take many days.
Therefore, at the beginning you must consider whether the eye in which there is a foreign body is healthy and not affected by any other disease. Then grasp that foreign body with suitable forceps or tweezers.
And tell the patient to hold his head steady on a table, and then suspend those veins with one or two tweezers according to your judgment. And that tweezer should be of fine double-ended form like this:
or two tweezers graduated in one body like this:
"Then carefully tie those veins with subtle threads, with subtlety, and remove the blood promptly, before you see those veins being freed from the bone and turned over."
"And be careful not to cut the bone with the scalpel's tip; and if your operation is done in the middle of the day before the sun, make sure you are steady during the operation so that you only cut those veins."
"Once you have completed this, then distill in the hollow skull vertex or rose water so that with its sharpness it might corrode what has been cut off by the scalpel."
"But if this is not possible for you, then collect all in that hour and afterwards plaster it with what relieves the pain of it, and let it rest for a few days until the pain is calmed and an abscess has healed."
"And repeat this process again in the most gentle manner until it is healed."
"Here is how you perform a caesarean section:"
"Chapter XIX."
"On reducing fractures of the nose."
When you treat burns with cautery or sharp medicine according to the preceding description and they do not heal, then do not attempt to enter until the abscess ripens. Open it there and extract all the moisture that is within it, ensuring the bone is exposed.
And thus when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then cut it with an instrument that has this shape:
And it is called the "sharp-pointed head," made of iron, and its head should be round like this ∘ but punched with lime or fine chalk points through subtle piercing.
Place that upon the decayed part of the bone and then turn it between your fingers, pressing it little by little until you know that corruption is scraped away.
And after doing this several times, then restore the place with drying and astringent causes.
Therefore if the location is consolidated and new flesh has grown there, and the body is separated from sickness and remains thus for forty days, and it does not renew nor suppurate nor suffer any accident, then you would know that it is healed.
And if not, then it is necessary to reduce the fracture back into place according to this manner. First, uncover it using a hammer or sharp medicine, and when uncovered, you take a splint thus formed:
The end of the iron should be triangular, and its shaft should be thinly tapered towards that end like this.
And then place that splint on the bone, near the lacrimal; and with your hand a little above it, press the splint down while it enters until all of the bone is covered. Then you will feel the discomfort as air escapes from there when your hand presses down.
Then restore the location using drying astringent medicines, like this.
"Therefore when flesh and the place are hardened, then the matter that flowed into the parts returns to its source, therefore this is easier upon the patient."
"The chapter twenty."
"On the reduction of the swelling on the wound."
"When the swelling of the wound is complete and no document or diminution occurs in the appearance, then it is necessary that you leave the patient, follow him closely, and pause windy fomentations on his neck without scarification and suck with good suction; also apply ointment made from acacia, aloe, wax, and tragacanth on the wound, and strengthen the plaster with many powders."
"And the manner of making the powders is that you take linen rags many folds, and each rag folded into four pleats; make them of these folds."
"And also place those on top of one another according to the quantity which the wound requires." "Then apply a hard cloth tightly with strong pressure; and apply cupping glasses with suction without scarification; then remove the cups and let the wound remain tight day and night."
"If during this time the ligament becomes softened, it is necessary to tie it tightly."
"And remove the bandage day and night as we have said."
"If the wound has already been reduced, that is good; if not, then apply the plaster with powders and pressure and cupping glasses until it heals."
"Chapter XXII"
"Of the incision of the prominence of the tunic of the eyeball."
"When there is a rupture in the tunic of the eye and it becomes prominent and protrudes through the eyelids like a grain of millet, and you wish to incise it, then perform the operation in this manner: insert the needle into the groove of the eye at its lower end and bring it up towards the upper end. Then insert another needle on the side of the lachrymal gland and let it penetrate and follow the first needle in its path. Then cut the looped suture and lift out the prolapsed portion of the tunic with that, pulling it firmly."
"And then remove the needle and press the wound with lanum infused in egg-white and leave it there until the thread adheres to the wound."
"And then dress the wound with that which will comfort it until the prolapse is healed."
"And sometimes it happens that the entire prolapse is enclosed within a circle of cloth applied over the wound with great prominence, and then it should be perforated with a fine spatula which comes to the front of the wound, allowing the humor albuminous to escape, and the eye will descend and become quiet immediately."
"And then wait until it is healed."
"Chapter XXII"
Treatment for eye strain
This condition known as eyestrain is nothing but excess heat that settles in the area around the eye, resembling water flowing downwards.
The method of treating this condition is to make the patient sit on the prepared stool with their back straight, and then take hold of their head with both hands, moving it in such a way that you see the excess heat beginning to descend from the affected area. Then, dry it off so that it does not flow downwards, and cover them with clothing, so that they feel better as if they have seen light again.
And if it does not flow downwards, know that it is water.
But if the excess heat is not properly prepared to flow downwards as we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and take a small, fine spatula. Wipe with it on the inner corner of the eye, close to the continuation of the conjunctiva onto the cornea, until the excess heat has been dispersed.
Once it has been dispersed, then distill onto the eye a few drops of water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then treat them with other causes until they are healed.
"The chapter twenty-two."
"Regarding the treatment of descending hydrocele."
"We have already spoken about the kinds of water in the division and which is appropriate to perforate with clear speech, therefore following health guidelines."
"Therefore you should make the patient sit between your thighs on a chair and hold their testicle with your hand, squeezing gently."
"And appropriately place your left hand close to the scrotum of their left testicle if it is the one containing water; or your right hand if it is the right one."
"And with your right hand take a bandage if the testicle is left; or with your left hand if it is right."
"And then place the end of the bandage close to the ring-like structure near the thickness of the vein on the testicle towards the lesser lachrymal gland. Then wind the bandage tightly around it with your hand."
"And then enter into the vein of the testicle and feel that the bandage has reached its proper position."
"And the length of the bandage should be equal to the measurement of space from the pupil to the end of the blackness, which is the ring of the testicle. Because you will see with that pupil through the clarity of the tunica cornea."
"And then place the bandage into the space where the water is located. Then pull it down suddenly once or twice more. And if the water descends quickly, immediately the patient will see better and the bandage will be in its proper position."
"And then pause for a moment. And if the water has descended, then pull that other bandage again making sure that it is not dislodged."
"And then when it is full and no more water descends, carefully remove the bandage. Then slowly unwind it with your hand, a little at a time. And then dissolve a small amount of gemstone clear salt in the water and use that to wash the inside of the testicle. And then pause outside the testicle and stop or plug it with cotton soaked in rose oil and almond oil and tie it around the testicle."
"But those of our time pause over that command twisted with almond oil."
"And if you cannot insert the bandage into the testicle due to its hardness - for it is one of those men whose testicle is very hard - then you should take the spatula called 'alberid' which has this shape:"
"And then pierce with that the conjunction between the testicle and the scrotum. And do not go too deep with your hand. And if you cannot make a way for the bandage, use a subtle instrument."
"And then insert the bandage as we have said."
"And you must prepare the patient for sleep by ensuring that they are lying down comfortably in a room where it is dark and quiet. They should remain still and avoid any movements."
"And pause the nature of water so that its nature is clear and do not move your head to the left or right at all."
"And let the bandage be according to its arrangement on the third day."
"And then untie it in that dark room and uncover the eye, and let him see some lights. And then return the bandage to its place on the seventh day."
"And you should not do this during the hours of treatment or immediately after infusion." "For it is necessary that you avoid doing this because water plays lightly upon great and powerful regard."
"But if an abscess forms, then you must untie the testicle on the seventh day and correct it with something that will cause the abscess to drain."
"Then uncover his eye and pause over the face of it so that it will direct its gaze towards the ceiling. Let him lie thus in a dark room for several days."
"And then gradually lead him out of that darkness and accustom him to his usual surroundings."
"And know that sometimes the apprentice is not exempt from vision. Therefore you should be careful about the operation."
"And it has come to our knowledge that among those who practice this art, some say that fire should be made in the River Magdalen, pierced with a reed through which water is sucked."
"But nevertheless we have not seen this done in our land, nor is it written in any of the ancient books. Therefore it seems that this method may be new."
"And these are the forms of the bandages for those who do not know them:"
"And they should be made of iron or steel properly forged and their extremities should be cut with this triangular subtlety, the sharp point being like this:"
"Chapter XXIV."
"On the treatment of flesh torn in the nose."
When flesh of diverse colors emerges from the nose, which is sometimes caused by a condition similar to a scorpion with heavy weights or polyps in the face; this illness is called polypus because it resembles that fish. And its flesh is cancerous and pale, dark-colored; and its lion-like flesh is not dark-colored.
Therefore, in that case where the flesh is not deceitful or cancerous, you should make the illness disappear between your hands and place it in the sun, open its nostrils, and pick up the lion's hair from those areas. And immediately remove that from the parts deforo, and carefully cut away what you have grasped of those with sharp and subtle spatula from one part until you know that all the flesh is removed; so that if any cause remains for which amputation is possible, then quickly remove it with one of the delicate instruments with ease. But if there is an abscess with blood or pus, then you should wait until it opens up; but if it is of the malignant kind, then cut it open and cauterize it immediately after amputation so that blood may be stopped and all cavities may be cleaned out.
And also pour into the wound wine mixed with honey or water to make the incision clean. But if the wound is open and moistures flow out towards the palate, then you know that it has already healed.
But if moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that beneath the wound there is dead flesh and pus above the bones of the nostrils where amputation was not performed.
Therefore you should then insert a probe into it if there is any thickness, and make knots at the mouth of the wound, leaving the quantity between each knot equal to the length of the finger or less. Then extract the disease by inserting one extremity of the probe into the nostril with a hook or other means available.
And after doing this, let him breathe strongly through his nostrils until the odor reaches the canals of the nostrils and let it escape over his gullet, as many people who have done this action before can see that children do at school. It is an easy thing for anyone who wishes to do it.
And also pause both extremities of the probe, one extremity which comes out over the nostril and the other which remains in the nostril. Then apply a suture of flesh around the knots that are on the probe until you know that the flesh is well attached to the knots on the probe.
Then extract the probe and pause in the nostril until bleeding has stopped completely. Then apply a plaster made of honey and salt for three days or more until the wound is healed from the flesh.
And finally, at the end of the treatment, insert into the nostril a lead cannula for several days until it has healed completely.
But if you have to perform an operation that requires drying, use that one accordingly.
"And this is the form of the device for purging the head with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:"
"And make this of silver or brass, it should resemble a small open lantern, like a small basin, with the mouth likewise."
"If you wish, make a closed cannula like this: and the opening of the instrument for purging the head should be flat and uncovered; at which you should hold it when you pour in oil or water that you want from the juices and causes of suction."
"Chapter XXV."
"Of knots (polyps) found in the nasal passages."
"Very often, a polyp is found in the nostrils, and it is magnified and inflamed during those days when much mucus flows from it."
"And for that reason, you should insert this (remedy) at the beginning of the appearance of the polyp and remove all of it." "Then place a cautery or medicine that burns on the spot."
"However, if the incision is delayed until it becomes magnificent, then consider whether it has become hard, dark in color and insensitive. If so, do not touch that part with iron because it is a malignant cancer; many times those who cut this cancer end up dying because of great wickedness towards him who had it."
"And if the aposteme is of lion's touch and not dark in color, and sometimes incision is possible throughout it, then evacuate the sickness and incise without fear, and cure the spot with astringent water that constricts until it heals."
Chapter XXVI
"Of the suture of the nose and lips, and of the ear when continuity is dissolved by plague or by injury."
Know that when a solution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, it is advisable to perform this operation on few men.
Then, when you find such a cause in someone, that you should consider whether it is fresh plague with its own blood, and then join the two lips of the wound with suture, and afterwards cure it until it heals.
"And if the lips of a solution of continuity are already separated, and each one is healthy by itself, then you should cut each edge along its apparent course until there comes out blood." "And then join the two lips with suture and strengthen them, and over them sprinkle dragon's blood powder and a little bit of tragacanth gum, and place on top of it a piece of diafinicon plaster or some other consolidative plaster, and leave that bandage for two days or three, and then remove it and replace the plaster, leaving it to heal by itself until the wound is closed. Then cure with ointment until it heals."
But the manner of suture is that you join the solution of continuity with needles as we have explained in the suture of the belly, or join it with thread as you and others do.
Chapter XXVII
"Of the extraction of those causes that appear between the two lips in wounds."
Very often it happens to many men that in wounds between their lips there appear hard abscesses like fat of hares, some small and others large.
Therefore you should cut the lips and split each of those hardnesses on all sides, then make an incision in that place with tragacanth gum until the blood is stanched, and then wash it with vinegar and cure it with something astringent until it heals.
Chapter XXVIII
"Of the incision of attached skin in the gums."
"It is often necessary to place a clamp on the attached gum tissue around the alveolus before incising it, so that you can retain its position and maintain traction during the incision, allowing blood to flow without clotting."
"And then place a pause (packing) on the wound with other powders, either stypitic or excitative."
"If that tissue returns, incise it again and cauterize it, because proper cautery will prevent its return."
"Chapter XXIX."
"Regarding teeth with iron (fillings)."
"When on the surface of the teeth there are rough, hard, and sometimes black spots between the gums, which often cause corruption, allowing pus to escape between the gum and tooth, causing them to appear loose."
"And therefore you should cut through the cause of this between your hands and push it down into its place, and scrape off the hard spots on those teeth where such appearances are seen that they do not appear loose for any other reason. This is due to blackness and yellowness, and other discolorations."
"So if that is what you want at the beginning of this reason, well and good. Otherwise, you should repeat this reason over those again on another day and the second and third times until it comes to the last statement that you want."
"And know that teeth require different types of drills with various shapes and forms according to what is prepared for your operation." "And therefore the drill with which a tooth is scraped at its outer surface is different from the drill used to scrape between teeth according to other forms. These forms of drills should be prepared by you, as you will see shortly:"
"Chapter XXX."
"On the extraction of teeth."
"Though you treat the tooth for its pain with all art and diligence in its extraction, there is no reason why the sight should suffer when it is extracted, for it is a subtle substance that is freed from constraint by its extraction."
"When the patient is about to have that tooth extracted, you must be firmly certain which is the painful tooth; for often the pain seems to come from a healthy tooth and you extract one while the real source of pain remains until the truly diseased tooth is removed. We have seen this happen many times in dental operations."
"Therefore when you are certain which is the painful tooth and know it well, then you must carefully scrape around the tooth with a probe having some medicinal virtue until the gum is dissolved from the tooth completely parted; and then gently remove it with your fingers or delicate forceps little by little until that occurs."
"And then use strong tenaculum forceps for good grasp or extraction; carefully hold the head of the patient between your thumbs so that it does not move and thus extract the tooth straightly without breaking it, nor causing greater pain to the patient."
"And then, if it is not forgotten, take one of those instruments and insert it gently from both sides with ease and effort to move the tooth as it was done at first."
"But if the tooth is broken or decayed, then you must first fill that crack with wax and strengthen it at its end with a subtle thread so that it may not be injured during your constriction upon it with forceps."
"And you must work carefully with scraping around all sides of the gum and guard your strength so that you do not break it and injure the patient, returning upon him for more pain than the first pain of his."
"And beware that you do not do what many ignorant barbers commonly do in their haste and boldness regarding extraction, without administering anything we have recommended; for often they cause great illnesses upon people which are harder to treat than the tooth itself was to extract, and sometimes leave behind roots all broken off or some of those, or even remove teeth with pieces of jawbone as we have witnessed many times."
"And then for the extraction of it, let the mouth be washed with hot water containing salt or vinegar."
"And if there should be flows of blood thereby, as often happens, then take some quantity of sage and sprinkle it upon the wound; and if that sage does not suffice, then cauterize."
"The form of the forceps and delicate tenaculum with which the tooth is held at first should have a long extremity, short handle, and thick, so that they may not be bent when you use them."
"And they should be such that their inside is of sufficient thickness that when you grasp with them the tooth is not bent or broken at its end."
"And they should be made of wrought iron, with straight extremities, and on the extremities there should be teeth which fit into each other and grasp firmly for constriction; sometimes the extremities are shaped like the bill of a bird called the ciconia, that is, hook-shaped, and have strong grasping power."
"Chapter XXIX."
"On the extraction of teeth and removal of broken jawbone pieces."
When extraction of a tooth that is firmly embedded requires some cause,
"Their extremities are made smooth like lime or whetstone."
"And if you do not obey the examination with these forceps or tongs, then you must cut through the flesh and insert this tool called 'atali', which is a small lever whose shape is as follows:"
"And it should have a short, thick end that is not inserted to prevent pinching."
"Therefore, if the incision is forgotten, it will be good; otherwise, help yourself with these other tools, of which this is the shape of the first one: a triangular-pointed instrument with some thickness:"
"The shape of the second tool is that it should have a triangular point but be more delicate."
"And then you are helped with this tool which has two branches whose shape is approximately as follows:" "And also help yourself with these tools that resemble large pins; for the sake of clarity, this tool is shaped like so:"
"with a triangular, bent or short tip, which has some thickness but should not be inserted to prevent pinching."
"And you should know that the tools for removing teeth are similar in shape to the other instruments mentioned before."
"But the skilled and subtle artist will find for himself according to what he understands about the operation and various diseases. For there are some diseases for which the ancients did not provide any specific instruments due to their varied forms."
"But if the bone of the mandible or other bones in the mouth are crushed or broken, then it should be carefully treated on that spot with whatever is convenient from the instruments and forceps mentioned earlier for the extraction of dental roots. Help yourself with this gesture whose shape is as follows:"
"And gently press it with some thickness little by little, and hold it tightly with the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until all the bone is removed. Then approximately restore the area with appropriate medications."
"But if there is a small fracture in the bone, then remove that piece of the fracture and its darkness, and treat it until it heals."
"Chapter XXXII."
"Of the care of prominent teeth above the others."
When teeth protrude unnaturally beyond their natural course and form, especially in women, and more so in venerable elderly women; therefore you should consider: if the tooth is not adjacent to another tooth, and it is impossible to straighten or align it with thread, then that tooth should be extracted. But if it is attached to another tooth, then cut that one with this instrument whose shape resembles a pig's bristle, made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp tip.
And if your incision is not deep enough that you can cut that tooth out in three days due to its hardness, and do not touch any other teeth.
And if it's an erupted tooth that needs filing down, then file it with this Indian iron file whose shape is like this:
And all of it is made of fine Indian iron; and it has many short sharp points like this file with which teeth are slowly filed little by little over several days with ease, without touching or harming any other teeth. And finally, smooth out the tooth at its end with these little scissors.
And if it's a tooth with one corner broken off that cuts the tongue, then you must grind down that edge until its sharpness is smoothed and blunted, so that the tongue does not get cut and speech is not impaired.
Chapter XXXIII
Concerning the restoration of broken teeth with gold or silver foil.
When toothache occurs due to concussion and dislocation from a blow or fall, and the patient cannot swallow food, and you have treated them with medicinal astringents, but your treatment has not been effective, then those who are strangled by gold thread and not silver may be strengthened, for silver becomes green and soon purtefies within these few days, but gold is never changed.
And let the thread be of such fineness and thickness according to the amount that can fit between the teeth; and the manner of tying is as follows: take the thread, and take twice its length between two healthy teeth, and precisely when you have made two twistings of the thread between two molars, or one or more if necessary, until the thread reaches a healthy tooth on the other side. And repeat the tying within the same partition where you began, and strengthen your hand with facility and skill until it is not loose.
And let your tying be such that when you tighten the thread, you do not displace the roots of the teeth.
And then cut off the excess ends of the thread with forceps or scissors, and gather them up in each place with gestures, and turn them back and hide them between the healthy tooth and the loose tooth, so that they do not cause injury to the tongue. And then leave it like this for three days.
But if it becomes loose or breaks, strengthen that one or those with another thread in the same manner at all times.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the rectification of two healthy teeth and two loose teeth, as seen in these tied ones:
And when it happens that a tooth or two return to their proper places, and are repositioned as we have described, and remain stable.
And this is not done by anyone except skilled and wise artisans.
And sometimes it is appropriate to use bones from cattle for this purpose, and they are made in the shape of teeth, and placed in the location where the tooth has failed, and tightened as we have said, and remain and serve for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV
Of cutting the thread which comes into the tongue and obstructs speech.
This ligament which comes from near the tongue sometimes is natural with which people are born, or it occurs accidentally due to plaque that has already become consolidated.
And the operation in this case is that someone lifts the patient's mouth open with their head held in place, and elevates their tongue, and then cuts that nerve ligament along its length until the tongue is released from its restraint.
But if there is hardness or resistance in that place, and this is due to the consolidation of plaque, then you should use forceps and cut through it along its length until you have incised the ligament and dissolved the resistance.
And be careful that there is not made a fissure in the front of the flesh, and do not cut carelessly so that blood flows excessively.
And then wash the wound of the incision with warm water or strong vinegar or hot water and oil, and then place a lint bandage near the tongue; this is the method that the patient should follow every night so that it does not become consolidated again.
But if bleeding occurs, apply powdered vitriol over the place; but if the bleeding continues, then cauterize the place with a silver caustic which is suitable for this purpose. And then treat it with other causes until it is healed.
"Chapter XXXV."
Removal of a mucocele from the tongue
Sometimes, an accumulation of fluid resembling a small tumor forms on the tongue, preventing it from functioning naturally, and causing difficulty in speaking.
And the operation is as follows: have the patient sit facing the sunlight and examine the tumor.
If you find that it is of dark or black color, hard, and the patient feels no pain, then do not touch it for it is cancerous.
But if it is white or translucent, indicating that it contains fluid, then insert the curette into it, incise the mucous membrane around it, and excise it completely. If bleeding occurs during the procedure, pause briefly to allow for coagulation, using vinegar if necessary to facilitate hemostasis.
Then return to your work until it is completely healed with a smooth surface. It should be washed with vinegar and salt water daily, and dressed with the usual cure until healed.
Chapter XXXVI
On the extraction of tumors from the ears, those found in the throat, and other kinds of tumors.
When a tumor appears in the throat, it is called a gland, which may be formed from adipose tissue. If it grows externally and is named "double ear," if this tumor does not heal after being treated with water as previously described, and if it is hard, dark-colored, and causes little pain, then do not touch it with an iron instrument.
If it is of rough color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron for the flow of blood; rather wait until it has matured, and then you will either draw it out or it will break on its own.
If it is of white color, round, and the root of it is subtle, then that is what ought to be incised.
And in operating on it, before your operation, consider whether the aposteme has already rested and completed its growth or if it has diminished somewhat; and then have the patient lie down facing the sun, with their head towards the east, open their mouth wide, and the servant holding between their hands press the tongue of the patient away with a noble instrument of which this is the form:
And it should be made of silver or of bronze, subtle and sharp like a knife.
Therefore, when you press with that the tongue and it is revealed to you, then cut upon it quickly with the tincture of the east, and then take fire and place that in the middle of it, and draw it out at its partitions outside as much as you can. And afterwards, when you have drawn out some of the tunics, then promptly incise that with the instrument of which this is the form:
And afterwards, when you have drawn out some of the tunics, then promptly incise that with the instrument of which this is the form: And it resembles forceps, but its extremities are curved so that the sharpness of each is turned towards the other, very sharp, made of iron inserted within.
But if this instrument is not available to you, then incise it with a scalpel of which this is the form: And it should be sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And after you have incised one vein, then incise the other in the same manner of incision, and promptly wash the wound with water squeezed through a cloth
But if blood flows out, then wash it with water from a decoction of figwort or myrrh leaves, and similar to those of the styptics, so that the flow of blood is stopped, and then dress it until it is healed.
And sometimes it happens that other apostemes appear around those two ears, and incise them in the manner which I have told you regarding the incision of two veins equally.
And I once treated a woman with an aposteme that had appeared in her throat, which was dark in color and insensitive, and had closed up her throat, so that she breathed with difficulty, and food and drink had been prohibited to her, and she had come near to death if more time had passed for one or two days.
And the aposteme had already grown so much that it had formed two lumps, each of which issued forth through two ducts.
"You extracted it with a tweezer and placed it in one of their sores, pulling out quite a large portion. Then you cut off the part where it was connected to the other tumor, and then you tied its mouth shut and pressed its tongue down. Then you left the sore in that abscess."
"And you removed a large part of it, from which only a little blood flowed." "So the ulcer of that woman was healed soon after she began drinking water and eating. Then I often cut into that abscess for a long time without it healing, but instead it grew bigger."
"So you took a needle and cauterized the ulcer. Then you added more medicine to it. But you wandered around and did not know what God had done for me."
Chapter XXXVII
**Of Incising a Swelling When It Becomes Abscessed.**
When phlegm descends to the humors and is thick and long, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is at the beginning thick and round, then it is called bubo.
But when it is cured with what we have said in the division, and your treatment does not confirm it, and also sometimes even when an abscess has been cauterized and it is already open and subtil, then you should insert that which is aggregated roundly; and if it is to that length, and it is sanguineous, of dark color or black, and there is no feeling in it, then you should examine the incision of it, for in that case there is fear about the patient's condition.
And when you find that according to the manner which I have described of its whiteness and length, then you should make the patient lie down and press the tongue of it with an instrument whose shape is appropriate for it, and place your finger on the new opening, and draw that downwards and incise it with one of two instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two melons.
And you should not incise it unless that is adapted to its natural term without addition, for if you incise too much of it, you will impair its speech.
And at the incision, use that which we have recommended in the incision of two melons, and cure it within so that it may be healed.
But if the patient is frightened by the incision of it, then you should use a cautery in its cauterization without fear, and the manner of cauterizing it is not but with hot water, and this is what you should do: pause the head of the patient on his chest, and press the tongue of it with the instrument which we have mentioned, and take some of that water which we have said in the chapter of cauterization, and apply it with that fire, and place it neither thick nor subtil, and with that fill the concavity of the instrument whose shape is this:
Let the extremity of that concavity in which the medicine is placed be thus as the concavity of a spoon of ray, and place the instrument with the medicine over the wound, and let the patient lie upon his side so that saliva or mucus from the mouth of it may not fall into the interior through the intrusive medicine, lest it should descend into its throat.
And then place your hand on the medicine, and press it upon the uvula for the space of half an hour until you see that it is blackened and sedated by the biting of the medicine.
And if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around the extremity of the ray, and immerse the cotton in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cotton into a cannula above until the cotton adheres to that cannula, and do this many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the uvula, and then leave it alone for three or four days until it dries up and falls off.
And if you should need to repeat the medicine, then repeat it, and afterward cauterize around the uvula with cotton dipped in borax, and cleanse it with that of what is around it from the medicine, and wash it with warm water, and afterwards cure it abroad with embrocation, and then keep it at rest until it is healed.
And this kind of cure is more safe than incision, and also longer lasting without fear.
Sometimes the uvula is cured with something more subtle than cautery and incision, for it is cured by sublimation in this manner: take calamint, hyssop, origanum, rue, saffron arabic, chamomile, betony, and similar herbs of those kinds, and adjust all those causes, or some of them, in a mortar, and let them be moistened with sour wine, and boil them; and let the mortar be well beaten with good lime, and let there be in the middle of the mortar a tube, upon which is placed a concave instrument of silver or brass thus made:
And let the extremity be inserted into the mouth of the patient so that the vapor may reach the uvula upon the uvula until the uvula is much obscured.
Guessed translation:
"However, if you do not have this instrument present, then take a reed and attach at its end a piece of hot coal, so that the patient's mouth is warmed, for the heat of the coal prevents the mouth from burning."
"And this cure is good for health."
"Chapter XXXVI."
"Of the removal of splinters and other things adhering in the eye, and of other causes."
"Many times a fly or thorn or some other thing adheres to the eye."
"Therefore you should remove that which is visible among those [things], on which the gaze falls, because as you press your tongue against the instrument before the sun, it will be declared to you what is in the eye."
"And that which is not apparent and is hidden in the eye, you should make the patient vomit before food has been digested in the stomach, because very often the cause annexed to the eye will be forgotten through vomiting; or the patient could swallow a piece of dough or of fig leaf or a mouthful of dry bread; or he could take a piece of dried sea sponge and tie it strongly with flax, and appropriate it to the patient's forehead, for as soon as it arrives at the place in which the thorns are extracted, they will be forgotten." "And more, take an eel and tie it with flax, and put it inside the bed, and suddenly extract it; or take a pot and suddenly put it on [the eye], and suddenly remove it."
"And more if they are not forgotten through those causes which we have said, then use an instrument of lead in this way:"
"And it should be thicker than a little finger, and at the end of it there should be concavity which you will insert into his eye with ease."
"And hold his head raised up, and make sure that the contact of his forehead with his throat does not happen, so that it could go into him and with that which causes the bone or the spine, or that which the physician puts in with his hand."
"But however that the patient himself inserts it better, by his knowledge of the place of the annexed cause and pushes it downwards, and pulls his hand with the instrument upwards, all this according to the quantity which is prepared inside him until it is forgotten."
"Chapter XXXIX."
"Regarding the extraction of blood from the groin area."
"When applying the leech as mentioned in the division of cure with medicines and it does not improve, consider the time when it is applied to the patient's groin area, for you have prepared the tongue of the leech using the instrument that was recommended."
"If you wish to use the bloodletting leech, extract it gently or with subtle movements accordingly."
"And if it is not possible to extract with that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the patient's groin area, and properly place within the concavity of the cannula an ignited iron, and do this several times (until the leech is dead and removed from the groin area), abstain from giving the patient water all day."
"Then take a vial full of water that has been warmed, and place its mouth over there, wash the mouth with it; do not let any leak from that and keep changing the water an hour at a time in your hand, for the leech immediately feels the water."
"But if it is not forgotten as mentioned earlier, then fumigate the patient with cummin or asafetida using the instrument that was recommended in the fumigation of the uvula."
"Do this, so that it may be effective."
"And this is another method of operation in fumigation of that area: you should take an earthenware vessel containing burning coals and cover the vessel with a lid having a hole in the middle, and place the end of the instrument through that hole; then perform the fumigation from above; and have the patient place their mouth over the end of the cannula, closing their mouth so that the fumigation is not lost until you know that the fumigation has reached the leech, for the leech will immediately fall."
"And if it does not fall, then you should repeat the fumigation many times, and prevent the patient from drinking water, and let them eat salted foods and almonds, and do not let them drink water; and thus it is necessary that with this regimen one should be forgetful."
"And this is the shape of the instrument with which one draws out a leech from the groin area when it can be seen: and it resembles forceps like these, except that it has some curvature:" "which is placed on the groin area, and its end resembles the beak of an ibis bird, which is broad, in which a file has been sharpened, for when it seizes something it does not let go."
"Chapter XL."
"In this chapter is the summary of the sermon on the treatment of apostemes and their incision."
"Apostumes are many species with many methods, according to what is remembered about them in this book, each one being described here:"
"And they are different in their puncture and incision methods due to two ways: one is for the species of deep apostemes; and by what is gained from humidity."
"And the second way is according to the places where accidents occur in the body, for the aposteme that occurs on the head is different from the one that occurs on the buttocks; and the aposteme that occurs on a fatty location is different from the one that occurs at a joint; and each of them has its own treatment through operation."
"And more about apostemes: some should not be punctured but rather waited until maturity or completion of them in those areas:"
"There are other apostemes which should be drawn out when they are hard and not mature according to their completion, such as apostemes near joints, for when an aposteme is near a joint its essence extends into what is around it, and often the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted by it, causing contraction of that limb; or if it is near a main limb, if you delay its puncture until it is fully matured it may harm the main limb; or if it is near the buttocks, then pierce it immaturely; and do not pierce one that is hard due to undigested matter unless it is near the buttocks, for fear of tearing the skin of it and extending it towards the inside of the buttocks, causing a fistula." "But you should know the time of puncturing an aposteme, which is when it has matured:"
"And it is matured when there is cessation of pain and fever, and around the decrease in redness and pulsation, and the sharpness of the head of the aposteme, and other signs."
"And because you should know that puncturing should be done where there is least pus: far from the aposteme and coming from its peak."
"And puncturing should always be done along the length of flesh or skin if apostemes are in areas such as those around the breast or feet, and at locations of muscles, nerves, arteries; and, finally, in all places except where there is reflection; for those that are reflected use puncture according to that limb."
"But when an aposteme is in a fatty location, it is better to leave its puncture until digestion of it has been confirmed according to its completion, as we have said; for if you pierce it before that time the skin of the hole will be extended and much matter will accumulate, and often the lips of the hole will become hardened and its depth increased."
"But some apostemes are punctured across the width of flesh or skin due to necessity, or according to what is necessary for that limb."
"And you should administer a small puncture, and in large apostemes make a large puncture and wide or many incisions according to the diversity of their size."
"And others are apostemes in which it is necessary to make the chain concave and cut it when it has been completed as if it were bread, and done so that it may already stick, such as those that occur in tubercle and buboes."
"And of those that are incised with three angles in section; and of those in which it is cut like the figure of a mitre leaf, such as those of hermits."
"And among them are those to which round incision and crescent incision are administered, similar to those."
"But that one to which it is not applicable as with their superficial apostemes, you should pierce it with superficial or flat puncture alone."
"And when an aposteme is large and has already collected much matter, you should pierce it but not remove all the pus at that time; having removed some of it, bandage the aposteme overnight, and then on the following day remove a larger portion, and continue doing so gradually until it has healed."
"And especially if the patient is an infant or pregnant woman or child or elderly person in decline, for the animal spirit is often resolved with the exit of matter, and sometimes the patient dies, and you operate on them."
"Therefore guard this chapter with great care, and especially the puncture you make in these apostemes, for you should cleanse the wound and consider whether the wound of the aposteme is small or is a flat section; then you should administer the cautery to it or ancient caustic. And if the aposteme is large and the incisions of the puncture are many, then you should pause between each pull until they converge together."
"And if in the aposteme a portion of the chain is cut off or has been made concave around its circumference, then you should fill it with old cotton or thread made from linen cloth, like when you bake bread or cakes without moisture; and strengthen it on the third day; and then proceed with it and cure it with what is needed for the dressings until it heals."
If blood flow occurs during your operation, then you should administer warm water and vinegar mixed in a cloth, and place that over the area of blood flow many times.
If bleeding persists, then you should administer remedies and care as recommended in various places of this book and its division.
If it is wintertime and the location of the abscess has many nerves nearby, then you should mix powder in warm vinegar and oil, and place that on those locations.
And if it is summertime and the locations are fleshy, then you should mix powder with water and oil or vinegar and oil, and keep that warm until the third day, as we have said, and then you should drain the abscess and cleanse it, administering to it whatever is appropriate for its healing.
And this is what is necessary for the general knowledge of the treatment of abscesses, but according to the method of distinction, I have already mentioned in detail how each type of abscess should be treated in its own chapter.
Chapter XL.
Of the Incision of Abscesses Which Appear on the Neck
In the neck of young children, small abscesses form, which are like glands containing sacs that are made in this way; and their varieties are many.
And among them there are pimples, and those contain a moisture similar to slime. And those which contain moisture resembling dust also resemble them in this way; and those which are like stones, hard.
"I fear not the sectioning of all things, nor the extraction thereof; for I must do that which is neither harsh nor cruel."
"You must use an instrument shaped like this, called a 'tomes', so that you know what it contains."
For if what it contains is humidity, then cut it lengthwise along the surface according to this form.
"And begin the section at line B, extending to line G. When the moisture has been evacuated, then peel away that which contains this moisture, leaving no cause for any recurrence of trouble."
"And immerse it in Egyptian pitch, if available, otherwise in water and salt. Fill that with the mixture and leave it for another day, as with this it will corrode all that remains of its surface."
"And again apply Egyptian pitch to that spot a second and third time if necessary, until you are confident that there is no remaining cause of its surface. Then heal the wound with ointment until it is healed."
"And if an abcess contains hard nodes, then cut it according to this form:" "A section having the shape of a cross, and cut once between its two lips and scrape it clean from all sides, and exert your strength in removing the tunic which contains this."
"But if you encounter resistance with your scalpel, then do what I told you first."
"And similarly treat the carbuncle section and cure it according to what I have told you. The section of a carbuncle is easier because it has little blood and humidity."
"And sometimes some of these abscesses that are on the head in some men have no humidity at all. The cause is that once someone cut an abscess on the head of an old woman like a deaf stone, rough and white, which could not be opened, and if anyone were to hit it with something, it would injure him."
"But in other accidental abscesses on the head that are not like this one, such as those that occur on the heads of children and behind the ears, the section should be a surface section."
"And make the incision of these as low down on them as possible, so that it alleviates the body from the lower parts of the abscess."
"And apply the appropriate treatment to those according to what you consider suitable for cure."
"Chapter XLII."
"On sectioning scrofulas that occur on the neck."
Many times these abscesses occur in the neck, in the armpits and in the groins; sometimes they also happen in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck are many and are generated between them, and all scrofula of these is within its own tunic, as also in the nodes and abscesses of the head, as we have said.
And the types of these scrofula are many; for some are hard (lapideas), and others contain moisture, and some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Therefore in that one which you feel to have good disposition upon touch, of which the color of that which is manifest is like the color of the skin (codena), and is smooth throughout, and is not annexed with the nerve of the neck, nor with the veins, nor with the artery, it is necessary that you incise it with a dry superficial cut from above to below on the line from G. to the line B., and remove all its skin, and extend the lips of the wound with forceps, or with several forceps if you have need of them, as we have said in the abscesses of the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is more cautious that neither vein nor nerve be incised.
"And if the wound is not moving, do not insert your hand into it lest you injure the patient and unnecessarily incise; for if you incise a vein or artery and hinder your operation, then apply powdered vitriol or other powders that stop bleeding, cleanse the wound, and allow that which causes inflammation to rest so that the pain may be mollified and begin to suppurate." "When blood is absorbed."
"And then return to your operation until it is completed."
"Then inquire if there are any causes of the other small scrofulae, and if so, incise them and cleanse them."
"And if it is near a large vein, do not incise that scrofula at its root." "Avoid cutting it with a doubled folded blade, and allow it to fall on its own without injury."
"And then fill the wound with softened cotton which you have already immersed in Egyptian ointment, and also treat it."
"And if you incise the whole scrofula, then it is necessary that you approximate the two lips of the wound and dress it immediately so that there remains no superfuility."
"But if there remains superfuility due to the size of the scrofula, then it is necessary that you incise the root of it, extract it, and administer suturing and whatever else is said."
"And those scrofulae that contain fluid, pierce them with a superficial perforation where it appears to you the location of maturity of it, and pause the perforation until it emits purulent matter from below the skin, as we have said."
"And then administer a dressing with ointment and similar substances, so that it may burn away what remains of the corruption." "And when you see that the wound is already cleansed, then treat it with a ointment for generating flesh until it heals."
Chapter XLIII
Of the Incision of the Point of the Abscess Accidentally in the Groin
The ancients called this type of incision "epilhot," and there is no man known in our land who has performed it.
And this is the inscription of the speech of those people.
But in men with hip pain, it is necessary to avoid the extraction of the epilhot, because by doing so, all the veins and major vessels of the disease are opened.
But in those who have hard abscesses in the mouth or groin or ears, when the disease is not in the canal, it is necessary to perform an incision of the epilhot to avoid the damage that is caused by perforation.
Therefore, when we want this, we should incise the epilhot around three or four circles of the epilhot's rings, or make a small incision across its width in that which is between two circles in quantity, so that the incision is made in bone, not cartilage. This location is convenient for an incision because it is devoid of flesh and the vessels of blood are distant from it.
And if the physician is fearful, then he should first extend the cord of the groin with a loop and then cut it so that it reaches the canal, but avoid the vessels of blood if one sees any cause for doing so.
And then incise the hip bone as we have recommended, and it is indicated above the incision of the canal by the flap that has issued from there with what is of its disruption and by the absence of sound.
Leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, once the hour has passed in which perforation is feared, join two lips of the cord of the wound, and sew it alone without cartilage.
And then administer medicines that promote the growth of flesh until it heals.
And Albucasis says that the sum of the speech which we have recommended is this: that some of these abscesses have already closed off the groin of the disease, and the disease has come inside to cause death, and the breath of it is cut off, and some go to incise the epiglottis so that the diseased may breathe over the location of the wound for some breaths, and thus be saved from death.
And therefore I command that the wound be left open until the mischief of the disease is consumed; and the mischief lasts for three days. And then I command that the wound be sewn up, and cared for until it heals.
And this is what I have seen myself: that a servant took a knife and stuck it in his groin and made an incision with it into a part of the canal of the lung, and I was called to care for him, and I heard him moan like one dying, and I uncovered the wound and removed the blood that had issued from it in small amounts.
Therefore, I was convinced that he had not cut any vein or artery, and the wind issued from the wound. And I cared for it until it healed.
And nothing happened to the servant except that he lost his voice temporarily, and a few days later he returned to his usual state of health.
And now I say that in the section of the epiglottis there is no fear.
Chapter XLIV.
On incision over an abscess that occurs externally in the groin, and is called a groin hernia.
This abscess called a groin hernia is a large abscess according to the color of the skin, and it is common in women.
And it occurs in two ways: either naturally or accidentally.
"In nature, it does not arise to cure."
"And the accidental is according to two methods: one is similar to fatty tumors, and the other method is similar to an abscess which occurs due to the clogging of an artery, and in this case there is fear." "And it should not be presumed upon him with iron unless it is requested." "And then you should press it and investigate it with the said iron, and if you find that it is similar to fatty tumors and there are no veins suspended in it, then you should cut into it like nodes, and extract what contains it from its skin and bursa; but if not, then you should carefully examine all of its being, and apply cure to the place according to what cure requires until it is healed."
"Chapter .xlv."
"Of the sectioning of kinds of tumors."
"There are many species of tumors, and I have already mentioned all the kinds of them in the division."
"And it is necessary that I explain thus the difference between a tumor and an ulcer so that there may be no doubt."
"So I say that in an ulcer there is heat and fever and violent pain until the boiling away of the superfeta is stopped; but it is completed putrefaction which then stops the fever, pain, and heat."
"But a tumor has neither heat nor fever nor pain, and contains that which produces phlegm in the lymph vessels or the proper sac."
"And according to the color of the body and the beginning of it is like a boil, and becomes like an empty sack, whether larger or smaller, and they are divided into two species: those that are fatty contain moisture; and the colors of the moisture are many, as I have said in the division."
"Therefore, when you come to the treatment of tumors, it is necessary that you investigate it at its beginning with an instrument called the trocar, according to what will be said about its shape in the following chapter."
"And the manner of investigating abscesses and all tumors is this: you should take this instrument and insert it into the moist place which you find in the abscess, and turn your said instrument around little by little until you know that it has penetrated the channel."
"And at last withdraw your hand according to the measure of the greatness of the abscess, and then remove the trocar and consider what has issued from it in its trace."
"And if there is a flow of moisture of whatever color, then you should cut into it with a superficial section according to what has been said about other abscesses."
"But if there is no moisture issuing from the trocar's trace, then know that it is fatty."
"And then cut across it with a cross-section having this form:" "So as you have been shown, and suspend it with forceps, and carefully excise the channel from all parts, keeping the skin or sac if possible, and remove that tumor."
"But if it breaks during the operation, it is not possible to remove that tumor whole, and sometimes something remains there; therefore, you should remove what you can without leaving anything behind."
"For if anything remains there, little or much, the tumor will return again according to its nature."
"And if you find that some small part remains there, then fill the cavity with some sharp corrosive powders and sew up the wound, leaving a cauterizing plaster over that which sits upon the abscess; and cure it by the other method until it is healed."
"But if it is a large tumor, then cut both lips of it and cure it with what oozes out."
"But if there is pulsation, contrary or not, then tie and compress the place of the wound with threefold bandages which are moistened with treacle and leave it thus for two or three days until the wound closes and the ebullition of blood ceases; and then return to cutting into what remains of the tumor."
"Chapter XLVI."
"Of the shapes of the instruments necessary for sectioning and perforation."
"Of these are the shapes of the entrails, and they are of three species, namely large, medium, and small."
"The form of the large intestine is this:"
"The form of the small intestine is thus:"
"They have iron feet, well-rounded extremities skillfully made, so that they may quickly enter into the wounds."
"And these are the shapes of the experiences, and they are named Albered, and one of them is called Berith."
"And they are of three species: namely large, medium, and small."
"The shape of the large experience is thus:"
"The shape of the medium experience, form of lu:"
"The shape of the small experience, form of lu:"
"That they may serve for such wounds and exits and fistulas and boils; so that among those are the bones, and other causes."
"And they are made redoundant, large, lion-like, such as great needles with which the skins are sewn together, and they are made of ivory, or of brass, or of iron, or of silver. And the best are those which are made of ivory."
"And they are made of black lead, which are used to open the fistulas in the concavity of which there are reflections that may be reflected with its levity by those reflections."
"And they are of three species: some of them are long, others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the stricture thereof."
"Form of the large lead experience:"
"Form of the medium lead experience:"
"Form of the small lead experience:"
"The forms of the hooks are of many species, for some are simple ones, having only one curvature, and they are of three species: large, small, and medium."
"And among them there are hook-shaped ones, which are of three species:"
"And among those hooks having two curvatures, they are of three species."
"And among them there are ones having three curvatures, and they are of three species."
"And all these are necessary in their place."
Shape of a little hook, shape of it:
Shape of a large hook having two curves Shape of an average hook having two curves Shape of a small hook with two curves
Shape of a large hook with three curves
Shape of an average hook with three curves
And these are the shapes of the scalpels with which the nodes and boils are cut and scraped, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small.
Shape of a large scalpel
Shape of the medium scalpel
Shape of a small scalpel
The outer edges of those with which the section is made are sharp and the others are not sharp, but they are not blunt in this manner, but so that it can be done carefully in scraping nodes to avoid the fear of cutting a vein or nerve, and for those who want healing from illness and tranquility of mind through the removal of boils by scraping.
And these are the shapes of spatulas, and they come in three kinds: large, medium, and small, as you can see.
They are made of bronze and resemble rays with which alcohol is distilled.
And at the side edge there is a hole hidden by a small plate, through which you can insert and remove the parts both inside and outside, as you wish.
The shapes of spatulas, which are hidden among the aforementioned tools for removing boils and are not perceived by the sick, come in three kinds: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of them:
The shapes of tweezers with which blood flow is cut off, and they come in three kinds: large, medium, and small. The forms of them are like this:
There are made of wax, round with some length, and they are subtle.
And you should choose these types of cups to be large, medium, and few in number, so that through those incisions blood flows quickly as needed, and later on when it is not medicine at first.
Wait, do not use those to incise blood everywhere on the body, and only use them in fleshy locations, such as on the thighs and buttocks, arms, breasts, abdomen, and groin, and similar moist fleshy areas.
And sometimes they are made of those other small instruments like lances in this shape: for which blood is incised when it is done by phlebotomy, or incision of a vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round in this shape:
Chapter XLVI
Of the care of the breasts of men which are like those of women.
Sometimes the breasts of some men become enlarged and puffy with sleep, and they are inflamed, and their breasts resemble those of women, and we should bind them tightly.
And regarding that which is said above, it should be cut with a lunar section according to this shape from line B. to line G., and then remove all the thickness, and then fill in the wound with an ointment that encourages healing, and then sew together the two lips of the wound, and care for it until it heals.
But if the breast leans towards the sides and becomes softened by its size like that of women, then it should be cut in two on both sides upwards with two lunar sections, each containing the other at their ends so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this shape from line B. to line G. And then remove the cord which is between the two lips of the wound, and remove the excess flesh, and administer what has been said about suturing and powders as necessary for healing until it heals.
And if you do not complete the incision of that which ought to be cut due to restlessness of illness and bleeding, then you should fill in the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive oil and leave it until it has corroded what is removable from the thickness, and then care for it until it heals.
Chapter XLVIII
Of the perforation of boils that come from the armpits
These boils that come from the armpits are of the kind called scrofula, hard ones, which contain a core that is removed.
And those that contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be cut with a lunar section according to this shape: from line G. to line B. And when all the healthy matter has been evacuated from the boil, then fill it with black wool and leave it for another day.
"And then the wound should be covered and treated with an appropriate salve until it heals."
"And if the abscess is of the kind found in joints or on the skin, then you should incise it as we have said in the section about scrofula."
"And if the plague has spread to the point of causing putrid flesh, then you should apply cautery as we have said earlier."
Chapter XLIX.
About incising abscesses that occur from injury or by venesection
When an artery has burst and the vein that is above it becomes consolidated, then often an abscess occurs. And the signs by which it is known whether inflammation and abscess are due to the artery or the vein: for when an abscess is due to an artery it is elongated towards the front of the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers you feel a cracking noise.
"And one that is due to a vein is round, near the surface of the body."
"And it is an error to make an incision regarding this abscess, especially those that are located on the hips, thighs, armpits, neck, and many other parts of the body; therefore its treatment with iron should be avoided. And those that are in the extremities or on the head should also be avoided."
But concerning that which is due to inflammation of the sheath of the artery, make an incision in the vein along its length; then widen the incision with hooks and expose the artery itself, delivering it from its surrounding sheaths.
And then take that needle and pierce it through to the other side; and twist the artery with a double thread in two places, — which will provide you an example of how to extract two arteries which are found on the temples.
"And then make a puncture with a spatula in the location between the two ligatures where blood has accumulated; this will cause the abscess to dissolve."
"And then apply treatment in which pus is generated between the ligatures so that they fall away; and also treat him with appropriate medicines until he is healed."
"And if the abscess is due to an incision of a vein, then you should take hold of it with your hand as much as possible; and then insert the needle on the side where you have held the abscess, and pierce it through. Then tie the thread in such a way that you extract it from the other side; and then ligate the abscess with good ligatures according to what I have taught you regarding the ligation of grapes of two parts with two ends of the thread."
But if you fear that the thread may come out, then insert the needle along with it on both sides of the abscess through the original incision of the needle; and twist your threads in four places.
"And then close the abscess in its middle part so that when it has healed, you can then incise the superfluity of the vein, and leave what is tied."
"And then plaster it with powder that you have immersed in wine and oil, and apply hot fomentations and appropriate medicines until it is healed."
Chapter 1 of the abscess which occurs from twisting of nerves
Just as an abscess occurs in the artery and vein, so too does an abscess occur in the nerves when they are subjected to percussion or excessive movement, and for similar reasons.
And such abscesses most often occur in the locations of the elbows or ankles, or in any place where joints are moved with violence.
And if the abscess is large, it resembles the color of the rest of the body; it is hard and tense, without its usual flexibility, and when pressed with violence, there is a sensation like stupor.
And if the abscess is not situated on the chest, it is near the vein; it is moved at any part and does not move toward its front or back.
Therefore, those that are located in the joints should not be bandaged with iron, lest it cause contraction.
But one that is on the head or forehead may be opened with a spatula. But if it is a small abscess, then treat it with cold compresses and incise it with razors.
But if it is large, then suspend it with a bandage, scrape it off, and remove it; then sew it up with stitches, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter 2
Of the incision of an abscess that occurs from a cut on the belly
There are certain people who see in the bellies of others and other parts of their bodies things that resemble those with fungi, which have a subtle root and a large head; they also have lips that are inverted, and these are small or greatly enlarged.
And I myself have seen one such case in which there were two growths resembling fungi on his belly, and they had no difference between them; both were white with small roots.
And the lips of those were inverted and split open, from which moisture flowed constantly.
Therefore, I incised them and removed one weighing eighteen ounces and the other weighing six ounces.
Therefore, when performing the incision of such abscesses, consider first whether the inflammation is moist. If the color of the skin is white and moist with a subtle root, then incise it with a wide spatula that has been heated in fire, for much blood may flow during the sectioning; cauterize if any blood flows.
But if the inflammation is painful and fearful, beware of incising with iron. Instead, take a fresh lead thread made from the kind we have described, twist it around the abscess, and leave it for two days.
Then adjust the lead thread at its tightest point; continue twisting the lead around it until it has been separated and fallen off by itself without any manipulation.
But if the root is thick, there may be some cause for fear and anxiety during its incision, especially one that is in the belly.
But it is possible to incise most of it, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then treat it until the wound has healed.
Beware that you do not attempt to incise a growth that is dark in color, insensitive to touch, and regularly recurring, for it is cancerous.
And I remember this regarding cancer.
Chapter 52
Of the treatment of umbilical hernia
An umbilical hernia is caused by various factors: fissures of the skin over the belly, or a prolapse of the intestine or bowel through other ruptures; blood flowing from a vein or artery as mentioned earlier; or constricted flatulence in it.
But if it is due to a skin fissure and prolapse of the intestine, then the color of the abscess will resemble that of the body; there will be no pain, and it will appear in various positions. But if it is due to prolapse of the bowel, then its position will be as we have described earlier with great variation. When you press it with your fingers, it will disappear and then return; there will be a loud noise, and it will become greatly enlarged during bathing and vigorous exercise.
But if it is due to moisture, then there will be no noise and it will not disappear or become hidden when you press it with your hand; nor will it be constricted or enlarged.
If it is due to blood, then appear these signs: the abscess turns black.
However, if it is due to flesh without blood, then it becomes a hard, large and tough abscess, which grows in size.
But if it's due to windiness, then its touch is light.
And the operation in this case is to consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to arterial blood, venous blood, or windiness; therefore you should be prohibited from treating it, because there is fear and awe as I have taught you in the chapter where I spoke about arterial and venous abscesses.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to bowel or tissue, then you should command the patient to keep their elbows by their sides and stand extended. Then, sign with a tent around the entire navel, and then command them to lean back between your thighs but above your two knees, and then encircle around the navel with a wide spatula on the area where you have indicated with the tent. Then extend the mass of the abscess upwards with a large unguent; and finally, ligature around it with strong flax or cotton, using an appropriate tying manner.
And then carefully press the middle of the extended abscess towards the cord and insert your finger into that opening, seeking the bowel. And if you have found it and grasped it with the cord, then gently pull it outwards and push it back inside the abdomen.
"And if you've exposed the tissue, then take that with oil; and incise its excesses."
"But if it's opposed to your artery or vein, then encircle that spot and return to your operation; take two needles and place them in those strong threads, inserting the needles into the circle you've made around the abscess in a cross-like manner, penetrate them; and then stretch the abscess in four directions over the needles."
"And if you wish, remove the needles and let the wound close up on its own; or cut it open once it has healed and become subtle, then dress it with oil as necessary until it is fully healed."
"And if the prominence of the navel is made of raw flesh or due to dampness, then you must remove the abscess as we have said and drain out the blood or dampness that you find there, and then dress it with oil until it is consolidated."
Chapter LIII
Of the treatment of cancer.
We have already spoken in the division of kinds of cancer and how it can be treated with medicines, and that surgery with iron is avoided because it could cause an ulcer; we have also said that cancer generated in the larger vein or artery is difficult to cure.
And the ancient authorities said that sometimes cancer can be found in places where its removal is possible, such as cancer of the breast or scrotum and similar locations on the limbs, especially when it begins small.
But when cancer is advanced and deep-seated, it is not advisable to approach it, because I have never seen anyone healed of that kind nor heard of another case.
And the operation for this kind of cancer is as follows: first excise the malignant tissue and purge with black collyrium several times, then cauterize it if there is a manifest tumor.
And then prepare the patient for surgery in that location, and afterwards sew up the wound with stitches as necessary. Also cut out everything around it with a good excision so that there is no remaining cause of recurrence. And let the blood flow out, and do not bind it lightly, squeeze the parts, and wipe away all thick blood with your hand or an instrument that is available to you among the instruments.
But if you encounter a lot of thick blood during the incision of a vein or artery, then cauterize it immediately until the flow of blood stops, and then treat it with the other treatment until it is healed.
Chapter LIV
Of the treatment of dropsy.
We have already discussed in the division the kinds of dropsy and their symptoms, as well as how to treat it with medicines.
And that which is treated by surgery is only the condition of ascites alone, and it should not be approached surgically in cases of tympanites or hydrothorax because these are fatal.
And when you have treated tympanites with medicines but do not see any improvement, then consider whether the patient has become weak from another illness or has another kind of dropsy, such as in cases of coughing or abdominal pain, and do not treat it surgically because there is great danger involved.
But if the patient is strong and healthy, and the only illness present is tympanites alone, not in infancy or old age, then the method of surgery for it is as follows: raise the patient between your hands, and have an assistant press the abdomen with their hand below the ribs on the left side, expelling the water through the opening in the peritoneum, and then take a spine-covered spatula in this manner:
"Let it be of double-edged sharpness, long at its pointed end like a spade; yet let it have some slight shortening here and there, so that in the operation with it one does not enter too deeply into the intestine."
"And consider whether the generation of dropsy comes from the bowels, because now you should extend the section through the navel for about three fingerbreadths on the right side over the bladder."
"But if the generation of dropsy is due to illness of the liver, then your section should be on the left side of the navel for three fingerbreadths."
"And if the generation of it is because of the womb, then your section should be on the right side."
"And do not let your section be over the side where you want to make the opening, lest the superfluities run to that place."
"And then carefully perforate the entire cord with the instrument and enter that section, elevating your hand with the spade between the cord and the bladder, and you shall cut through it; if the amount is like a fingernail or less."
"And then carefully perforate the bladder so that the spade reaches the desired place, which is the location of the water." "And then extract it and insert an instrument whose shape is as follows:" "And it is like a thin silver cannula; it is made of silver or iron or laton lion, at the lower end of which there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other side; and its tip is cut obliquely in the manner of a feather, like this:"
"And at the upper end of it there is an armilla, for when the instrument reaches the water, then immediately let that fall onto the instrument, so that you evacuate from it as much water in half an hour as is necessary, for if you evacuate more than is necessary in that hour, it causes sudden death due to resolution of its animal spirit, or five days before death approaches."
"But evacuate from it according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what you understand about the conditions of the illness and the strength of the pulse and its goodness."
"And then extract the instrument and retain the water that is held by the cord which retains the hole that you have made on the bladder according to what I have taught you."
"And then repeat the procedure on another day if the illness is tolerating it, and extract a small quantity of water each time, doing so for several days with caution, and make sure that not too much water remains."
"But if you fear for the illness and allow too much water to escape, then cure it with a burial in hot ashes, and apply a lot of dry suet in a bath, and expose it to the sun for a long time; and cure it with drying medications until it is healed."
"And cauterize the stomach and the mesentery around the location of water extraction, according to what I have previously described."
Chapter LIV
"Concerning the cure for children born with unperforated openings of urine."
Sometimes, some children are born from their mother's womb with the head of their mixture not pierced (or too tight or not in its place).
Therefore, carefully cut into it immediately after birth with a sharp knife according to this form:
And then pause in the tight spot with a thin lead awl and tie it up, and leave it for three days or four.
And when they want to urinate, move them away and let them relieve themselves; then return that one (to its position).
And if you do not use lead, it is possible that the urine which falls on this place will not close it.
But that one whose opening is too tight should be treated with lead awl as we have said for several days until it becomes wider.
But those in which the opening is not in its proper place should be led away, because some of them are born with the head of the penis at the end for which they cannot urinate except by lifting the penis with their hand above; and this is not due to their generation, because the sperm cannot reach the mother according to nature, and it is a serious illness.
And the manner of operation in this case is that the sick one should be placed on his back, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand with great force, and cut off the tip of the glans penis at the opening of the urethra with a sharp knife, as if cutting through paper, taking care not to cut any other part, so that the middle of the penis resembles the head of the penis and the opening falls into its proper place according to what is appropriate.
And beware in your operation of a flow of blood, because many times this happens; and stop the bleeding with whatever you cut off the blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
Chapter LVI
Of whiteness which occurs in the foreskin on the head of the penis, and of roughness, blackness, and adherence of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
This whiteness often occurs on the penis and is a raised flesh growth.
And among them one is malignant and another is not malignant.
Then take a subtle hook and suspense it carefully, cutting the diseased part completely. Immediately afterwards, apply pressure on that area with your fingers in the Egyptian manner. Then cure the wound with clean linen until healed.
And if it is malignant and of a black color, then you must apply cauterization immediately to the incision and its root.
But if the swelling is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis and one part of the swelling is inside the foreskin and another part is outside, then you must remove the swelling that is inside at the beginning so that it becomes consolidated. Afterwards, cure that which is outside, for when you cure it together with the foreskin, it may become inflamed again.
And if such a condition occurs in the groin or foreskin with blackness and corruption, then you must cut away all that is already discolored and about to become corrupt or already corrupted. Then apply linseed over it mixed with honey, which has been ground together with fine flour of millet, three parts sifted and sieved.
And afterwards treat it with the other remedies until it is completely healed.
But if there is a flow of blood, then perform a lunar causterization in this way:
"When cautery is beneficial for two conditions together, it is helpful for bleeding and plague when corrupted."
"If the tip of the glans is corrupted and destroyed all at once, then you should insert a lead cannula into the flesh of the foreskin so that the patient may urinate through it."
"In the adhesion of the foreskin to the glans (and this adhesion does not happen except in that which has a redundant foreskin, and over it circumcision is not required; and when adhesion occurs due to plague or aposteme) you should excise with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the glans of the penis is freed from all adhesion."
"And if it is difficult to distinguish them carefully, then you should excise with a spatula some cause of the glans and foreskin, for the foreskin, when thin, can easily be pierced by its thinness."
"And afterwards separate between the foreskin and the glans with a thin thread of silk, which has already been moistened in warm water so that they do not adhere again."
"And afterwards it should be treated with astringent wine until it is consolidated."
"Chapter 57."
"The purification of children and the treatment for what happens to them after circumcision."
Circumcision is not a continuous solution like other diseases; however, since it is an operation that we perform willingly and on children specifically, it is necessary to assign the best method and easiest path for them to recover their health as quickly as possible.
Therefore it is said that the ancients did not mention circumcision in all of their books because they did not use it in their laws. And this is because, from our experience, we have found that most artisans and barbers use circumcision and purification with a scalpel and clamps; and they use lime and incision with the nail.
And I have already tried all these methods and found that purification with forceps, lime, and nail is not better than purification with the nail alone. For many times it escapes the foreskin above because the foreskin has two tunics, and one remains on the outside, making another incision necessary and causing more pain. And in the purification that is done with tweezers, which are used by barbers, it is not ensured that the incision at the end of the male member will be precise because they often go inside the foreskin.
But with the operation using a nail, you may slip and damage your work. And the foreskin of an infant is short by nature, and often it can be performed in such a manner that there is no need for purification. And I have seen this myself.
But regarding purification that is done with forceps and lime with salt, its advantage has been clearly demonstrated to me because the forceps are of proportional incision. That is to say, the sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below; and therefore, when you press your hand so proportionately between two sharp points, you cut in accordance with one comparison at once; and there is compression of the salt in a figure containing the foreskin of the entire part, with which there can be no error whatsoever.
And the first manner of operation is that you should hold the child more firmly if it is one of those who understands a little, so that you do not merely place the salt on its foreskin but allow it to remain there for another day.
And then have him rejoice in every possible manner that he understands. And then have him sit between your knees in a well-prepared state and not afraid. Hide the forceps in your hand or behind your ear so that the child does not see them nor anyone else any of the instruments.
And then place your hand on his foreskin and blow into the foreskin, draw it back until the head of the foreskin appears, and then purify that which has gathered there of dirt.
The shape of the forceps used for purification is as follows:
The outer edge of the forceps should not be cut and the inner edge should be cut so that the root of the claw does not appear. The length of the two points should be equal to the length of two flattened handles.
But the error in purification is when you pull too hard and remove the entire inner foreskin or cut it off during the incision.
Therefore, you must extend that with your nail before the swelling of the spot and cut it evenly.
And if you cannot hold it with your nail, then pull it out with tweezers and cut it.
But if three days have passed and there is still swelling behind the foreskin, then leave it until the swelling has subsided and carefully cut away the dead skin, and cut it according to your preparation.
And be careful with the head of the foreskin, for do not cut off anything from it.
And then treat him with what will consolidate the wound using the powders that have been recommended in the treatise on powders.
And if it has been cut correctly, obeying the divisions above, there will be nothing left behind.
"Moreover, care should be taken with this condition as we have said within for it to be healed."
Capitolul .lviii
"Regarding the treatment of urine retention in the bladder."
Retention of urine in the bladder occurs due to obstruction caused by a stone or concretion, or by poverty or paralysis, and is similar to those conditions that we have mentioned regarding the methods of treatment in this division."
"And if it is not dissolved by that which we have said, then the cause of the illness is severe. In this case, extraction must be performed using an instrument called a siringue (syringe), which has the following form: It should be made of silver and well polished, similar to a feather quill with a subtlety like half a palm in length, at whose head there is a subtle canal."
"And the method of extracting urine with this is: Take the doubled thread and tie it at the end of the wick or cotton for a good knot; then insert the ends of the thread into the opening of the syringe, and if there are any superfluous causes of wool, cut them off with scissors. Then insert the wool into the canal with force. And then press the syringe with a border and albumen of an egg."
"And make the patient sit on a chair, and grasp their scrotum with olive oil and water."
"And then insert the syringe gently until it reaches the root of the scrotum; and then fold the scrotum upwards at the navel area; and then push the syringe inside that; and then push it further until it reaches the bladder. And when the patient feels that it has reached the empty cause, do not follow this order but place the instrument in the meatus which goes to the tortuousness."
"And then gradually pull out the thread with the wool, because urine sticks to the wool."
"And then remove that and perform a curettage of urine, using the syringe until the bladder is emptied and the patient feels relief from the ailment."
Chapter 59
Of the quality of irrigation of the bladder with a catheter and similar instruments which are suitable for that purpose.
When an ulceration or an abscess occurs in the bladder, or blood coagulates therein, or it is obstructed by a stone, and one wishes to drip water and medicines into it, then this should be done with an instrument called a catheter, which has the following form:
but its end is blunt, so it is closed. And in that there are three holes: two on one side, and thus arranged.
"At the beginning is a place hollowed out, wherein this thing lies that is called by such a name, and its quantity may vary without addition, until when some cause draws moisture from it, let it be drawn thus, and when it is expelled, with it should also be drawn, just as pitch in battle is smeared with lampblack on ships."
"Therefore when you wish to prohibit moisture in the bladder, insert the tip of the lampblack into the moisture and draw with it that which is expelled upwards, because the moisture is drawn into the hollow of the lampblack."
"Indeed insert the tip of the lampblack into the penis as we have recommended in the circle; and likewise expel the moisture with that which you expel, because that moisture immediately reaches the bladder, and the illness is due to that."
"Form of the subtle crucible with which the bladder is crucified, and this is its form:"
"And let it be made of silver or lead, from which the head has been removed so that it resembles a small feather, and the rest of the cannula may remain hollow inside."
Approximately translates to: "Next, take a bladder from an animal, place the moisture you wish to crystallize in the bladder, then tie it tightly between two strong threads with doubled knot. Warm this moisture over the fire."
Approximately translates to: "Next, insert the tip of the crystal into the bellows."
Approximately translates to: "Next, press your hand on the bladder containing the stretched-out moisture until you feel that that moisture has reached the bladder."
Approximately translates to: "But if you do not have a bladder, then take a piece of parchment and make it into a circle; pierce that circle throughout its entire roundness; next insert a strong thread through those holes, so that it may turn; then attach the circle as is usually done; afterward you will pause in that which you wish of the moistures, oils and waters."
Approximately translates to: "And next you will place that in the instrument and do it as you did with the bladder, expressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder."
Capítulo .lx.
De Extracción de Piedra.
"We have already spoken in the division about the kinds of stone and their cure with medicines, and the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and those generated in the bladder, and their signs."
"And we have said that operation with knife and section is performed on this stone."
"And the stone generated in the bladder itself is that which remains in the bladder."
"I will now explain this briefly and concisely."
"Therefore it is said that stone generated in the bladder mostly affects children; and its signs are that the urine which comes out of the bladder resembles water in its fineness, appears in that area; and the pain grips the penis, often happens at night, and especially when standing up; and with this there may be difficulty defecating."
"And it would be easier to cure children of that complaint who have not yet reached fourteen years, but difficult in old people." "But in young persons it is more suitable for this [treatment] because they are between those."
"And of that one whose stone is large and its cure will be easier; but if it is small, it is contrary to that [treatment]."
"Therefore when we come to the cure of this [complaint], at the beginning of it we must relieve the pain with a poultice which draws out all the inflammation that is in its passages, because sometimes that passage prevents the expulsion of the stone during its search."
"And especially let the pain be taken with his feet and held down and moved in such a way that the stone descends to the neck of the bladder, or what is left over from it."
"And also let that sitting be done between the thighs well prepared, and the most of it should be done with things of that kind, so that the whole bladder may be made to decline towards the parts below."
"And again seek that [stone] and all of it defecated."
"Therefore if you feel the stone in its place, immediately lie down on your back with your legs raised up over it."
"And if all of that does not come down from the said touch, then you must anoint your index finger of the left hand with oil, if the pain is a child's, or your middle finger if it is a youth's, and insert that into his anus." "And again seek the stone so that it may remain below your little finger." "And slowly turn that little by little until it enters into the neck of the bladder."
"And also press upon it with your finger and expel it outwards from its place where you cut."
"And command the minister to press on the bladder with his hand; and command another minister with his right hand to stretch out the scrotum upwards, and with his other hand to pull downwards on the cord which is below the scrotum, in part of the place where the section is being made."
"And also insert spatula as shown in this way:" "and cut into it with the knife that is between the anus and the scrotum, not in the middle place, on the side of the left-hand thing; and let the incision be made over that stone and your finger be inside the anus, and let the incision be transverse, so that the outside may be wide and the inside narrow according to what is possible for the size of the stone, and no more, because too much pressure on your finger which is in the anus causes the stone to slip away during the operation, and it remains forgotten without difficulty."
"And know that some stones have angles or margins which make their extraction difficult because of this."
"And of those things one seems like a glans and is round, and it is done with light extraction."
"Therefore if that one has angles or margins, adjust it in the opening."
"And if it is not thus forgotten, then you must press down upon it with your hand or press it gently down with a gesture like this: the end of which should be like a file with which you press on the stone, and do not let it escape from there; or insert into it that thin curved instrument."
"But if you cannot press upon it, then widen the opening a little, and if you see blood flowing, cut into it strongly with powdered vitriol."
"But if there are more than one stone, then at the beginning you insert your hand into the mouth of the bladder and cut upon it; and immediately afterwards insert a little further into that place; and similarly do this if there are many more."
"And if there is a very large stone, then it is not known that you should cut into it with a large incision, because one of two things happens to the patient: either he dies or he suffers from continuous distillation of urine afterwards, because the place is not completely consolidated."
"But the minister performs the expulsion of it from there which has been forgotten, or presses down on its fracture with forceps until that one comes out in pieces."
"Therefore when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with threads of aloe and dragon's blood and stitch it up." "And place on that a cloth dipped in olive oil and wine or in sweet olive oil rubbed with water, so that the wound may heal without inflammation."
"And then let the patient lie on his back for three days without removing the stitches."
"And when that has been removed, wash the place with water and much olive oil, and then dress it with fine ointment and diabaic ointment until it is healed."
"But if inflammation and corrosion happen in the wound, which is hard and destructive, like that which seems as if blood were congealed in the bladder, and because of this urine is forbidden (and this is known by the exit of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and remove that blood, for if it remains it provokes corrosion of the bladder and its decay."
"And then wash the wound with sour wine, water and salt, and apply anything that is suitable for healing wounds until it is healed."
"And you must lie quietly during all of the healing time with both legs elevated and adjust the dressings which are placed on the place."
"And if the stone is small and is in the middle of the urethra and has been inserted into it, and urine cannot be excreted, then treat it with what I have mentioned before that you should do to avoid sectioning, because many people are cured by this treatment without any section being made; and here it is how you should take a small awl-shaped probe of iron, the shape of which is like this:"
"with a triangular end, sharp-pointed, fitted into wood."
"And then take some wax and apply it with that to the urethra from below the stone so that it does not return to the bladder."
"And then insert the iron into the urethra, gently perforating until the probe reaches that stone." "And then slowly rotate the probe with your hand on that stone and push it through until you pierce it from the other side, because urine will be released immediately."
"And then press your hand on that which remains of the stone from its exit from the urethra, because that is broken and forgotten with urine, and the patient is healed."
"But if this treatment does not suit you for any reason that prevents it, then apply wax below the stone and also above it." "And then tie two ligatures around the urethra on either side of the stone:" "And then remove that." "And then untie the ligature and wash away the congealed blood, which has formed in the wound."
"And there is no need for sutures on the kidney stone, unless it returns to the bladder. The other suture above it is needed because when the ligature around the ureteral opening is released, the ureter slips back into place and closes the wound."
"And therefore, when you tie the suture above, it is necessary that you elevate the ureter towards its opening above or else you must complete your task and close the wound as we have said."
Chapter .lxvi
Of the removal of kidney stones from women.
Kidney stones in women are rarely formed.
If a stone appears in one of these [parts], then its cure is difficult and forbidden by many methods.
Another one of them is when the woman strongly resists being opened.
And the second one is that you may not find a woman who knows how to tell if she would willingly submit herself to the doctor when she is chaste, or is among married women.
The third one is that you may not find a woman who knows this art well, especially the operation with the male organ.
And the fourth one is that the location of the section for removing a stone in women is far from the location of the stone itself, requiring a deeper section, and causing fear.
But if necessity forces you to do this, then it is necessary that you take a woman who knows well how to perform a female circumcision and is little frightened.
But if you are deprived of such a woman, then seek out a male doctor who is skilled and subtle, or present a mature woman who is experienced in the affairs of women, or a woman who has some experience in this art.
Therefore have such a woman present, and command her to do everything that you order from the examination of the stone at the beginning; one reason for this is to determine whether the woman is a virgin, in which case she should insert her finger into the woman's vagina and try to find the stone.
Therefore if she finds it, then command her to withdraw her finger, and afterwards have her insert a speculum over that area.
But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the woman's vagina and search for the stone, since she will place her left hand on the bladder, and compress it with good pressure.
Therefore if she finds it, then gradually move the speculum from the opening of the bladder to the sides with the help of her strength until you reach the root of the matter.
And appropriately insert the speculum into that position of the mouth of the bladder where you found it and stopped, and keep her finger on the stone until it is removed from there.
And let the incision be small at first. Then insert your knife into that section and if you feel the stone, adjust the size of the incision according to how much of the stone you know will be removed from there.
And know that stones are varied in their shapes: some are small and round, some are large and sharp, others are long and round, and some have branches.
Therefore you should know what kind of stone it is based on what you can feel through the incision about what you want to do.
And if you see flow of blood, adjust the position to the side of the vessel and leave it for an hour until the blood is absorbed, then return to your operation until the stone is removed.
And make sure you have ready all the instruments mentioned in this book regarding the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be assisted by them during your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood and know that the expulsion of blood is from the artery that has been incised, then apply powder over the area and strangulate it with lint and strict ligature, but do not repeat this; leave the stone there and do not try to remove it, for otherwise the woman will surely die. And then dress the wound.
Therefore when the sharpness of the bleeding has ceased after several days and the area is healed, then you may return to your operation until the stone is removed.
Chapter LXII
Concerning incision for incarcerated hernia.
Hernia occurs when there's excess moisture in the white coat that leaves the groin of the genitalia containing the eggs.
Sometimes it occurs in the proper peritoneum that Nature has prepared at the time of childbirth between one egg and another, which is the groin between the white coat we've mentioned, and it's nothing but a mistake.
The cause of this hernia is weakness that occurs in the groins due to which this matter escapes from them, and sometimes it happens due to a sudden blow on the genitals.
This moisture has various colors. Sometimes it tends towards citrine or sanguineous red, or dark brown, or is blackish-yellow, or watery-white; and this is what happens most often.
The signs by which one knows where this accumulation of water is located are these: if it's in the white coat we've mentioned, then the swelling appears leaning slightly towards length like an egg shape, and the groin is visible because the moisture contains that area entirely.
If the moisture is in the proper peritoneum, then the swelling appears divided like an egg and for this reason people estimate that it's another egg.
And if the moisture is between the cord of the genitals and the white coat, then one should cut there.
And if you want to know the color of the moisture, then press the color of the moisture in the swelling with an empty cupping glass whose shape is described here; and according to what appears in the mark of the emptiness, judge what is inside it.
Therefore, when we come to the treatment of this with iron, then it's necessary that we command the patient to cough if possible, and press the body of the swelling full.
And also let him lie on his back upon some slight elevation, and then cover the swollen parts with cloths.
And then sit yourself on the left side of him and command the assistant to be on his right side. The latter shall extend his hand towards one or two fingers' breadth from the cord of the genitals and the boundary of the navel of the belly.
And then take a broad knife and cut the cord of the genitals from its middle lengthwise, close to the penis.
And let the section be made according to a straight line equidistant from the skin of the genitals, until it reaches the white coat containing.
And strip that off, and observe, and take care that you do not incise it; and your stripping should be done in such a way that it hangs with the egg more subtly and carefully stripped according to the quantity possible for you.
And then pierce the full coat of water with a wide perforation and remove all the water.
And then separate between the two lips of the section with forceps and extend the coat at its upper parts. Do not touch the cord containing the genitals and cut the coat in this manner as is possible for you. Cut that completely or in pieces and especially its sides subtly, because if you do not examine the incision of it carefully, there is no guarantee that the water will not return.
But if the egg proceeds from that outside its cord during the time of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the coat, return inside it and immediately join together the two lips of the cord of the genitals with suture, and also treat it like other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the egg corrupted by other disease, then it's necessary that you loosen the vessels which are near the suspenders and remove the egg. Then treat it with what we have said.
But if water accumulates in two places separately, then know that there are two hernias. Therefore cut that section according to what you have done on the other side, and if it appears to be an operation, then do it.
And then you shall clean the blood and enter into the sections with wool submerged in oil or rose oil. And put outside other wool which you have submerged in wine and oil, and spread it over both genitals and the navel of the belly. Then place doubled cloths and powders on top, and bind those with a bandage according to this manner:
And then take two cloths and fill them with carded wool in this manner. And make the ends of those with which it is pressed from cotton or wet wool, and attach them together with a string in the breeches of the breeches. And one end should take the buttocks inside to outside, and the second should take at the navel, and two extremities over both thighs, and other two extremities over both hips, and all tightening should be adjusted in the breeches of the breeches.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with cauterization instead of sectioning with iron. And you should take a cutting cautery and incise the cord of the genitals with it. And ignite it according to what we have recommended until the white coat containing the water is discovered. Then take cautery in this manner: And it resembles the Greek letter Pi.
And then pierce with that cautery and heat it until all the moisture is driven out.
And then extend the coat with forceps and scrape it with forceps and scrape it with a subtly heated cautery. And cut that as much as is possible until you have removed all of it, and take care that the egg does not touch the fire.
And know that this operation is safer and farther from blood flow than an operation with sectioning.
But if you encounter an aposteme or cautery during the time of sectioning or cauterization, or bleeding, then know what hinders you for that and cure it with the treatment which is appropriate for it according to what has been said.
But if the disease is painful and does not await a second operation because of its horror, then administer perforation according to what we recommend for that. And it is when you are certain, by what we have said about signs, that that hernia is hydrocele.
Then you should make a seat for the disease on some elevated cushion, and then pierce the apostume in its lowest part with a broad spatula, and continue the piercing according to the length of the body.
And let the aperture be wide enough to drain all the water.
Then press with cotton on that spot and tie it and leave it there so that the remaining water can flow out. And then treat it until the wound is healed
But if there is resistance to the exit of water at that time you pierce it, then that happens only because the white panniculus in the opening of the wound causes resistance and prevents the escape of water. Therefore, insert into the wound a probe or an instrument with which the water from hydroceles is removed, whose form is described above; or adjust a small catheter in the aperture of the wound
And know that water will return and accumulate again around six months or less. And when it has accumulated, then pierce it in the same manner because this disease will thus pass its days.
Chapter LXIII
Of sectioning on fatty hernia and its treatment.
Know this: in the section regarding this hernia, there is great danger of loss and peril in many cases; therefore, I have seen it fit to dismiss him and save him by that better means.
And you are reminded about the operation on that one and the species of the abscesses.
Therefore, it is said that the abscesses are born in those bodies where the veins are composed and this happens for many causes: either by acute acid superfluity, which is poured into the veins, or by percussion.
And the colour of the abscess follows the colour of the body, and it is not found in the pain, and it is a serious abscess.
A light boil is an apostemized ulcer, of which the colour is dark, and it is not painful to the touch.
And sometimes it happens through the coagulation of arteries and through inflammation of those vessels that have already been perceived to be remembered, or through inflammation of veins.
But that which happens through inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers, and it does not need to be touched.
But that which happens through inflammation of a vein is not dispersed by any cause due to the compression with your fingers.
And it is possible that on this species there may be section made and on the other flesh; and it is if you cut the chain of veins, and close to where they emerge at their departure, extract from it the white matter, free the suspenders of the vessels, tie them up, and cut the suspender of pus after you have freed it from all parts of the hole.
Therefore, if the boil has already adhered to those flesh tissues, then you must extract the boil and cut it open.
And if there is adherence within some cause of the pus or between that which is between the vessels, then you must free all that adherence and cut it open with a round incision.
But if there is native flesh in the place of the adherence which is behind it, then you must cut all that is of it and extract the boil as we have said.
Therefore, when your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool soaked in rose oil and wine, and close it with the other dressing until it is healed.
Capítulo LXIV
Of the treatment of hernia that is caused by wind.
Wind hernia is an abscess wrapped in some wrapping similar to a bud with softening of the testes, and it makes difficult movements and walking over the illness.
And in the treatment of this ailment, it is by means of remedy that which preceded its memory.
"But how can we call this operation according to what was done first?"
"And I say that you should first place the patient on an elevated couch; and then gently expose the spermatic cords at their origins; and then grasp the cord of the testicle with your fingers and tie it with a probe in the scrotum; and have another servant help you, extending his hands with great care."
"And then make an incision with a sharp scalpel through the skin perpendicularly to the right side of the vessels where they are exposed."
"And then strip away all the fat from there, just as we have described for the extraction of an arrow from its head, which is located at the temples."
"And then take a needle with double thread and insert it at the first point where you see blood flow, and bring it out again at the last of them." "And then incise at that midpoint with a perpendicular incision along the length of the body and remove what has accumulated there from corrupted and putrid humors."
"And then treat the wound with treatments for other wounds where you want healing to be generated, since the vessels that you have not ligated one of two will not cause harm."
"But if it happens that all the vessels are cut off, then either the testicles must be removed or they should be tied off with the vessels so that there is no nourishment for them due to the incision of the vessels and they shrivel up, or else they will cause harm."
**Chapter LXV.**
**Of the Treatment of Intestinal Hernia.**
Hernia occurs due to a rupture in the abdominal wall caused by straining during bowel movements, allowing intestines to protrude.
And this rupture occurs either in the abdominal wall itself or due to an exit from it. This happens for many reasons such as: percussion, sneezing, coughing, heavy lifting, or similar causes.
And the sign of this is that if it occurs due to an extension of the abdominal wall, it happens gradually over time and not suddenly. It appears as a swelling between the pubic area and the groin because the abdominal wall compresses the intestines.
And the sign of it is that if it occurs due to a rupture of the abdominal wall, initially there is sudden severe pain. It appears as a different visible swelling near the groin area, which is due to protrusion of the intestines through the rent in the abdominal wall.
Sometimes the intestinal tissue becomes trapped outside the abdominal cavity without being able to be pushed back inside. This type of hernia is called an incarcerated or strangulated hernia.
Sometimes there is windiness (flatulence), sometimes the intestine slips out of the rent and gets trapped inside it. This can cause great danger to one's health. Sometimes it causes severe pain, especially when pressed upon.
And in the treatment of these types of diseases with iron, caution is necessary to avoid causing a hemorrhage at that location.
The procedure for this operation is as follows: tell the patient to push their abdomen inward with both hands from inside the navel if it returns there. Then quickly place your hands on their thighs and lift them up. This will help reduce the hernia by pushing the intestines back into the abdominal cavity.
Then press the cord that connects the scrotum to the abdominal wall at its base, and incise it along its length. Then use two forceps on either side of the incision to widen the opening as much as necessary to expose the hernia.
And if the incision is made wide enough according to your ability, the protruding loop of intestine may be able to slip back into place on its own.
Then carefully remove the fluid-filled sac that is surrounding the loop of intestine (hernial sac) by pushing it back through the opening in the abdominal wall until only the white fibrous tissue of each side remains exposed.
Then insert your finger into the opening around the testicle, between the white fibrous tissue (which is left attached to the loop of intestine) and the hernial sac. Then carefully separate any adhesions that may be present behind the hernia with your finger.
Then grasp the cord with your left hand at its base on the outside, and stretch the white fibrous tissue upwards with your right hand. Then lift the loop of intestine along with the hernial sac back into the abdomen through the incision. Tell your assistant to hold the loop of intestine in place from above while you use warm saline solution to dissolve any remaining adhesions behind it.
Carefully check with your fingers that there is no bowel tissue still wrapped around the white fibrous cord (hernial sac) and that it has been completely reduced into the abdomen. But if you find any remaining cause (tissue), then carefully push it back into the abdominal cavity with your fingers.
Then incise along the spermatic cord on its lateral side, as previously described, to allow blood and lymph fluid to drain freely.
Then apply sterile gauze soaked in oil to the wound and place it over the incision. Then apply a ligature as previously described (and occasionally cauterize the white fibrous tissue with a hot iron near the blood vessel tie-off, especially if there is active bleeding), and leave the ligature in place until it falls off on its own.
But if the wound does not close spontaneously, then apply hot water compresses to promote healing and reduce inflammation as previously described.
Then dress the wound using appropriate wound care techniques until it is healed.
Chapter LXVI
On Ventral Hernia
In this type of hernia, there is nothing that can be burned or cauterized during the operation.
The early authors said that it should be treated in the same way as a hernia with fluid (hydrocele), by ligating and tying off the blood vessels around the hernia and then cauterizing the wound with a hot iron to prevent infection.
And dress the wound according to what has been said until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII
On Dislocation of the Jaw
Sometimes there occurs rupture in the joints as we have said, and swellings appear at that location.
And if the intestines do not cause any problem to the horse, then that is good, and it returns to its usual state at all times.
But if the time is prolonged thus, there occurs an adjustable fissure in the hip joint through which the intestine enters into the hip joint; and this happens because of the extension of the hip joint which is located in the joints as we have said, whose cause is that the hip joint has been stretched out and the place becomes softened, with the resulting apostema (an abscess) and swelling.
And its cure is through cauterization as it has been preceded by its narration.
And sometimes it is cured with iron according to this manner: and it is that the sick person lays upon his back between two pillows, and then the place of rupture of the swellings is dried up by section through its width according to their quantity.
And then strengthen the white hip joint which is below the backbone so that it may be discovered (i.e., brought back into alignment).
And then take the ray and place it upon the prominent part of the hip joint, and press it against the front of the belly.
And then heat the two prominent places upon the end of the ray of the hip joint, and join them together with a suture.
And then extract the end of the ray, and do not squeeze the hip joint at all, nor extend the wound, nor cause any other harm as you know well in the cure of intestinal hernia.
And then cure it with the cure of ulcers, and when you have cut through the tissues, cleanse them and restore the ulcer so that it may be consolidated; because the hip joint is contracted and the prominence of rupture is not joined together.
And cauterization is better in this place, for it is closer to health.
"Chapter 68."
"The softening of the chain of the testicles."
"Many times the chain of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh that is between them is softened. This is noticed."
"Therefore it is necessary that whoever examines the treatment of this [condition] makes the patient lie on their back, and cuts all the softened chain along its length above the natural chain; then he should approximate both lips with stitches."
"And if you wish, at the beginning, remove the excess of the softened chain with three or four cuts and sew it firmly."
"And then cut between the sutures; and then treat with treatment for other diseases until healed, and the threads fall out."
"Chapter 69."
"The Castration."
"Know that castration is condemned in our law, but because it has been requested of me that I remember this in this book, and it is not necessary to remember it except for two ways: the first is so that it may be known by those who study medicine when they are asked about this, that they may know its treatment; and the second way is that we often have a need for castration of other beasts for our uses for those animals, such as mules, goats, pigs, and similar beasts."
"And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by crushing or by cutting through a section."
When an injury is caused by a blow, the method of treatment is to seize the beast in heated water until its genitals are softened and made limp, and then suspend it. And furthermore take those with your hand so that they are resolved and do not appear outside the touching point.
Moreover, in castration performed through incision and sectioning, you should hold the beast and press the cord of its testicles with your left hand.
And moreover tie the suspensory ligament, and make an incision over each one with a section so that two halves proceed from it.
And moreover cut those parts that will have extruded outwards. Do not leave anything on the scrotum except for the thin skin which is above the testicles.
And this method of castration is better than the one performed by crushing because crushing leaves no trace of the testicles and makes the beast desire copulation.
And furthermore treat the wound until it is healed.
"Chapter Seventy."
"On the Treatment of Hermaphroditism."
"In men, hermaphroditism occurs in two ways: the first is when it appears in that space between the testicles where it resembles a vulva with menstrual blood."
"And sometimes urine flows from that area between the testicles."
"In women, it is one species: and that is when the vulva on the pubis appears like two testicles of a man, a little bit smaller at their opening, like the penis of a man and two testicles."
"And its treatment is of three kinds: two for men and one for women." "And you should insert those joined flesh between the opening of that (vulva) and cure it with the cure for other sores."
"And in the second kind of men where urine flows from between the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for it."
"Chapter XXI."
"Of lint and flesh protruding due to causes in women."
"Freckles, being naturally formed between the skin's surface and its depth, are noticed due to observation. Sometimes, in some women they become prominent, spreading similarly as in men, even during intercourse."
"Then you should remove the surplus of lint with your hand or tweezers and discard it."
"And finally, when cutting, especially around the wound's perimeter, to avoid bleeding."
"And thus treat those with plague until they are healed."
"Born flesh is flesh that appears during pregnancy within the uterus until it fills it entirely, and for this reason it is called "hairy disease". Therefore we should remove it as we remove lint and treat it until it heals."
"This is chapter seventy-two."
"On the treatment of leprosy."
"Leprosy is when a woman's vulva is not pierced or is barely torn." "And it can be either natural or accidental."
"Accidental occurs due to prior illness, and it is caused by lack of flesh, poorly attached skin, or thick, rough calluses."
"And it happens either at the entrance of the womb, or on its sides, or on the pubic skin above it, or below it. It inhibits coitus, pregnancy and childbirth, and often inhibits menstruation as well."
"And its diagnosis is made by examining the vulva, if it appears open, it is considered prominent; but if it does not appear open, you should examine it closely with your fingers or a speculum."
"But if the opening is due to thick, rough calluses and appears between both lips, you should cut it open and remove it."
"And when it pauses over both labia minora, its examination is indicated by inserting your fingers from both sides as far as they will go."
"And when the woman is lying on her back with her legs extended, she should extend both labia minora with force until that rough callus is broken and the opening is exposed."
"And then she should take some lint soaked in oil and place it on that location, and leave it there for a day so that the wound does not heal over."
"But if the callus is thick and rough, you should incise it with a scalpel or a myrtle leaf."
"But if the opening is due to lack of flesh, you should suspend that area with a hook and then incise it."
"And use medicines that stop bleeding without biting, such as aloe, dragon's blood, and mastic mixed with egg white."
"And then insert a wide lead cannula so that the wound does not heal too quickly."
"And keep it like that for several days and apply hot compresses of flaxseed water."
"And then treat it with the other consolidation treatment until it is healed."
"And sometimes it occurs in the natural opening of other flesh, and in that case you should incise according to this method." "But if this is due to a hard abscess in the womb, you should not use any iron instrument against it."
Chapter .73
Chapter .73
"Hemorrhoids are recognized as orifices of many veins where blood flows continuously; and when these hemorrhoids become ancient, they are made thick."
"And you have already spoken about the division of species and signs of those, saying which ones receive treatment and which ones do not."
"Therefore I say that hemorrhoids and piles, when they are in the front of the anus and do not appear to the touch, at that time they should not be treated with iron."
"But those which are in the orifice of the anus where one can feel them, are those which are cured."
"And you should put the woman in a warm bath and then extend her buttocks with forceps, or with rough cloth, and incise those with scissors."
"And then sprinkle upon them, against the flow of blood from one of the powder boxes without biting, thus with acacia and similar to those."
"And then let her sit on her heels for an hour, and then let her pause in warm water."
"And if the bleeding persists, then let her drink a decoction of sumac and the bark of thorns from the blackthorn tree and oak trees and similar ones."
"And then take barley flour, mix it with honey and vinegar and make a plaster with that on her back."
"And if the blood has been cut off, it is good; but otherwise let it adhere with two bandages, and on the breasts without scarification."
"And then take wool and immerse it in the juice of coriander or in the juice of hyssop or in the juice of greater plantain with white wine and adhere it to the place, and also treat the place with a poultice until it is healed."
"And cure it until it is healed."
"Chapter LXXIV."
"Of the Perforation of an Abscess Accidentally in the Belly."
Many kinds of ulcers occur on the thigh, such as hard and fleshy tumors, ulcers, inflamed sores, scabs, serpiginous fistulas, blood-filled cavities, and others. I have already spoken about these illnesses, their types, symptoms, and treatments in the chapter on ulcers.
And now I will explain in this treatise how to cauterize the ulcer that appears on the thigh when it comes from ulcers that do not heal, and if you wish to know how the operation is performed with iron.
Therefore, you should consider whether the pain of the ulcer at its beginning is acute with percussion and swelling and fever, if it becomes reddened and tender to the touch. Then, do not cut into it with a cautery until it begins to mature, and treat it with water that helps with maturation until the sharpness of the symptoms ceases.
"Now you must place the woman on an elevated surface that has two pillows; she should recline on her back and adjust her feet close to the opening of her womb, with her thighs spread wide. Then position her arms beside her breasts, binding each one appropriately."
"And then the midwife takes her place on the right side and administers the instrument with which she opens the vagina, whose form will come up in these cases that they will discuss next."
"And when you wish to administer this instrument, place it at the entrance of the woman's vagina; ensure that only the tip of the instrument enters the vagina and does not cause discomfort." "But if the instrument is larger than the opening of the vagina, then you should apply powder on the surface of the opening of the vagina so that no instrument can enter it."
"And you should hold the thread that runs through the instrument on the left side and above, so that when administering it, they must keep the instrument steady while turning the thread clockwise to open the vagina."
"And when the head appears and is touched with the hand, it must be gently lifted and dried with a linen cloth; then you should cleanse the child's face with a sponge."
"And when the child is born, then you should place a cloth soaked in rose oil or olive oil with some astringent properties on the umbilical cord; and place it on the section at the opening of the vagina."
"And then cleanse the woman and over the child, place a clean cloth soaked in water with boiled mallow leaves."
"And afterwards it should be cared for properly two days after birth with ointment that is suitable until it is healed."
"And sometimes the woman and the placenta are washed in this way: they are crystallized with water and honey, and then returned to the ointment. And sometimes it is washed with water in which rose hips or long pepper have been boiled."
"And if the placenta remains inside the womb after birth, then it is prohibited to perform any surgery on it with an iron instrument; they should have care of it with water as we have said in this division."
Chapter LXXV.
"To teach midwives how to treat women whose births are difficult and do not proceed according to nature."
"It is necessary that the midwife recognizes at the beginning the figure of a natural birth by its signs, and this happens when she sees the woman pressing her thighs together and desiring to smell the air, and afterwards she feels relieved by what comes out over her, and hastens the birth of the child; then you know that this birth is according to nature. And this is the emergence of the head first, followed by the shoulders hanging from it or suspended from the umbilical cord."
"Therefore, when you see those signs, it is necessary that the woman's belly is pressed so that the child comes out gently as it emerges over its head; then the shoulders follow, and they are cleaned of those excesses with good cleansing."
"But if the birth is not according to nature and is not desirable, then it occurs when the child emerges feet first, with its body emerging before its head and feet; or one of its hands emerges first, or its foot, or its head emerges together with its hand or belly. And thus it turns upside down on its neck, resembling those figures that are not desirable."
"Therefore, it is necessary for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all of these causes and to guard against error and deception."
"And here we are showing you all the figures of those that are not according to nature, and what is their cause, so that it may be understood by this and established on this."
"When the feet emerge first due to an error of nature, and it is violent over the woman and difficult for her to give birth, and she sees that her strength has weakened, then they should seize it by its feet or what the women hold onto, and evaporate its head with fenugreek cooked in oil and humid earth."
"And also the midwife should insert herself between its legs and tear open the second with her finger or cut it open with her fingernail until what is inside it of humidity flows out." "And press the woman's belly until the child comes out."
"But if it does not come out, then the woman should be crystallized with dough of barley and dough of fenugreek with sesame."
"And then command her to be pressed, and also she should sneeze with conditions; and put your mouth over hers and your nose over hers for one hour, because the child will soon forget."
"And if both arms of the child are forgotten at the beginning, then you should reduce them gently little by little." "But if it does not obey the manipulation, then place the woman on a pillow and lift her feet up, and also strike the pillow against the ground so that the woman is held that she does not fall due to the blow."
"And if the arms are not properly returned and the child dies, then incise those veins and extract the flesh of the child or tie its body to your hand with cloth and extract it equally, because that will soon forget."
"When the child emerges feet first, then you should push those up and also turn the child gently around, and grasp its heel with your finger, and take one of its feet and stretch it out little by little."
"But when it is inside the hips, then you should command it to press itself out and make it sneeze with conditions, because it will soon forget if God wishes."
"And if it is not forgotten with what we have recommended, then return the child gently little by little until you place it according to natural figure, because that will soon forget at that moment with gentle birth."
"And if it is prohibited with all that we have recommended, then take dough of mallow and dissolved gum, and grind everything well in the mortar, and also line the woman's head, especially the lower part of her belly." "And also make her drink hot water decoction until she achieves contractions."
"When the passages of the child are softened, then make it steam with myrtle and keep it warm." "And when it has had steam for one hour, then make her lie down on a pillow and make her sneeze and draw out her mouth, take that out from there, and press the lower part of the birth passage gently because the child will soon forget."
Guessed Translation: Examination of the latitudinally hanging one of its hands. Translation: If it cannot be reduced by that hand, then lift the female and make her go there.
If she cannot go there, then make her lie down on the bed, and strike the parts of her with violent concussion, and promptly administer remedies composed of mucilages.
If childbirth has come, then make her sit on the birthing chair, and immediately study the reduction of the hand, guide the fetus according to its natural shape, make the woman sneeze, and command her to push hard until it is expelled.
Examination of the fetus on the collar with expanded hands and its fascia behind that of its mother That the midwife should hold the hand of the fetus and gradually turn it around, and ease it out.
And when it has come and as much as possible is expelled, then pause on the neck of it until what we have recommended of oil and mucilages has been absorbed.
Then command her to push little by little, and when she has done this, then make her sit on a birthing chair with the condition that she leans over the right side, and promptly command her to push; and make her sneeze. The exit of the fetus prepared on the left side
When it has been expelled from the mother in this manner, consider, and then you should incise the secondine with your nail until it is evacuated of moisture.
And if the fetus is suspended on its face and neck, then you should incise that of the amniotic sac, so that it is not retained and dies.
Then push the fetus out towards its exit until that which is necessary passes, and command the woman to push herself several times, and it will be expelled with ease if God wills.
Exit of twins or multiple fetuses Know that many times twins are born, and sometimes three or four, but this is rare and strange and not to be expected; but two causes are natural, namely:
And count those that are multiplied, whether they be one or more secundine, and they are separate by caul, distinguished among each other within the ligament in the navel of each of them. And sometimes they are expelled thus as if it were one fetus through natural easy exit, and sometimes they are expelled through difficult exit as we have recommended.
And if some of them are difficult to bring forth and come thus as we have said about the unnatural figures, then care for them as we have mentioned.
And if the midwife is skilled and does what she does with ease and skillfulness, and with patience, and if she is knowledgeable according to every figure as it has been prepared for her by the engineer bringing about health.
Remembrance of that which is formed in the matrix from embryos and miscarriages
Sometimes one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and more than ten are formed in the womb, and it has been verified that a woman miscarried seven, and another one expelled all ten that were formed, which cause was made by measurement by the glorious wise.
And all this should be known by the midwife for she must know well that small figure which is similar to it, and thus she may act according to what is necessary.
Chapter LXXVI
Of the extraction of the dead fetus
When you care for the dead fetus as we have said in the division of midwifery and it has not yet been expelled, and you are forced to use an operation with your hand, then you must consider if the woman is of good health and does not have any of the accidents by which loss may be feared over her.
Then the woman must be placed on her left side on the bed, and her head should be inclined downwards and her hips raised.
And the attendant must hold her from both parts or else she must lie on the bed so that her body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
And then you must moisten the mouth of the womb with olive oil and with mucilage of marsh mallow, fenugreek, and linseed.
And then the midwife should anoint her hand with those oils and mucilages, and then she should insert her hand gently into the womb, and then she should search with her hand for where the hook is located in the fetus.
And the convenient place for this is: then consider if the fetus is ready to be expelled on its head, and then you should place the hook in the fetus' ears or neck or mouth or palate or beard or furcula or near the ribs or below the hypochondria.
But if the expulsion is on its feet, then in the perineum or middle of the buttocks.
And it is necessary to hold the hook with the right hand, and place its curve in that location which is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand gently until you reach the desired cause of the child's body.
And then hold and place another hook or the third one if necessary, in order to have equal traction and not just lengthwise extension according to its correctness.
And may it be useful for all deliveries, so that the expulsion of the fetus is alleviated just as it happens in tooth extraction during its eradication.
And it is necessary that during this the extension should be softened; and if any part of the fetus is retained, then the midwife must anoint some of her fingers with oil and insert them gently and turn them around in what is retained.
Therefore if the expulsion of the fetus has not happened yet, then the hooks should be changed to another place where they may push more effectively; and do this until the entire fetus has been expelled.
But if the hand has come out before the other, and it is not possible to reduce it by its contraction, then cloth should be wrapped around it; and then extract it until all of it has been expelled, and cut it off either at the junction of the hand or in the elbow.
And do the same with the other hand and both feet.
But if the head of the fetus is large, or it occurs contraction in its expulsion, or there is water in the head of the child, then you must insert between the spinous processes of the pubic bones and split open the head and extract the water, or remove it with an instrument called "alundat", the form of which will come with the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
And do the same if the fetus has a large head by nature: and then it is necessary to cut off that with an instrument called "gematu", or take it out with the alundat as we have said, and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head has been expelled but is contracted by the pubic arch, then it should be split open until the fluid in the fontanelle has flowed out.
But if it is not complicated and does not obey expulsion, then cut open the head immediately as much as you can manage on your own.
And if there is an aposteme or hydrops in the lower abdomen, then you must perforate it until the fluid in it runs out.
But if the fetus is lying on its back, then its attraction will be lighter and its direction to the mouth of the mother will be easier.
"If the belly and chest are tightly bound, then you must remove that cloth which you have wrapped around your hand, and cut into the belly and chest so that whatever is inside may flow out."
"If the other limbs are stretched out and the head is turned, then insert your left hand; but if the mouth of the mother is closed, then insert your hand into her throat, encircle the head with it, pull that towards those things [the limbs], and immediately put one or two fingers inside [the mouth] and push them in there."
"And if the mouth of the mother is obstructed by an aposteme [thick swelling] that has happened to her, then it should not be troubled; rather, it is necessary at that time to administer effusion of thick humid causes." "And apply poultices; and follow the patient with waters that soften and moisten."
"If the patient is on their side, if possible, turn them over; and administer what we have said in the case of a living person."
"And if this is not possible, then incision should be made through the peritoneum, and it should be opened."
"Take care to leave no cause behind inside."
"And after you have completed your entire operation, then administer what we have said about the treatment of burnt wounds which occur during major operations."
"If bleeding occurs, then apply styptic waters and administer the other treatments."
"I have seen a woman whose fetus died in her womb, and again she became pregnant shortly thereafter, and the second fetus also died." "It happened that about a long time after an ulcer formed in her uterus; it became inflamed internally where it was opened, and began to emit a bad smell."
"And I was called for its treatment, and I treated it for a long time, but the illness did not resolve."
"Therefore I suspected that it might be caused by some sort of strong attraction, and I extracted one bone from it, and about a few days later, another bone was extracted; and I was very amazed because there are no bones in the uterus."
"And then I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus."
"So I treated the illness, and extracted many bones from it, and the woman remained in good condition, living in that way for a long time without any bad odor coming from it."
"And I did not regard this as strange, because in this there is knowledge and assistance for the physician who performs cures with his own hand."
"Regarding the shapes of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus."
"The shape of a hook with which the mouth is opened:"
"This is the shape of a retractor in which two hooks are attached, with each hook having one tooth at its end." "However, this hook should be more subtle and made of either ivory or boxwood."
"And each tooth should be two digits wide and one digit thick at its margin, with a length of one and a half palms; and in the middle space between the two teeth there are two adjustments for fitting that middle tooth, which are already fixed, with a length of about one and three-fourths palms and a width of about two digits or slightly more."
"And these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the uterus so that it can be opened using them when you turn the two specified hooks."
"Another shape similar to the previous one, but more subtle and lighter:"
"It should be made of ivory or boxwood according to the shape of forceps." "But at the end of it there are two additions like this: , with each addition having a length of one palm and a width of two digits."
"And when you want to open the uterus with them, then have the woman lie on her back with her feet hanging down, opening what is between her legs." "And then open your hand with the instrument just like you do with forceps, according to the amount that you want of the opening of the mouth of the uterus, until the fetus comes out as you wish."
"The shape of a hook which the ancients described:"
"The shape of an elevator with which the fetus is pushed up:"
"The shape of a spoon with which the large head is contained:"
"And it resembles forceps, with teeth at the end like this: , and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this shape, like this: , with teeth like those of a retractor with which it is inserted and contained." "The shape of a small spoon:"
"The shape of a hook having one spine:"
"The shape of a hook having two spines:"
"The shape of a spatula having two ends with which the head is cut off:"
"The shape of two wide spatulas:"
"However many of these instruments are used, and when they are most multiplied in species and prepared by the craftsmen, it is still easier to operate with them, and more convenient for people due to their quantity."
"And do not use those instruments if there are none available, since the need for them is not excusable."
"Regarding the extraction of a secondine:"
"When the secondine is retained during childbirth, then you should order the sick woman to hold her breath, and then have her sneeze with caution, and press your hand over her mouth and nose. If it comes out this way, that is good."
"And if not, then take a cloth and pierce a hole in it, and place it on those herbs burned over the mouth of the uterus, such as calendula and rue and aneth and chamomile and saffron and cinnamon and costus and sandalwood." "All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the cloth, and then place it on the fire."
"And then insert a reed cannula into the mouth of the uterus, and hold it there until steam comes to the concave part of the uterus."
"And then have her sneeze as we have said, and the secondine will be expelled with great speed."
"But if this treatment does not work and the secondine remains, then you should order the midwife to immerse her left hand in sesame oil or a mixture of althea, and then insert it into the vagina and search for the secondine with that. And when she has found it, then take it out little by little. But if it is attached to the mouth of the uterus, then insert your hand as we have recommended, and when you have found the secondine, extract it little by little according to what is straight, so that the uterus does not suffer from violent attraction." "It is necessary that they be moved with facility to both sides."
"And if the mouth of the uterus is constricted, we have already recommended treatment with sneezing and medicated cloth with herbs."
"But if it is not expelled with all the causes that we have recommended, then be careful not to tire yourself out in repeated attempts at abstraction. But rather what comes out of her to the mouth of the uterus should be laid on the thing of the woman, and then dress it with oil and tetrafarmacon; because this will make it disappear in a few days and it will be dissolved and expelled."
"But when it disappears, it leaves behind a bad odor in the head and stomach, which harms the sick woman. And then fumigations and suitable remedies should be administered for that."
"But some of the ancients used fumigation with nazitort and dried figs."
"The shape of an instrument with which a woman is fumigated due to the retention of menstruation and secondines:"
"It should be made of bronze or brass."
"And the fine extremity should be placed in the vagina and the broad one on the fire, and fumigation should be applied to the embers of the fire."
"And keep adding more until that fumigation is consumed, then repeat another."
Of treating the imperforate anus of a child
Many children are born with imperforate anuses that are subtle and obstructed. Therefore it falls to the midwife to pierce this opening with her finger, and if not, then to pierce it with a sharp spike, taking care not to touch the intestine.
And she should place thereupon some wool soaked in wine and oil, and keep wiping until clean.
But if you fear it is obstructed, then place a catheter there for several days to drain, and remove it when the child wants to eat.
And if an obstruction of the anus occurs due to a collection of pus or an abscess, then it is necessary to incise that collection and similarly treat it with the remedies mentioned above for the lead.
Of treating fistulas that develop there.
Fistulas that develop near the passage of the anus, which are swollen and thickened, often occur close to the buttocks externally or in the space between the buttocks.
And it is a fistula or warts.
Moreover, when that swelling is chronic and comes from moist heat, it produces a white or clear yellowish fluid, and sometimes these fistulas have penetrating openings.
And these openings are recognized by what exits from them through the exit and via windiness; sometimes the disease manifests through discharge, and it is often discharged through worms.
Sometimes these fistulas have penetrating openings that extend into the bladder and into the urethra; some of these openings extend into the junction of the scrotum and into the glands of the penis.
And to recognize a penetrating or non-penetrating fistulous opening entering the anus, you should insert your little finger into the anus and carefully probe the fistula with a fine thread of silk or iron when there is no obstruction.
But if there is an obstruction, then insert a fine thread of lead or horsehair until you feel the thread or hair against your little finger.
And if you do not feel anything with it and find no cause for discharge or worms or windiness, as we have said before, then you should know that it is non-penetrating, and thus begin the treatment.
And when a fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the urethra, then its significance is that urine will be discharged from it and there will be impediment to it until it becomes consolidated according to what is taught in medicine.
But if it is penetrating into the scrotum or into the bone and there is pain around it, then its sign is that the probe may penetrate here if there is no obstruction in the bone, and there will be pain around the opening; and that there is always purulent matter; and that medicine has no effect on it, nor does it become consolidated with ointments.
And in all penetrating fistulas there is no complete cure, and the treatment of these is merely the struggle and deception of foolish physicians, about which we are firmly convinced.
But in those that are not penetrating and do not open, healing with iron is expected according to what I will advise you, and that which I have already said.
And it is that the disease appears between your thighs, mainly on the right side and raises the scrotum within itself, with the testes inclining toward its abdomen, and carefully insert a probe of lead or silk if there is an obstruction in the fistula, until you know where the probe comes out.
And if that disease is felt around the anus, then it is necessary for you to insert your little finger into the anus in that direction.
And if you feel with your little finger that the probe is already openly penetrating inside, other than what you feel between your little finger and that siphac or flesh, then certainly know that that one is penetrating; and therefore do not struggle with it, for there is no healing of it, as we have said before.
But nevertheless some people say that it can be healed in certain men.
And the treatment by which it is hoped that some good may be achieved in it is this: cauterize with a subtle fire according to the width of the fistula, as has been described above, and insert that burning into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those adherent fistulous tissues have been burnt like the feathers of a bird.
And then dress it with hot fomentations wrapped in wool until all those adherent tissues have softened; and then treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate flesh, and if it heals, good. But if not, then know that it will never be healed by any other treatment.
And if the probe enters and does not penetrate inside your little finger which is in the anus and between that and the probe which is covered with flesh or siphac, sometimes the fistula goes along the surface of the bone, then cut the bone from the beginning of the fistula; and you will see it dry with the probe, and let it be in the fistula until the section reaches to where the end of the probe comes out; and through the probe it is freed and healed.
And then clean those fistulous tissues which are like the feathers of a bird's quill, and do not leave any of them behind.
But if there is bleeding that comes between you and your operation when you cut those tissues, then the milder instrument to cauterize with fire or with an acute medicine is better, for cautery with fire has good two habits: it is adhesion of those adherent tissues, and excision of blood and drying of moisture.
And then dress it with hot fomentations wrapped in wool or with thin cloth until that place becomes warm; and then afterwards treat the wound with hard flesh-generating and consolidating medicines.
And these are the medicines in which there is astringency and excision; when they are applied, it will be restored and already healed, with no fear of recurrence.
But if the fistula has already reached into the anus and extends along the surface of the body, then insert your little finger into the anus and explore with it.
And therefore if you feel the probe and there is something like siphac or flesh between you and it, and it is close to penetration, then there is no operation for it except according to the way of faith and hope.
And this is to be administered in it in one of three ways: either cauterize it as has been said; or cut it open until you achieve the concavity of it so that you can possibly insert your finger and apply the proposed treatment; and do not proceed with cutting too much, for fear of wounding the contents of the anus and causing pain and harm without cause. And then dress it with what has been said, for flesh is easily healed there. Or else elongate that velament and clean out that pus which dries it inside close to the anus as has been said, either with a probe or with another instrument of sharp point; and then clean those fistulous tissues which are in the section by scraping them away with a curette. And then strive to heal all the wound with stitching; and if the opened orifice does not consolidate above, and the fistula remains open at its beginning near the anus, it will cause pain. And sometimes the fistula is finished in this way: when you insert the probe into the fistula and it comes out on the side of the anus around the surface of the body with the bone and at the margin of the anus, then take a probe with a perforated tip, which is like a needle for preparing hearts, shaped thus:
"I will now introduce this needle into that opening of yours, turning them; and immediately I will try to insert another needle into the fistula until it reaches its cavity."
"But if you penetrate the margin of the anus properly, then you should remove that thread as such that you can insert your little finger into the anus; and after removing the end of the thread, join both ends together, strain each one separately, and leave it like this for a day or two, and whenever you notice that the thread has cut into the flesh, then carefully remove that part where those cuts are located which are between the two ends of the thread."
"And immediately heal the wound until it is consolidated and healed."
"But if the opening of the fistula is not penetrated, then you should make it penetrate in whatever manner you are prepared for, but do not probe too deeply into the perineum lest you injure the skin. And immediately apply that (ointment) until it is healed."
"The shape of the spatula with spines on which the fistula is opened has one end very sharp and the other end not sharp, so that you do not injure what is not necessary."
"Regarding the suture of hemorrhoids in which blood flows from the opening of those (hemorrhoids),"
"Hemorrhoids occur in two manners: either they are between the buttocks appearing like coal, or they seem to be filled with grease of rose hips." "And those are small and large, from which blood constantly flows and is one, and are numerous, and are outside the anus, and at its ends."
"But those that are outside the anus occur according to the months of little humidity, from which yellow water or a bit of blood runs continuously with the body's sweat, and they vary in color."
"And the treatment for that which is inside the anus is that you command the patient to sit up and press inward until the anus opens and the hemorrhoids appear before you." "Then you take and suspend with forceps or whatever you may have those [hemorrhoids] with your nail, and promptly cut them at their roots."
"But if the forceps do not hold those [hemorrhoids] due to their humidity and softness, then you take them with rough cloth or with cotton or with a wool pad, and extract those with your fingers, and promptly cut them at their roots and sprinkle some powdered resin thereupon immediately after cutting so that it may serve as cautery for those; or cauterize them according to what is stated in the chapter on cauterizing." "And afterwards dress those with the other dressing until they are healed."
"And if the anus does not obey evacuation, then you catheterize the patient with a catheter in which there is a small bite and let it be washed with that water which is in the anus so that it may facilitate easy evacuation when the patient presses."
"But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is light, and it suffices that you take them with your nail or that you take them with forceps and cut them, and afterwards dress them with water as has been said until they are healed."
"And he who cuts them should administer suture to them in this manner: take a thread wrapped and insert it into the needle and then extract the hemorrhoids at their roots above, and make the thread penetrate with the needle into the root of the other part, and wrap the two ends of the thread around that part more distant from the needle, and stretch the hemorrhoid tightly with strong tension, and then tie the thread and remove the needle."
"And do this to all of them, leaving one alone without tying it so that the superfluous blood may flow out from it."
"And then apply over the anus a dressing made of lint soaked in rose oil or wax, and apply that over the anus and command the patient to repose." "And then leave it like that for three days; and when it is healed, dress it with ointment or with another dressing until it is completely healed."
And if those veins are old and not useful in that medicine, then you should open those with the point of a spatula or your nail so they are moistened and remove the thick pus above them which hinders their solidification. And immediately clean those that have been solidified.
Then you must remove it with a very strong razor so that at first there is no blood and they are not scraped. And immediately heal those that have been healed.
Know that the soul is the key, and not blood according to the color of the body resembling a small nail head. It is found throughout the body but more so in the joints of the legs and arms. Thereby pain occurs through them.
Therefore, it is necessary that what is in the circuit of the key be incised and held with forceps or tweezers, and eradicated from its root. And immediately heal it.
And if you wish, cauterize the second one that is mentioned in its chapter.
But warts are small, rough, flesh-colored elevations on the surface of the body, often rounded and sometimes pustular. Many are seen in children.
And the treatment for it is that you stretch out and incise it with a knife or scrape it off with a file or pumice stone until it bleeds freely. And if you wish, cauterize it with fire or with an acute medicine, as we have said before.
But a pimple is a small, fatty or pustular elevation on the surface of the body that often appears on the forehead and elsewhere. When it is pressed, it becomes inflamed like the sting of an ant, and it appears around the body.
And the treatment for it is that you take a quill from an ostrich or vulture feather and make it strong. Place it over the pimple so that its circle surrounds it. Then rotate your hand with the quill to incise what is in the circuit of the pimple, pressing it against the skin of the forehead. And eradicate the pimple from its root.
And if you wish, do this with a needle made of brass or iron in this way:
Let the point of the needle be drawn to a fine, blunt tip, not perforated, wrapped in such a way that when you grasp it with your fingers, its edge is smoothed and its rotation facilitated.
And if you wish to cauterize the pimple, do so according to what has been mentioned in the chapter on cautery concerning atheyl.
Of the instruments used for administering cautery
Sometimes cautery is performed with silver or lead that has been melted and hammered. And sometimes it is performed using instruments that are small or large according to those used for the purpose. For example, the one used in treating young children should be small; and for those whose bottoms are furrowed or wrinkled, their cauteries should also be small.
The method of performing a large cautery with little injury:
The opening of the cannula's head should be wide in this manner, and it should be at the distinction where the bag is tied in this way.
And the lower end of the tube that is inserted into the anus should be blunt (i.e., not open), tapering to a subtlety; and on one side there are two holes, and on the other side one hole, with the width of the hole according to the thickness of the rays.
And let the bag in which the medicines are placed be made from bladder or sheep's skin, and its width be one palm.
And let it be perforated with many holes so that it rotates evenly; and the distance between the holes should be roughly the thickness of a finger.
And then insert through those holes a strong thread of raw silk that is made from ten threads, or wind it around them; and adjust it with the bag. And when you place the bag on him, tighten it at the head of the clyster syringe between two distinctions with strong constriction, and clysterize with it through each hole: But the quality of clysterizing with it is that you should heat the bag of medicine according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance; and be careful not to make it too hot nor too cold.
And then the patient should lie on their back with their buttocks raised and place a cloth or towel underneath them to prevent staining of the bedding. Then anoint the tip of the clyster syringe with oil, albumen of egg white, or mucilage of fenugreek or similar substances. Then insert it into the anus gently, and then the attendant should take the bag and squeeze it two or three times forcefully until all the contents of the clyster syringe have been emptied into the bowel. Then remove the clyster syringe and the patient should raise their buttocks against the wall.
And if the medicine causes him to perspire excessively, let him hold as much of it in as he can. And if he sleeps with it for the whole night, it will be more effective in its benefit.
But if you clysterize him for loose bowels and diarrhea in which the excretion of the belly is copious, then repeat the clyster until he is healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or tender fistulas in the anus, then let the clyster be very thin and gentle, of those clysters with which children are clysterized.
Regarding the treatment of plagues.
I have already said in the division on the treatment of plagues what was necessary for the book, and I say now the treatment of those with more severity using medicines according to their condition.
Therefore I say that plagues are diversified according to what part of the body they occur in and according to the location on which the plague manifests itself.
And the causes for which often plagues occur are such as: cutting with a spearhead, or incision with an razor blade or knife, or piercing with a lance, or beating with a club or stick, or being hit by an arrow, and similar accidents.
But the plagues which are in certain parts of the body are such as: plague that occurs on the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the belly, or the thigh, and similar ones on the limbs.
And I am now describing the treatment of certain plagues so that you may pause this reasoning and rule about the other plagues.
And I will begin with simple head plagues, for the reminder of the composite ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore I say that when a simple head plague occurs and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is from a blow with a spearhead or similar object, and the bone has already broken only on its own and it is a large wound, and you fear that an abscess will develop in that patient, then immediately perform phlebotomy of the cephalic vein, and do not delay; and remove as much blood as possible according to the strength of the blow, unless there is some reason prohibiting phlebotomy, especially if the blood that has flowed from the wound is little.
And let the phlebotomy be on the opposite side of the wounded part; and keep the patient from exertion and wine and coarse foods.
But if for some reason you forbid phlebotomy, then let him be put on a low diet and not approach flesh nor wine.
And pause over the wound if an abscess develops, then apply hot oil or wine that has been thickened with flour.
But if you are sure that an abscess will develop, then pause over the wound while it is still fresh with its own blood and the air has not yet changed that powder which I will recommend later on a small scale.
And if the air has already changed it, then pause over the abscess and let it drain until it is healed.
But if the wound is large or it has occurred from an incision with a spearhead or similar object and its edges are not fitting together by themselves, then adjust those edges with stitches according to what I will recommend for the stitching of lips.
But if the wound is already exposed to bone and tendon, and there is only a slight suspension of the flesh, then incise it and cure the wound with medicines and restore the flesh properly in place of bone, and command the patient to be put on a diet of coarse foods such as cabbage and beans and similar ones until he is healed.
And if you find putrefaction in the bone and it does not adhere to the bone, then incise all that is rotten and remove it, and then cure it.
But if in these wounds an artery or vein from which blood is flowing can occur and it cannot be ligated by medicines, then inquire about the artery; and if you find that one has not been incised, then incise it with a scalpel, or tie it. And if necessity compels you to do what I have said does not suit, then cauterize until the blood is stopped.
And if these wounds are simple and small, then their cause is light. Therefore you powder them with this powder so that it may solidify before the air changes them.
And the manner of the powder is this: take one part oil of sesame seeds, two parts dragon's blood, three parts myrrh ground; let it all be finely ground and sifted, and with that fill the wound, and let it be pressed down by good pressure until it adheres to it, and then let it coagulate with its own blood.
And then press it down from above with powders and leave it like that; do not remove it while it is like this until it becomes an abscess, for the medicine will not be removed from it until it is healed.
And sometimes you can do this alone with just cauterization when you do not have sesame oil and dragon's blood present.
And this same operation is done in large wounds when it is appropriate to pause over them and press them down, especially fresh ones with their own blood which the air has not yet altered.
And if the air has altered them, and especially in summer time, then it is not fitting to use this powder. But at such times cure them with what I have said, so that you put over them some fresh ointments or polish them with flour paste mixed with water and honey until they are cleansed of pus; and then cure them with the other remedies until they are healed.
If you encounter a small fracture in bone during an operation, then extract it using tweezers.
Then I will teach you the treatment of head fractures that are dangerous.
Of the wounds of the neck
But if the wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment between this wound and a simple head wound.
But if the nerve or artery of the neck is injured, then if it is a nerve, there is no hope for recovery except to avoid treatment with anything that causes strong contraction, such as vitriol and similar substances that irritate nerves. And do not apply any caustic substance to the wound for fear of burning the nerve, because the substance of nerves is fragile and their continuity extends to the brain, which is the pulse center of all members.
And if you treat it with mild medicines, such as washing it with rosewater or applying it diluted in olive oil (with or without roses), and bandages when washed with rosewater, and other soft minerals according to this method, and then wrap it gently.
But if the wound is large, then apply sutures to close the lips of the wound and afterward dress it with powders until it heals.
But if the wound is deep or if it has happened that part of the nerve has been cut off, then pierce it in the most depressed place with a needle.
"However, if in the wound an artery has already been cut and there is blood flow, then separate or seal that, or ligate that, or cauterize that if necessary."
"If the spines of the coccyx have already been cut or all, and the veins of the rectum are saved, then adjust the lips of the buttocks with suture over the canal of the coccyx without touching that; Afterwards equalize that and reduce it to its natural shape, and support it with suitable strapping, and leave it for several days; And afterwards care for it with ointments in which there is astringency and excitation until it is healed."
"If the wound has already reached the bone, then explore that and if there are fragments of bone, remove all those that you can; And whatever is not apparent to you, leave it until the wound closes, and let it separate naturally, and its inflammation be alleviated."
"And if the wound is fresh then sprinkle over it the powder which I have recommended to you." If a fistula is made in the anus, then treat it with that remedy of which mention will be made shortly in its chapter.
If it is a wound from a lance or knife, and sometimes its depth varies, then consider more if there is wind coming out of the wound when the patient breathes; then know that the wound is fatal.
And if it is not deep and the wound is fresh with its own blood, then you pause in it for the first hour with powdered plantain, and do not press it so that no blood is retained in the depth of it and returns to the heart and increases the illness, but rather pause it with an attractive ointment, and cleanse it twice daily.
And if the ointment is not at hand, then pause in the wound with cotton moistened so that it draws out whatever moisture there may be; and make sure that the patient sleeps on the wound so that what is inside it may flow out.
But if three days have passed since the wound and there has been no spasm or trembling of the heart nor constriction of the lungs in the patient, and other good conditions of it are seen, then know that the wound is healed; and then cure it with poultices and other treatments until it is completely healed.
But if the healing of it is prevented, and it has been open all this time, then know that it has already become a fistula; cure it according to its chapter.
And if the wound is from a cut by a sword or knife and it is simple on the surface of the foot or hand, then cure it with what is preceded by suturing if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
But if there has already been injury to the bone and pieces of it have already been cut off, then you turn the wound and try to extract those pieces, if they are separate. But if they are not separate, then leave them inside until the wound heals, for their extraction will be easier that way.
And concerning other accidental wounds on other limbs, the judgment regarding their treatment is as we have said.
Of abdominal wounds.
"Indisposition that occurs in the belly may be large, or small, or moderate."
"And small rupture is done with difficulty in another way, and so its reduction is more difficult if you do not quickly extract them from their place at once, because they open and become swollen so that the entrance of them becomes difficult."
"And therefore the best rupture is moderate, because in that one it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, just as it is difficult in the two kinds mentioned above."
"And know that there are four ways to suture the belly, but two of them are common and convenient for sutures of other wounds of the body."
"And the other two sutures are proper to other wounds, but however they are more proper to the suture of the belly."
"And I tell you each one with explanation and description."
"Therefore it is said that when the wound is small and some cause of the intestine comes out through it, and it is difficult to reduce it, then this is in one of two ways: either because of the smallness of the rupture as we have said, or when the intestine has come into inflammation because of the coldness of the air."
"And therefore when this is the case, then you should cut it so that you immerse a sponge or wet cloth in hot water alone, or take some hot water with squinant, cyperus, spice, and embrocatum with which you moisturize the intestine inside until the inflammation has been resolved."
"And sometimes it happens that there is putrefaction in the wound, and it is better to use water alone for the resolution of inflammation."
"And therefore when you see that the inflammation has been resolved, then you should moisten the intestine with water in which is cooked mallow and malva, for by this means it is alleviated from inflammation with little cause."
"But if the inflammation of the intestine has not been alleviated by this treatment, then cut the rupture a little with an instrument with which you have incisedemorroids."
"And the first treatment is better, for it is proper that it not be a section, and there should be no occupation to cut unless necessary and unavoidable."
"Concerning the instrument, see its form:"
"The one part of it is cut sharp and the other not-sharp, and the extremity is subtle but not too delicate, rather somewhat blunt."
"And therefore when the wound has been enlarged and the intestine comes out through it, then its reduction should be according to its natural form in its proper place if possible about that, for better is."
"But when the rupture is wide and is in the lower part of the belly, then you should make the patient lie on his back and place their buttocks higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you should place the head down and the feet higher than the buttocks."
"And likewise if the rupture is in one of the two parts of the belly, then always place your intention and consideration on this so that the part where the wound is may be higher than the other."
"And therefore you should administer this in large wounds and in moderate wounds."
"And in small wounds, pause until it is prepared and make sure that the one who ministers it is among your most experienced, who holds the rupture entirely with his hand and adjusts the lips of it, and quickly discovers from that to that which sews any cause if necessary."
"And this is the common manner of suturing: first take a needle or count needles according to the quantity of the width of the wound; and then leave it at the end of the rupture on the tip of your finger, and thread the needle with one thread, but do not put any knot in both ends of the thread, with two knots that are left below the thread, inside which you make it penetrate from one part to another; and you have already attached four threads."
"And then thread with a double knot around the needle, and sometimes two parts together, and then attach both lips and the wound by proper attachment; and then leave the thickness of your finger and put another needle in that, and then tie it with thread like the first needle; and do not cease doing this until you have completed all the contraction of the wound."
"And let the needles be moderate between thickness and subtlety, for thin needles cut flesh too lightly; and thick ones are difficult to thread with the thread, therefore they should be moderate in both thickness and subtlety."
"And it is not necessary for the needle to be stuck in both ends of the thread at once, lest the flesh be cut too lightly and the wound be opened before its consolidation."
"And do not prolong suturing so that the wound is not hindered from healing."
"And then cut the ends of the needles so that the patient does not bother with their sleep; and you will place powdered breadcrumbs on all parts over the suture, which hold the ends of the needles; and leave them until you know that the wound is healed."
"And these types of suturing with needles in any manner are more convenient for small wounds, because one needle or two is enough for their suturing."
"But the second type of suturing is like this: you should use four threads for suturing, from the thread and two knots at once, with a needle that has fine silk wrapped around it in both thickness and subtlety."
"And then, when the needle has pierced these four extremities, return the needle to that same opening from which you began, so that the wound draws back its pus-filled cavity into the abscess, so that the suture may be made according to a stitch of cloth with which the wounds are strengthened."
"And pause between each suture the quantity of the thickness of the little finger."
"And this suture is known by men."
"And at this suture you cauterized the wound which was inflicted on a man in his belly who had been struck with a dagger, and the disruption of the wound was more than a palm, and it was issued from the bowels around two palms of the bowels near the middle place, and the disruption was in the middle of the member; and then you reduced that deposit which the bowels had flowed out of the wound for 24 hours."
"And the wound was consolidated in the space of about 15 days, and that man was cured and healed; and at that time he lived for many years, and remained in his usual condition."
"And the other physicians had judged that he would not be healed; and it was by miracle that he was cured, because you did not cure him with an ointment, since he was in a place where no ointment could be applied nor any medicine, but you paused over the wound twice a day and washed it assiduously with water of honey until it was healed."
"But you describe two kinds of suture proper according to the narrative of the Word."
"And it is that you begin with the stitching of the cord, and insert the needle from without to within."
"And then as the needle penetrates into the cord and meets with it in length along all the body, let the extremity of the thread remain in that which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from within outwards in the other extremity of the member."
"And then when you have made it penetrate thus, afterwards make it penetrate again in that same extremity of the member from without within; and let the extremity of the thread remain on this side, and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from within outwards."
"And make it penetrate again with that penetration with which you have made it penetrate in the thread at the extremity of the member which is on the inside, so that all may penetrate."
"And then begin from this same side and draw it with the extremity which is of the thread on the other side, and withdraw the needle from the cord which has penetrated, and reduce that in that cord and tie the extremity of the thread which is on the other side with this extremity of the member; and withdraw that from the cord which is on the part within."
"And do this once and again, and do it once more afterwards until you have tied all that is without according to that example."
"And the sum of this manner of suture is that you make a stitch of skin with which you sew the skin, so that you make the thread once from the extremity of the cord and let it remain again until you have completed it."
"But the second kind of proper suture which you describe expressly, and this is about it and for it to be sewn together, is that you sew it in half-length so that some physicians sew it thus, arranging every part with its corresponding part according to nature; and they apply the extremity of one to the other extremity and the extremity of the member to the other extremity of it, and this is done as you command."
"So that you leave the needle in the extremity of the member near the outside part, and make it penetrate within that part and let both extremities of the thread remain; and then turn the needle round and make it penetrate from without within at both extremities of the thread."
"And then turn those loops round, and make each loop penetrate from within outwards in two extremities of the member other than those which are on the opposite side."
"And this manner of suture is better than common light suture, and it is the suture of which there was a preceding mention."
"This is the discourse of Galen"
"And others say that the suture of the belly is corrected with two needles, so that you insert in each a thread and begin with an introduction of the needle on whichever side it is necessary for you to sew according to the suture of those who sew the heart ingeniously."
"And know that when a disruption occurs in the middle part of the belly, then the suture of it is more difficult than those of other parts of the belly."
"But the judgment of medical treatment of pleurisy is also the judgment of other plagues."
"The cause is because when you succeed in the recent plague with its pure blood before the air alters it and reduces the vessel and sews it up well and applies it properly afterwards, then it remains calm on that inflammatory dust."
"And if the air has already altered the plague, then it remains calm on some of those which are present before they make hard skin and cast out the threads, and are solidified thread and member; and then cure it thus as is the cure of other plagues until it is healed."
"But if you are not present with the medications then it remains calm for a short time because as soon as it begins to throw forth much sweat and bad humours and changes twice a day, as you have taught us, until it is healed, because in many dispositions when the plagues are simple you do not need other medication."
"But if you fear that the plague may communicate to an injury of the principal members then it is necessary for you to immerse lion's wool in pure olive oil or rose oil and apply it around those parts which are between the angles and leave them thus."
"And if there is pain or putrefaction in its vessels because many times this happens then crystallize it with black treacle and vinegar, especially if the putrefaction has reached the vessel and a penetrating evacuation has been made into its concavity."
"And know that that which is in the thick vessel is of lighter healing than that which is in the subtle vessels."
"And it is of difficult healing because the vessel which is called 'gungu' does not receive healing from any plague that falls into it completely; and this is because of the great multitude of veins that are in it and the magnitude of them that are in those, and because of the subtlety of its body, and because of its proximity to the nature of nerves."
"But if what proceeds from the plague is tissue and you succeed in it recently then reduce it according to your discretion with which you reduce vessels ingeniously."
"But if it has passed into the space and is now green or black then stretch it with a thread over that part which is darkened by it, so that there comes a flow of blood because in the tissue are veins and arteries."
"And then incise that which is other than the thread and leave two extremities of the thread hanging from the part beyond the plague outside it, so that over you may be relieved the attraction of it you must have the stitching of the tissue and emission of the sweat of the plague."
"Remembrance of the plagues when they occur in the vessel."
"When there is a disruption in the vessel and it is small then it is possible that it may be restored in some people because I have seen this man who was struck with a spear wound in his belly which was a plague on the right side of the stomach and the plague was old and had made a fistula, but from it came management and windiness."
Then I pursue the healing of him though it was not yet completed in his recovery, but ceased to explore that region which had been healed and the place is consolidated.
And I saw that the place was already consolidated, so I told him to be careful not to aggravate his condition by eating and drinking too much, or overexerting himself, and to avoid excessive bathing and exercise.
And some experienced people say that when the bowel moves and is narrow, it should be tied in this manner: take figs with large heads, adjust both lips of the movement, and place one of those figs with its mouth open over both lips of the movement. Then press on it until its head separates from it, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
And place another fig near the first one, and continue doing so with figs one after the other according to the amount of movement there is.
Then reduce that and tie it with the movement; and those attached heads will remain inside the bowel until the bowel is healed, without causing any harm to the patient.
And it is possible that the bowel may be tied with a fine thread made from the bowel of an animal attached to it, because it is more like a needle. You should take the end of these bowel threads, and make sure it is well cleaned, and tie the end of it with the thread you have, wrapping it around, and then insert that thread through the needle and sew it onto the bowel, reducing it at the point of disruption.
And this manner of suturing with figs is nothing but a matter of trust and hope.
But if the movement is large and wide, especially if it is in one of the subtle bowels, because then it will only result in subtlety and not in the healing of it entirely.
Of the cure for hemorrhoids and fistulas.
"I know that every ulcer and abscess, when it opens and becomes ancient, turns into an ulcer that does not heal and continually discharges pus without being cut open; universally this is called a fistula, which we call that wound."
"A fistula is indeed a hard, tough, white nodosity with which there is no pain and it has a cavity just like the cavity of a bird's egg; because of this it is called that hollow wound."
"And in some men there is moistness [that causes] an ulcer which discharges pus; but if the moisture is cut away, it heals in a few hours." "Sometimes this moisture is much, little, thick, and subtle."
"I have already explained all those causes, their symptoms and the treatment of them by medicine in the division [of ulcers]."
"And it is necessary that I should also tell you about the cure of fistula, which is done by operation with a knife."
"And know that fistulas occur in all the members of the body: some of them extend to large veins and arteries, or to nerves, or to the bladder, or to some part of the spine, or to some of the joints composed by composition such as those of the hand and foot; and others open near the main member and its like."
"And therefore those fistulas which are of this kind are among the illnesses which are difficult to heal and do not receive cure, and dealing with them is troublesome and ignorant."
"And if among the fistulas there is one whose depth does not reach these places which I have mentioned, and you hope for its cure and trust in it, then take a thread of wool or iron and try to find that with it."
"But if the fistula is winding, then investigate it with a thread of thin lead, for lead with the lightness of its body is eased and curved along the winding."
"And if the fistula has many horrible openings, it will not be possible for you to mark them with a thread."
"Then cauterize the openings separately, because the moisture by which you cauterize it will go towards the other openings and from them."
"And then inquire carefully to see if you can know whether here there are bones or nerves; and also whether the fistula is far or near; or whether it is one with many openings which is located on top of everything with your utmost strength, investigation, compression with the hand over the place, and similar signs and causes accidentally occurring in ulcers."
"And when you have considered all those causes with careful observation, then come to the treatment according to your judgment: and this is that you consider whether it is an apparent fistula near in a healthy place, far from a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or one of the places which I have mentioned."
"Then dry out the fistula according to what has been said above about its narration, and remove that which is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and that which is born from the opening of the flesh or of the skin and similar things, and cure it so that it may be healed."
"But if the fistula is of great depth and is winding, then it is necessary that you insert it into the front as much as possible according to your ability, and also cleanse it from all its corrupted flesh; and then administer bandages wrapped in sharp medicines, and introduce those into the cavity of the fistula which you have grasped with an iron hook."
"And do this for several days in succession so that the sharp medicine may burn away all that is rough and corrupted within the cavity of the fistula."
"Then restore it with dressings which generate healthy flesh until it is healed."
If it does not heal by this method, then cauterize according to what we have advised.
If the cause of the fistula is bone and it needs to be certified, then inquire about it and dry it according to what we have advised, if you do not prohibit any cause of vein or nerve or main member as we have said.
But if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness in it, then remove that within which all the corruption has gathered; and afterwards cure it with this until it heals.
And if it does not heal and throws out again as it did before, then know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; therefore, uncover it once more and carefully examine its cause and clean it with your strongest ointment, and afterwards restore it.
And then if it is healed, well and good. But if not, then know that that corruption is in the deep interior of the body, which has not been reached, and therefore in that case there is nothing to do but leave it alone.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or can be removed, then remove it with fine forceps suitable for that purpose.
But if there are many bones, then carefully perform the extraction of all of them, and do not leave behind any cause with your strength.
But if you encounter any difficulty due to moisture, and there is no fear or error in their incision, then cut those membranes or flesh if it is here, and deliver the bones.
But if you are not prepared to remove the bones at that moment, then pause over the wound until it is closed up again, and leave that within which that closing has taken place around those flesh bones and membranes, and guard the wound so that it does not harden, and keep the incision you have made in your operation open.
Have then, if you fear, a poultice soaked in treacle and honey, or in Egyptian pitch, or in some other green ointment, for when those membranes dry up and the bones are separated by ablation, attraction is relieved.
But if it is a large bone such as the thighbone or shinbone or similar ones, and only the surface of it is corrupted, then cut away that corruption only behind, until that blackness and corruption is removed, and then restore the wound.
But if that which is corrupted in it is a large part, and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close up that and cut off all around where the corruption has penetrated, and then cure it until it is consolidated.
And I recommend that you have with you something belonging to a man in his shinbone, so that you may pause on it as an example and assistant for your operation.
There was once a young man about thirty years old, to whom pain occurred in his shinbone, and the cause of that pain was inside the thigh bone within which matter had penetrated into the shinbone, and it was a matter of an abscess with a large swelling, and there was no external cause for it.
And then much time passed with that one because of the error of physicians while the abscess was growing, and much matter came out from it, and his treatment was finally stopped when the thighbone became fistulated, and he did many things through those orificial parts which were all emitting pus and moisture from the body.
And then for a long time he was treated by many doctors around two years, and there was not much knowledge among them but rather skill, until I was called.
And when I saw the thighbone of that one and the matter that was running out from those orificial parts through a large part of his body, then that man's whole body was already emaciated and his complexion was yellowish.
And then I inserted the tent into one of those orificial parts and reached the bone with it.
"And then examine and probe all the orifices and find those through which fluid comes from every part of the chamber."
"And then you cut and incise on one of those orifices where you discovered a fracture of the bone, and you removed that decayed part which was earthy and rotten and blackened; and already a part of the chamber into which it had entered was corrupted."
"And then you closed what I had discovered and prepared of the bone discovered."
"I feared that it was not merely a fracture but some corruption which had been hidden and closed up, for I had already dressed the wound."
"And therefore he paused the restoration of the plague by using medicine in a consolidative way for too long, but it was not consolidated."
"Furthermore, I explored and exposed the bone a second time over the previous discovery, revealing continuous corruption in the bone."
"And I closed what appeared to be that corruption, and therefore he was perforated fairly for the cure of it and restoration, but it was not restored."
"And then I discovered it again and did not cease to incise the bone little by little particularly, perforating the restoration of it, but it was not restored until he had incised around a palm's width, and that extracted with its marrow, and therefore he restored it with medicines, and it is lightly consolidated and healed."
"It is not necessary to iterate the operation and section of it unless for the position of the friability of it and for the scarcity of its tolerance and fear of its death, because it had syncope in all hours due to superfuility of evacuation."
"And therefore it is healed by whole healing, and nothing is in place of hard flesh; and its position is good in its body and returns the virtue of it; and it has been converted into its positions and does not do anything contrary to it in walking nor harm in any cause."
"But if it is prominent in place of the body already broken, then you should cut it this way: Take linen and strengthen that in the extremity of that prominent bone, and order someone to stretch that out; And pause that linen of wool thicker than the first linen; And therefore tie that over the flesh that is left near the bone, and extend the extremity of it so that you draw the flesh apart from there, and you uncover the flesh upon the place where you want to saw so that the saw does not cut the flesh."
"And pause a piece of wood or board near the bone decently, because when you do this the saw will not cut the corrupted flesh."
"And it is necessary that the sawing be little by little upon the corrupted place because if it is in the concavity of the corrupt bone and does not appear in its appearance to the feeling, then the sawing must be done again."
"And if the bone is corrupted but not prominent, then one part continues with the other, and the corruption is in the middle place or at the end of it. Then uncover the flesh from all parts; And therefore pause wood near by, and saw that first part where there is corruption until the sawing of the other part is continuous."
"And let the sawing be according to the place of the corruption little by little, as we have said."
"And if the corruption is at the joint, then cut that corrupted joint, and saw the bone where it continues from the other part."
"But if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not in its reason but by chance."
"And if the corruption is in the breast of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however you should investigate the corruption in whatever way it appears to you, and remove that, and cleanse that according to every disposition which is possible for you, and with each invention be rectified by you when it does not cause any contradiction to vein or nerve."
"And know that there are different types of saws and sawing tools for cutting these bones. They are made according to the situation of the bones, their preparation, thickness, subtlety, size, smallness, hardness, and rarity; therefore you should prepare suitable instruments for each type of operation."
"And know that this operation implies to you regarding the type of instrument which you need when with you is great study and long knowledge of the methods of this art, and experience in the ways of diseases because then you already knew what is suitable for each tool according to each disease."
"And here at the end of this chapter I give you the number of instruments which you will prepare with them simply with which you will proceed to your prohibition which you will experience on others." Here is an example of how "serra" could be translated into English:
Otra forma de sierra
Another large saw shape
Form of ray The head of this ray is shaped like a six-pointed star, and its tips are shaped like the points of a compass.
And it should be noted that when the joints become corrupted, only then should their heads be rubbed together; otherwise, the opening is too wide.
Form of small razor
Razor blade shape
Form of another saw properly made: it is arched as high as possible and sharp like iron, and its wooden member is properly shaped like a punch. Shape of it
Razor shape with concavity
Another subtle razor shape
Form of another razor with curved tip
Shape of small razor resembling tentacle
Another smaller incisor shape
Shape of another incisor; this one resembles a ray, and its tip is like a saw, and it is used in many places where bones are involved.
The shape of the drill that suits the case of that which is perforated by the bones
And its tip is triangular and has a sharp point.
It is made of Indian steel, similarly it is necessary that all the causes that we have mentioned for razors and incisors and saws.
Regarding the cutting edge and the locking of bones
The edge can be dulled either intrinsically or extrinsically. If you have treated that corruption with medicines and the cure does not help, sometimes the corruption will spread to another member without any cause. Therefore, in that case, you should incise that member where the corruption has occurred so that the illness is cured through death or mischief which is a greater impairment of the member.
The sign of that which happens is that the member becomes black where it was burned by fire or approaches darkness where the corruption has entered within that member and takes all the body. Therefore, you should incise there.
Similarly, if it is caused by corruption due to some venomous causes such as the sting of a marine scorpion or viper or rattlesnake and similar ones.
And if the corruption or the injury is at the tip of the finger, then you should incise the finger and not allow the corruption to spread into the hand.
Similarly, if it spreads to the hand, then you should incise there from the wrist of the firearm and not allow the corruption to spread into the forearm.
And if it reaches up there, then you should incise the arm at the elbow in the joint.
And if the corruption passes beyond that and sometimes surrounds the elbow, then in that case it is the death of the illness. And to administer another cause for cure other than that is a matter of quantity of virtue.
Similarly, when corruption reaches the finger of the foot, then you should incise there to one of the joints
And if it takes hold in the ankle of the foot, then you should amputate all of the foot. But if it can enter into the knee, then you should incise the calf at the joint of the knee
And if corruption has already reached over the knee, then in that case there is no help but release and let the illness take its course to death.
The manner of incising the member or sawing it is that you should stretch one bandage at the point where you wish to incise, and stretch another bandage above that place. And extend one bandage towards the points below, and extend another bandage above them. And separate the flesh which is between two bandages with a wide knife so that all the flesh is exposed. And then it should be incised or sawn.
And care should be taken to place cloth of lime on all sides so that it does not touch the place raw, and that wound may come to the illness with proper lesion and caustic aposteme.
But if bleeding occurs while working, then you should cauterize the place carefully, or place some powder on it to stop the bleeding. And then return to your medication until it is complete.
And then bind the member with a bandage in whatever way seems appropriate, and treat it until it is healed.
And I relate to you what happened to a man in his foot, which is the accident that I and you are discussing, which was that it became black in his foot with burn-like discoloration resembling fire combustion.
And this corruption first occurred in his toe such that it spread throughout the entire foot
And then that man prepared to cut off his foot himself because the cure was not going well due to its severity of pain and burning. And he incised his foot at the joint, and fire healed it.
For a long time that same corruption occurred in the index finger of his hand
And then I came to him, and he told me that that same corruption had spread over with what I had placed on his hand as medicine, especially the cleansing of his body. And the corruption did not spread back but began to go into another finger until it reached the hand
And he asked me to incise his hand, and I did not want to do that hoping for the repercussion of that corruption. And more so because I feared the death of the incision of his hand, since the strength of the illness was already established
And since he left me, I heard that that man had returned to his land and had incised all of his hand himself, and it healed.
And I have not related this narrative except to help with what is known about this illness, and that it may be understood for which it is named and according to which it should be treated.
Concerning the treatment of sinus and the quality of cleansing with medicines
When an aposteme occurs on some fleshy members and the space of the aposteme becomes prolonged so that it collects pus, and then it breaks and perforates, and the pus is discharged from it, and the place remains void as if it were a vessel, and the channel that is above it is like a thin cloth, and no further corruption reaches it, and it does not print on bone or nerve or tendon, it is called a sinus, and it is not named fistula.
But if the space is prolonged so that corruption impresses on some member, then it is called fistula and notzukem.
"And the treatment of this condition is to insert that chain completely in this manner as it is rolled up, especially when it has been subtiliated and made with cloth, ensuring that it does not adhere to the location due to its corruption."
"If however you suspect that the chain has adhered and that this corruption cannot be achieved by any other means, then at that time you should treat him with a clyster."
"And if you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm that goes in has a foul odor, then clysterize him with an Egyptian medicine which is made of oil and sour wine and cinnamon ground together equally, put in a vessel, and cooked over the fire until it reaches the consistency of honey."
"And moreover take of that which is necessary and dissolve it with water and honey; and clysterize him with this mixture into the sinus, and strengthen the orifice of it, and leave the medicine in there for the quantity of two hours."
"And then remove that with a sponge; and do this for so many days until the sinus is cleaned and the pus removed."
"And sometimes it is clysterized with hot ash water when this medicine is not present. And if you take the ashes of figs and put them on the water, then collect that and clysterize him with it until you are satisfied that the sinus has been cleaned."
"And if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine or hot ash water, then clysterize him with warm water and honey mixed together three times, and clysterize him with wine and honey mixed, for it is proper that honey should cleanse and wash, and wine makes the sinus adhere, especially when there is an abundance of astringency and dryness in the wine."
"And when you have done this several times and are satisfied that the sinus has been removed, then clysterize him with something that makes flesh grow in it."
"And take of refined diaphoretic and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine, or clysterize him with some other medicines and ointments that have the properties which have already been written about in the treatise on ointments."
"And if the orifice of the sinus is narrow so that the cannula of the clyster cannot be received there, then gradually dilate it with a little iron, and pause in it with hot water wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it has been dilated."
"And similarly, if the orifice is wide, then gather its lips with a suture and leave in it the quantity in which the clyster enters without addition."
"And if the opening of it from which the arm comes out is elevated above its parts, then dry that place with a poultice below where it is located so that the arm may run easily, for when the arm is obstructed in the concavity of the sinus flesh may be generated there."
"And if it is not possible to dry the sinus inside according to your will, then prepare the member with preparation so that the arm runs through it easily according to what you are accustomed to, and that there may be no cause of retention in the arm."
"But that which is over the opening of the sinus should be removed at all times so that nothing may be stuck in it on the arm." "And so that you may know whether what comes out from the opening of the arm is much or little, whether it is digested or undigested."
"And also consider the place where that sinus is located, if the patient feels pain there or not, and whether it is an abscess."
"Given that your treatment has lasted this long in such a manner, and you see the matter that is thrown onto the wound of the sinus already adhering or becoming properly adhered, then remove it on the third day. And when you remove the cloth, then replace it with another one and renew the ointment."
"However, if the sinus has a long and narrow space that is filled with subtle virus, then do not despair about its adhesion, because its healing will be proper. For there are some people in whom the generation of flesh in the wounds is delayed, and among those are also those in whom it happens otherwise."
"If the sinus has remained dry for many days without discharging any matter, then you should know that the sinus is not adhering. And if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and prolonged as a result, then adjust the drying out of the medications. If the medications are humid in their substance and virtue, they will be dry like fine ointment when they have reached the appropriate amount of addition of pitch."
"And the last remedy with which it is cured is that you take some fine ointment and dissolve it in rose oil. Then pour it over the wound while hot, like ancient wine. And then apply this remedy to it, using it."
"And it seems like that action, when there is no matter present, ointment should be used. And if honey has been cooked until it becomes thickened, use it; or you may take myrrh and aloe wood and nutmeg, grind all of them together and powder them over the honey while it is still on the fire. Then spread that over a cloth and apply it to the sinus; and also spread that with the honey which has been cooked until it becomes thickened, and powder it over the cloth."
"And sometimes it is administered with long and thin roots of celestial lily (which is celery) and barley flour and centaurea. Use these simple remedies or adjust them as needed, grind them up and sift them, then powder them onto the honey which has been thickened, and apply it."
"And if the sinus remains prolonged and is not healed by this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in the bone of it. And you should make an investigation in the bones or in the other hard members or in the ligaments. Then treat it with fistular cure, as was said above."
"On treating panaricium (a whitlow) by rubbing with ointment, making an incision in the nail and adding a finger, and cutting it off."
A pimple is an abscess that appears beneath the nail of the toe or finger, and often appears in other digits as well. When it becomes prolonged and its cure is more difficult, it is called an abscess of an abscess or it is corrupted, and it emits a thick liquid that corrupts the root of the nail. Often the entire nail becomes corrupted, and frequently its corruption extends to the bone, which gives off a foul odor. The tip of the toe or finger becomes reddened, and the color appears dark.
Therefore, when you have that which we have spoken of in the division and your cure does not confirm itself, it is necessary then to cut with iron all the superfluous part that remains of the nail and cauterize the wound immediately afterwards, for cautery is very helpful in this case.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the corners of the nail begin to push into the flesh beneath, causing pain and inflammation there, then you should make a subtle incision at the angle of the nail that is pushing into the flesh, lift it up, and cut away that flesh with ease. Then place over what remains of the flesh medications that burn corrosively until all is removed; and immediately afterwards dress that wound with an ointment so that it may heal.
But if the corruption has already entered the bone, then you should cut into the bone and extract it, for there is no time when the bone can be healed once it becomes corrupted.
And if the corrosion and corruption extend to the finger itself, then you should cut into it at one of its joints according to what is remembered regarding its movement, and dress that wound until it heals.
But if the nail receives a blow or rubbing and there is violent pain in that place, then you should first bleed the affected part. Then dry the nail with a sharp spatula made transverse from above to below, taking care that the cut does not extend into the flesh beneath the nail. Otherwise you will cause severe pain and provoke the formation of excess flesh in that location. And dress that place with something that relieves pain.
"Yet it was said that some men are born with excessive flesh in their bodies, and they have excessively fleshy skin, or bones, or nails."
"And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or their birth takes place in certain knots of these aforementioned bones." "But he who is born in some knots of the finger does not suffer pain, and this one who is born at the joints is much afflicted."
"And those who are born fleshy, their section should be lighter, and you should incise the root of this one with a broad knife."
"Yet the treatment of that which is born at the root of the joint is difficult; therefore beware of cutting it off."
"Yet in that which is born on the knuckle of the finger, you should incise the beginning of the flesh with a round incision into the bone, and then saw it off with one of those convenient saws appropriate for this purpose, and afterwards cure it until it heals."
"Yet the consolidation which occurs in these among their veins visible, or by birth of man, or by the consolidation of plague, or by combustion of fire, or by similarity, then it is necessary to cut away that consolidation until these aforementioned return to their natural form."
"And also interpose between their membranes of the inflamed ones with fine rose oil so that they are not consolidated lightly, and separate them or interpose between them a thin sheet of lead so that it may be consolidated according to what is necessary."
"And similarly if consolidation occurs in some of these at the palm, then you should cut away that consolidation according to what is prepared and appropriate for the figure of the member."
"Of incisions of veins, there are eight."
"Veins are veins, and they are wrapped-around thick veins full of superfluous black bile which come into the muscles of the body's members, and their greatest occurrence is in the calves, and especially in the calves of those who travel, those who work, and those who carry things."
"Therefore you should administer purgation of the body from black bile several times with strong evacuation, and also bleed the patient from the basilic vein."
"Yet the treatment of these with iron is according to two methods: one is that it be incised and that black blood be drawn out, and the other method is that the vein be elevated and that all of it be extracted."
"The section of the leg is according to this method: irrigate the beginning of the calf with cold water until thick blood is resolved, which is the sediment of the calf, and then bind the calf of the sick person at the superior part of the hip joint up to the joint of the anus with a bandage, and then cut the vein in one place, or two, or three with a wide section, and then elevate black blood with the tie-up hand from the joint below the calf upwards downwards until as much blood as you wish is let out, which will suffice for relieving the virtue of the sickness."
"And also tie it up, and command him to abstain from foods that generate black bile."
"And repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when veins are filled and this is noticeable to the sick person."
"Yet the elevation of these is according to this method: you who shaves the calf of the sick person if it has hairs, and then place him in a bath and irrigate the calf with cold water until it reddens and veins are visible; or have him exercised vigorously if a bath is not available, until the member is warmed."
"And then cut the cord at the right of the vein by section in its length or thickness, either near the buttock on the side of the anus, or lower down near the heel."
"And then tie up the cord with forceps and strip off the vein on all sides until it appears to the touch, and it is desirable that its appearance be several times requested declining towards blackness."
"And then after evacuating tie up the cord white like a rope several times."
"And then you place below that one which has been elevated and cast off from the cord, and suspend it with a golden forceps."
"And then cut another section near that one by three fingers, and strip off the cord from above the vein until it appears."
"And then elevate that one and incise it in a second section near the heel, and then extract that one and elevate that one until it is let out through the second section, and then extract that one from the section that is above it."
"And do this until you have extracted that one from the section which is above all sections, or highest of all, until everything has been let out; and then close it up."
"And if you do not succeed in extracting and elevating it, then insert a double-threaded needle with strong thread and bind it up and extract it, or else place below that one which has been elevated and turn your hand round on all sides until it is cast off." "And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to elevate that one much, and harm comes upon the sick person through that injury."
"And when all has been cast out, then place over the wound a bandage moistened in wine and oil raw and oil not raw, and heal it until it is healed."
"And if the vein is contracted having tortuosity to which there is no wrapping at its parts, and it is not straight according to what we have said, then you must cut over that one all along the tortuosity of it and at the places where there is wrapping of it, and suspend it with forceps until you elevate that one entirely."
"And be careful of your section lest thou cut the vein and lest thou wound that one, for it will be difficult for you to elevate that one if thou doest so; and take care with thy prudence in that."
Here is the form of the incident in which a vein is cut:
"It is not made like other ointments and does not have sharp edges so that it does not injure the vein, and it is of thick consistency, lest if it were thin, it would cut the vein due to its thinness; there is superfluous thickness in it, as we have said."
"Of the extraction of a vein from the leg."
"This vein is generated in the caves located on dry lands, like those found in Arab lands and in the dry lands of India, which have little tenderness and where there is no grass or herbs."
"And it is also generated in other places of the body besides caves."
"And its formation is due to putrefaction, which rises from the spine like venom from inside the body serpents and worms and crabs and worms generating between the spine and the flesh."
"And the sign of the onset of its occurrence is that this vein happens to be inflamed in the cave, and around the location it is infected; and from there begins the vein to exit from the location of that infection, which appears like a plant root."
"And then when the extremity of it appears, at that time you should wrap around it a piece of lead weighing about two and a half drachmas, without touching the lead, and let it hang from the cave."
"And whenever any cause arises outside of it that causes it to swell up, wrap that in lead without touching it." "And if it does not become longer, then cut off a piece of it and wrap the remaining part; and do not cut it too close to the root, for if you do so it will retract and go into the flesh and cause inflammation and putrefaction in that location and produce a bad ulcer."
"So that it may be treated gently and extracted little by little until it is completely gone from the body and nothing remains of it inside the body."
"And this vein can be up to two and twenty palms in length, and I have heard of one that was thirty palms."
"And if it is cut during the time of its treatment, then insert a thread into the opening and pierce that with a long thread through the body until all that is inside the matter is evacuated, and administer putrefaction to the location for some days with medications; and cure it with the cure of apostemes."
"And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it comes from many openings, and each opening has its own branch."
"And therefore cure it as we have said in the division above, with what has been said about it."
"Regarding cutting for worms generated under the skin and called bovine disease."
"This disease is called in some lands 'bovine disease' because it often happens to oxen and is a worm that is born between the sinew and the flesh, and goes throughout the body pushing and pulling, and can be felt by its movement from member to member until it breaks the sinew and comes out."
"And its generation is due to putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms, serpents, earthworms, and ascarids are generated in the belly."
"And it is feared for its mischief because when it goes into the body and rises to the head and reaches the eye, then it strongly beats in it and enters and destroys the eye, which often happens."
"And therefore when you want to cure it and extract it, then do not do so unless you know its movement and appearance by feeling, and then bind what is above it and what is below it with linen and strong binding, and dry it on top of it and pull it out."
"And if it is caught in the flesh and not removed, then apply a cautery with fire to the location where it is until it is killed, for its corruption is what is most feared because it corrupts that location as has been said."
"But if it has reached the head near the eye, then bind above the eyebrow with strong binding and dry on top of it and pull it out; and the patient should use purgation of his body with medicines that expel bad putrid humors, and should avoid foods that cause putrefaction."
"Regarding cutting for the disease called nafir."
"This disease is called in our land 'nafir' and it is pain that comes to some members and also changes from member to member."
"And you will see this as I will describe it to you." "I was called to see a woman patient in a village, and I uncovered her arm and saw a small inflammation in the vein of the elbow joint of the arm, and after it had been broken for an hour, I saw that inflammation moving thus as if a worm were pushing towards this place but more lightly than could be seen, just like flowing liquid silver from place to place."
"And then the pain moved away from that place and fixed itself in the muscle, and stayed there for an hour."
And now correct what was done in the other body until it reaches the other arm.
And now I recall that you said to turn yourself throughout your body according to what I saw; and he was greatly amazed at the transformation of him and the speed of member by member. And I had already seen before that in my eyes according to that manner, but I have heard many who affirm that it hurts to be transformed from member to member. But I do not see that in the eyes like in women.
And you think that is because the woman was of old age, where there are many bodies and veins uncovered, and in this appearance it seems to feel that windy transformation.
And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this backwards curve in those who are delightful and have moist bodies with veins intertwined.
And when you want the cure of him, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not apparent to your eye as we have said, then you press on him gently and let go lightly and cautiously over him where that windy oppression has come out, and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see it with your eyes, then cure him with exercise of the body and with that which expels windiness, and treat him with pills made from bitter herbs and with pills made from saffron and similar things.
Of removing arrows.
Arrows are diversified according to their species and according to the places of the body where they strike, because their diversity is that some have large points and some small and concave ones, some are blunt and others solid. Some have three angles, others have tongues or feathers.
And the signs of death from being struck by an arrow are: when it passes through the bone and exits from the cranium above the brain, because it happens suddenly with loss of consciousness, vertigo, roaring in the ears, inflammation and redness of the tongue, spasm and confusion of understanding and vomiting of bile. The breath is suddenly cut off and speech is destroyed, and there is an exit of moisture resembling white powder from the wound, and a yellowish discharge like watery matter comes out of the flesh.
And therefore if these signs appear to you, then abstain from treating and extracting the arrow unless it is outside of the body.
But the signs of an arrow when it strikes the heart are: it is near the left nipple, and it seems to be stuck in hard flesh and not soft. The movement of the arrow is like the beating of the pulse, and there flows black blood from the wound, there is coldness of the extremities, chills, and syncope; therefore know that death will come without delay.
And the signs when an arrow has pierced the lung are: there is emission of frothy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the neck become obstructed, the complexion changes to pale, and there is great expiration or sighing for breath, and a desire for cold air.
And if the arrow strikes the diaphragm which is in the chest, then the pain will be near the little ribs, and there will be great swelling of the lung with violent pain and sighing, and all the members of the muscles will become paralyzed.
And if the arrow strikes the stomach, then there will be immediate vomiting of some undigested food from the wound.
And if the arrow strikes the abdomen and is stuck there, then there will be some opening of the wound, or the skin, or a ruptured intestine, and there is no hope for cure by extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow strikes the bladder and urine is expelled from outside, and there is some process around the parts outside, then there will be great pain above the wound, therefore know that it is mortal.
But the other members such as the face, neck, throat, shoulders, arms, and shoulder blades, spine, collarbone, thigh, leg, and their like are saved according to the most favorable conditions when the arrow does not strike a vein or artery and is not a poisoned arrow.
And I advise you to consider this concerning these arrows, so that you may know how to proceed with their treatment.
For example: there was a man who received an arrow in the lacrimal bone of his eye near the root of his nose, and I extracted it from another part, leaving behind only the graze of the ear, and he healed without any harm to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew which had struck him in the graze of his eyebrow, leaving behind only the eyelid. The arrow was already hidden and could not be seen, except for a small extremity with which it adhered to its shaft. It was a large, pointed arrow of the Turks, with a lion-headed ferrule, which had no feathers.
And the Jew healed completely without any harm to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man which had fallen into his throat. It was an Arabic arrow with feathers, and it was already submerged in his throat. Then I incised between two guide fingers and carefully extracted it, and the Christian man healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who had received it in his belly and thought that he would die from it. Therefore, since thirty days had passed without any change in his condition or symptoms, I incised over the arrow and removed it, and he healed without suffering any serious harm.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow had struck the back and the wound had healed over it. After about seventy years, the arrow came out at the root of his thigh.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had struck her belly and the wound had healed over inside her without any change in her condition or symptoms. The woman did not suffer any harm to any of her natural operations.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow struck his face and the wound healed over and the arrowhead broke off without causing much pain. Many similar cases have been seen to this effect.
And I extracted the arrow from the man of the princes of the king which had struck in the middle of his nose and had deviated slightly to the right. The entire arrow was hidden.
And I was called for the treatment of him about three days after he was struck by the arrow.
And then I opened the wound of the arrow quite narrow. And then I inquired about it with a delicate touch and did not feel it; but he felt a puncture on the right ear, and therefore I believed that this puncture was due to the extremity of the arrow.
"I have plastered the area with a plaster that has attractive and digestive virtue, ensuring that the area is covered so that I can see the arrowhead, for it is dry."
"There was no accidental occurrence in the area where the arrow had reached; and I continued applying the plaster for many days without any accident occurring; and the wound has since healed, and the patient recovered from his injury within several days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and recognized it."
"Then I applied acute corrosive medicine on the wound for several days until it opened; and with the forceps I grasped that [the arrowhead], and extracted the thin extremity of the arrow, which adhered to the shaft."
"And then I applied that acute medicine on the opening of the wound until it appeared visible to me; and I spent some time with this for the period of four months."
"And then when the wound was enlarged and it was possible for me to insert the forceps into it, I grasped that [the arrowhead], but I did not succeed in extracting it immediately. Then, however, I did not cease subtly manipulating and devising ways with ingenuity until one day I began to remove it by using methods of extraction described below, according to what came at the end of this chapter, so that I was able to extract it; and then I restored that wound."
"And some physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, but I did restore it and the wound became consolidated, and the illness was completely healed, without any remainder or cause for complaint."
"And I recount to you the method of extracting certain arrows because I have not given any rule or significance regarding that which has not been mentioned in this narrative, for the parts of this art and the definitions thereof are not understood with a mere narration nor is the book itself comprehended."
"And the wise artist compares little about matter; and that which is present he considers more than that which is absent; and he discovers new operations and new instruments whenever foreign causes of the art occur."
"And therefore I say that arrows are not forgotten in the members into which they have been fixed, but rather according to two methods: either by attraction of the place where it enters, or by the opposite method of withdrawal."
"And that which is cast in by the entrance point, or is an arrow proceeding from a fleshy location, is drawn out and extracted."
"And if it does not obey extraction at the time when cast, then you should leave it for a few days until the flesh that is around it becomes softened, and so that its attraction and exit may be alleviated."
"Similarly, if it is fixed in bone and does not obey extraction, then you should leave it for a few days and repeat the traction and motion each day, and then it will be extracted."
"And if it does not obey extraction even after several days, then you must perforate around the arrow in that bone with a subtle awl so that the location may be widened by the arrow, and then extract it."
"But if the arrow is deeply buried in the location of the body and concealed from sensation, then you must search for it with a probe, and if you feel it, then extract it with some instruments which are suitable for its attraction."
"And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the probe, and there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein there, then cut through the flesh until it is widened so that it may be possible to extract the arrow."
"And if it is held by the ears with which it may be retained, then separate the flesh in which it is fixed on all sides with whatever effort you can make; and endeavor to achieve this without fracturing the ears or twisting them, so that you may succeed."
"And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any location, then use twisting with your hand and forceps on all sides so that it may obey; and do this with such subtlety that the arrow is not broken, and so that its extraction may be easily accomplished."
"And if you cannot accomplish this at that time, then leave it for a few days until the surrounding parts have softened, and then repeat it since it will be alleviated." "But if you find that there is opposition to the flow of blood, then administer what we have said about cure in its chapter."
"And guard against injuring any vein or nerve or tendon, and exert all possible effort to avoid the arrow; and do this with gentleness, calmness, slowness, and steadfastness as I have recommended."
"And therefore when you extract the arrow, do so in such a way that the illness is according to the figure according to which the case of the arrow was situated in it, for this is more beneficial." "But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures."
"But arrows which are extracted against the other side of another part, or those from which some part has already proceeded into other parts outside it, or those which have their point or end concealed due to sensation of the flesh above them and are prominent in that area; then cut through that area. Let the section be according to the quantity which the forceps grasp; and then extract it, for it will be easy to extract."
"But if it is retained in the bone, then twist it backwards according to its opposition until the arrow presses against the bone and widens it on both sides, and then extract it."
"And otherwise, leave it alone for a few days, and then repeat it when it is necessary to do so."
"If the arrow's shaft is in that [place], then you push it there with force."
"But if the shaft has fallen and you wish to administer momentum, then insert it there, if it's rigid, use a smooth instrument concave so that between the concavity of it and the end of the arrow it pushes gently against it."
"But if the arrow is concave, then you push it with an instrument inserted in that, because the arrow is opened by it."
"And if the arrowhead is poisoned, then you must cut away all the flesh around where it is inserted, if that is possible for you, and immediately treat it with whatever remedy you deem appropriate."
"And if the arrow strikes bone, or enters the abdomen, bladder, side, and is close to touching it with your hand, and if you can safely cut around that area, then cut around it and guard against cutting any veins or nerves, and extract it, and apply a bandage if necessary, and treat it until it heals."
"Forms of forceps with which arrows are extracted:"
"[They] have the ends like the beak of a bird, made sharp like a saw when they grasp the arrow so that it does not slip away."
"And there are many types of them: large, small and medium-sized ones according to the amount of the size of the arrow and its thickness, and also according to the width of the wound and the constriction of it."
"like a rod, in order to facilitate the entrance of the concave arrowhead and push it with that."
"On flebotomy of veins:"
"The veins that are usually flebotomized are thirty-two in number, of which sixteen are in the head. These include two pulsating veins near the ears called 'alizain'; two herbs on the temples; two veins on either side of the nasal cartilage called 'aspicients'; one vein in the middle of the forehead; one vein at the tip of the nose; two branches of the neck; two veins above the upper lip; two veins below the lower lip, which are called 'aleglic', and two veins on either side of the tongue." "In the arms there are five veins that are flebotomized. Of these, one is cephalic and is located on the outer side of the arm; it is called 'the vein of the head' by the people. Another is median and is composed of a branch from the basilica and another from the cephalic vein; this is called 'the vein of all the body' by the people. The basilica is a vein that lies on the inner side of the arm, called 'citillar' by the vulgar people. There are also the funis veins located above the elbow, in which flebotomy is usually performed and where it appears most visibly on the forearm. Lastly, there is the salvatella vein located between the little finger and the next one."
"And in the foot and ankle there are three veins: one on the outer side of the curvature of the little finger of the outer side of the foot, another is the saphenous vein located on the inner side of the ankle on the inner side of the foot, and the third is the sciatic vein located on the outer side of the ankle on the outer side of the foot. There are also other veins in the ankle that resemble these."
"The benefit of flebotomizing the veins near the ears is for treating ancient catarrhs, migraines, and headaches, as well as ulcers on the head that are of long standing."
"And the method of performing flebotomy on these veins is as follows: first, shave the head of the patient and rub it with oil on the occiput where both veins are located. Then, place a wide cloth on the head of the patient and apply firm friction. Next, wrap a bandage around the patient's neck so that both veins appear near the ears in two depressions on the head. Finally, grasp those veins with your thumb and if you feel their pulse with your thumb, then proceed to perform the flebotomy."
"Then take the cutting lancet and insert it into the vein on the arm until blood flows to the bone." "And then raise your hand with the vein and arm upwards and make an oblique incision into the vein, cutting it obliquely." "And let the length of the incision be about two fingers or thereabouts. Then allow as much blood to flow out as desired."
"And then apply powder and a bandage, leaving it in place until healed."
"And it has been preceded at the beginning of this book, the incision of those affected by cauterization."
"The two veins leading to the temples, which is beneficial for phlebotomy, are useful for ancient headaches and persistent migraines, and for frequent eye disorders. It also has sharp, abundant effusions in the hips."
"And the quality of performing phlebotomy on them is as follows, which I recommend to you: compress the patient's arm with a bandage until both veins appear clearly at the surface and are demonstrated by touching them. Then proceed."
"Then raise the arm over the vein at its intersection with your index finger, insert the phlebotomy lancet into it, and elevate the vein above. Incise it as you have done on other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need."
"And then release the compression from the patient, keep your finger on the vein for an hour. Then apply cotton and powder, and strengthen that area with firm pressure. Leave it alone until it is healed."
"And already in the beginning of this book, I have described their remembrance and incision, and attraction."
"And therefore phlebotomy of the frontal vein is appropriate for treating ancient headaches, migraines, and severe or foul ulcers on the face."
"And the quality of phlebotomy on it is as follows, which I recommend to you: have the patient compress their forehead with a bandage until the vein appears. Then take the instrument called 'fossor', whose shape is as follows:"
"Press the pointed tip of the 'fossor', which is at its head, against that vein and pierce it with a quick movement or another cause. Let the blood flow according to how much you want. Then release the puncture from the patient and compress it until it is healed."
"And sometimes it is useful to perform phlebotomy in a lateral direction, but it is not necessary that the phlebotomy be of acute termination like other phlebotomies. Rather, it should be performed transversely because the bone is nearby and would easily break if the phlebotomy were too fine."
"But the advantage of these two veins that are on the lacrimals of both eyes for scabies of the eyelids due to heat and sweat in them, and for diseases of the face."
"And the quality of phlebotomy is this: have the patient compress their eyelid with a bandage, then perform phlebotomy on it while you are standing over their head."
"And the phlebotomy should be performed transversely and slightly diagonally with a fine phlebotomy needle because there is little flesh in that location. If the phlebotomy is too fine, it will easily break."
"And then make the blood flow as much as you need, and pause over those wounds. Then compress them for one night, and finally release them."
"But phlebotomy of the nasal vein is beneficial for acute fever and sudden sneezing, and for diseases of the face and migraines that occur there, especially when they are chronic."
"And the quality of phlebotomy on it is this: have the patient hold their head and then take your left hand and place it over their nose. Then take a fine, long phlebotomy needle and insert it into the middle of the head of the nose in a straight line because the vein does not appear by touch here, and blood will begin to flow soon."
"It is necessary that you slowly withdraw your hand with the phlebotomy needle and make the blood flow according to your needs. Then compress it for one night because it will heal easily."
"But the benefit of phlebotomy on both wrists is for constriction of the armpit and the beginning of leprosy, as well as for many diseases, itching, and corrupting ulcers like herpes."
"And the quality of phlebotomy on them is this: have each patient hold their arm with a cloth. Then stand over the head of the patient and have the patient sit on a seat."
"And then perform phlebotomy on the vein along the arm with a wide, fine needle little by little. Then remove blood according to a moderate quantity or as much as is needed. And do the same for the other vein."
"And then release the cloth and compress both veins with moderate pressure so that the patient is not fainted. Then leave them for the night because the wound will have healed by morning."
"And the benefit of phlebotomy on the veins in the armpits is for small apostemes and pustules of the mouth and corruption of the gums and ulcers and fissures, as well as ulcers that are in the nose and around it."
"And the quality of phlebotomy on them is this: have the patient sit in front of you and compress their head with a bandage. Then turn their lips up and look for two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left. The demonstration of each is by its darkness, and this is more so because there are small black veins around them. Then incise each with an incident incision."
"But if you have any doubt and do not know which is one of them, then listen to the sound of their pulsation or observe the visible pus of those."
"And perform the same on both veins that are in the upper lips."
"It is appropriate to perform flebotomy of the cephalic vein at the forearm, in cases of uvula inflammation, and mouth infections."
"And the quality of flebotomy is such that it should be done between the thumb and index finger, towards the sun, raising the tongue and observing both sides of the vein, noting the change in color to black."
"And then flebotomize each one; be careful not to exceed your hand in flebotomizing those, for there are arteries beneath them."
"And the veins that are flebotomized in the elbow are those in which blood is customarily drawn from all men. The flebotomy of these is performed in two ways: either by putting a mirtilated or olive-shaped lancet to it with subtle inclination; or by cutting with a cuticular flebotomy lancet, called 'alnessil', and this is the shape of it:"
"It should have edges like this: so that it may open the concave veins full of blood appearing thickly, and those which contain dark, turbid blood."
"And this flebotomy has less width and more subtle extremity; it is suitable for flebotomizing the subtle veins that contain clear, citrine-colored blood."
"But the benefit of flebotomizing the basilica vein, which is one of three veins, is that it draws out blood from illnesses that are located in the head and neck, and that which affects the feet and belly."
"And it is convenient for the flebotomist, when flebotomizing this one, that he guard this carefully and be above all fearful of it, because beneath it there is an artery. If he errs in the puncturing of the flebotomy lancet, he will incise that artery and cause a flux of blood to flow forth, therefore he should not flebotomize this with a puncturing flebotomy lancet, but rather cut with alnessil."
"And if the basilica is not apparent by manifest appearance, then you should leave it and move to another, seeking some of its branches; or you should flebotomize in place of that the end of the arm where it is manifest, and cut that with an alnessil flebotomy lancet as we have said."
"But if you wish to flebotomize the elbow, then first at the thickness of the arm where you feel the pulse, press gently upon it with your thumb; and raise the arm and cut the vein with a concave section using an alnessil flebotomy lancet as we have said; and guard against percussing near some space of the location of the artery."
"And when you bind with a bandage, if there is swelling in the place that you have pressed with your thumb, then this swelling is swelling of the artery; therefore leave it."
"And if the blood flows in the flebotomy like a child's urine and the blood is thin red, then know that it is the blood of the artery; and therefore tighten your finger above that for some space; and then remove your finger, and if the blood is cut off, because many times it is cut off, then bind the arm and leave it."
"And guard against the illness of the wound, and be above all fearful of it, and do not move that for some days until it is healed."
"But if the blood is not cut off and yet it continues to flow, then this medicine is not present; therefore you have incised the artery if it appears to you. Because the extremity of it is contracted and the blood is cut off, or take some cotton wool, compress that, and apply it over the location of the vein with pressure using a bandage and powder for another day."
"And therefore if the blood is cut off, good. But if not, then cure it with that of which we have spoken at the recollection of the location of the powders cutting off flux of blood."
"And the stopping of the flow of blood from it is difficult in many dispositions because of the smallness of the wound and the possibility of tying the arm."
"But the flebotomy of the black vein is beneficial because it draws out blood from the upper part of the head and from below the body. Because it is composed of branches of the basilica and branches of the cephalica, as we have said."
"And it is necessary for the flebotomist to be above all fearful in the flebotomy of that one because below it there is a nerve. And therefore if he errs in the puncturing of the flebotomy lancet and strikes the nerve, then numbness will occur, and its healing is difficult and sometimes it cannot be completely healed. This nerve can often be felt; but if it is hidden to some people and is subtle and does not appear, then you should pause the flebotomy with the lancet with which you are flebotomizing with a concave section, and avoid the nerve with your strength."
"And if the vein is between two nerves, then cut the vein along its length."
"The benefit of phlebotomy on the temporal vein is that it draws blood from the head and alleviates illnesses of the eyes."
"And this is where you should puncture if you want to perform phlebotomy with the olive style or the myrtle style; for it is the safest vein, since neither artery nor nerve is left."
"But sometimes an abscess forms in some people if they are not phlebotomized during the first percussion; but do not touch that abscess."
"The first thing you should know is that phlebotomy is administered only for the preservation of health and in hopes of preventing illnesses, and with caution against their occurrence. And that phlebotomy should be performed on one of the veins that are located on the elbow, namely: the cephalic, the basilic, and the median cubital vein; and that it should be performed at the beginning of spring, after fasting in spring and autumn, and near mealtime in winter, when signs ofpletion appear."
"And phlebotomy should be performed on the third day or even earlier, provided that at least three hours have passed since the previous meal."
"But phlebotomy should be administered whenever it provokes convenience and necessity for that person, whether at night or during the day, at any hour and at all times."
"And children should not be phlebotomized until they have reached the age of fourteen; pregnant women should not be phlebotomized until the fourth month has passed from conception to the seventh month; and the elderly, once they have surpassed seventy years of age, should not be phlebotomized."
"And before anyone wishes to be phlebotomized, they must cleanse their intestines with a lion's clister if there is much retained feces in them, so that the veins do not draw the superfluities from the purification of the intestines during phlebotomy, which would harm the principal members."
"And patients with sacred illness or drunkenness should not be phlebotomized until they have recovered from their condition; nor those who are suffering from fever or intoxication. Phlebotomy should be avoided near colic pain and vomiting, and near abdominal complaints, and near multiplication of coitus and work and exercise during fasting or vigils, and due to any cause that dissolves the virtues, i.e., bodily or animal."
"And before phlebotomy, consider the refinement of humors, and if the blood is thick, use foods and drinks to thin it out, and medications if possible."
"And before phlebotomy, take a bath if there is no prohibition due to any cause, or stimulate with some exercise so that the blood may be subtilized."
"And pause phlebotomy at the foot of the day, especially around the hour of terce, as we have said."
"And perform phlebotomy only when the foot of that day is guarded from all harmful animal accidents, such as anxiety, anger, fear, and from all harmful bodily accidents, such as excessive work, fatigue, coitus, etc."
"And at his seat, let there be present the causes in use which are customary for men with aromatics and perfumes, balms, etc., according to their quantity of possibility."
"And let the phlebotomist sit on a stool that is higher than the stool of the person who is to be phlebotomized."
"And first, extract his arm and rub it with the phlebotomist's hand two or three times to warm it up; then tie the limb with a bandage twice."
"And let the tying be moderate, for if it is too tight or there is an excess of superfluity in the tying, it will impede the flow of blood; but if it is too loose, it will cause weakness of the blood."
"And after tying, let him who is to be phlebotomized rub his hands together until the veins are swollen and can be felt."
"And the phlebotomist should anoint his lancet with a little ancient olive oil specifically; and then place his left index finger on that vein where he wishes to perform phlebotomy, so that the vein may swell slightly and the percussion be steady, for one of the veins which is about to be opened will throb like a string, and that one which is full of windiness will contract under the lancet, revealing itself to the phlebotomist; and he should not open the vein until it has been felt by the finger, and if he opens it, it must be narrow."
"And therefore, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be firm and attentive to all these causes."
"And then withdraw the lancet, but if the vein fills up at once, that is good. But if not, repeat this process in another part nearby, or even above it, with haste, provided there is no apostema."
"But if the location is inflamed or the condition worsens, then leave it for a day or two, do not tighten the bandage, lest it draw forth an ulcerated inflammation, nor take a bath."
"And repeat phlebotomy if necessary."
"If the opening is small and blood flows out subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will come out, then repeat the lancet in that same place according to rectitude and adjust the opening slightly, and do this with haste before the location becomes inflamed, for many people's locations become inflamed due to a small opening."
"But if the location is already inflamed, then do not repeat it there, for it will serve no purpose. Rather, pause on some part of the oil groove to ease the flow of blood." "And oil is better in this location than any other ointment."
"And similarly, administer an oil groove in every phlebotomy where veins are opened with the prohibition of blood flow, and they do this by applying treacle, alfalfa, and sage when pausing on one of those locations, for blood is subtilized and made to revolve when it is thick."
"If a large inflammation has arisen in the location of phlebotomy, which happens many times, especially to those who have not been bled before or whose vein opening was small, then apply a sponge soaked in water and salt, lightly scorched, over that place for an hour, for it will be dissolved."
"And this should be done immediately after the blood has flowed from that vein or another one."
"If a blackness or greenness remains in the location for several days, do not worry about it. But if you wish, apply some solution of aloe and myrrh, or some juice of mint, chamomile, or the like."
"And many times apostemes and elevations happen due to phlebotomy at the basilica."
"Then place your hand over that and if you still feel softness under your pressure, then that elevation is harmful and bad. And therefore be sure to apply some of what we have said there to prevent the flow of arterial blood."
"Prepare a plaster with something that has astringent properties to harden the area, then treat it with another cure until it is healed."
"It is necessary to draw blood from each person according to their quantity of vital force and the prevailing color above their blood."
"But if the blood is black, then let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly if you find it thick, then let it flow until it becomes subtiliated; and similarly if it is sharp, until its sharpness has been diminished."
"And for someone who is full and robust and needs bloodletting at one time, the venipuncture should be widened and the incision made wide."
"And for someone who is cold, do the opposite of what was done for the previous person, and let them bleed in several sessions, with a narrow incision."
"It is better to make a transverse section of the vein when performing venipuncture than to prick it."
"And this method of bloodletting preserves against the flow of blood and injury to nerves, and it is safer and more laudable than bloodletting by width and length."
"And when syncope is about to occur during bloodletting, you should care for the patient beforehand with a little powder of millet seeds or simple sage infused in wine; and let out their blood in three or four sessions."
"And if it is coldness of temperament, then take before bloodletting a powder to infuse in a syrup of myrrh or in an aromatic syrup sweetened with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like, or in a highly fragrant aromatic syrup."
"And if syncope occurs during bloodletting and it is due to the letting out of much blood, then you should give them to drink water of meat and highly fragrant syrup; and apply aromatics with aloe, and let them lie quietly on their side."
"And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the division of syncope by evacuation."
"And whoever wants to expand his veins and dissolve his blood according to the second method should let out blood from him with venipuncture for much evacuation, and the power of it is cold, which evacuates blood little by little, so it depends on the amount of power in consecutive days."
"But whoever wants to expand his veins and draw out his blood a second time, and his body is strong, then do so about seven or nine hours after the first venipuncture."
"But whoever wants to draw out blood from his body contrary to the direction that it declines, should have it expanded on the second or third day."
"But in that body in which there is little blood already let out and it is acrid and causes fever to occur, you should draw out blood from him in one session and draw out a large quantity of it, and amplify the aperture until syncope occurs; for you will have preserved all the conditions of bloodletting; and place your hand on his pulse before the body's blood, so that death does not happen instead of syncope, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent."
"And when you want to release the veins and evacuate blood a second time, since the opening of the vein is closed and it is difficult to draw out blood, do not press with violence and curvature, but gently extend it; for this is very bad."
"Let him lie down again until he is phlebotomized a second time; or remove it with the acuteness of the bloodletting that has coagulated in the opening of the vein; or place upon it tyriaca alfarach, or sage, and press it gently until the blood flows out."
"And if the vein is inflamed, then leave that one alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided."
"And if necessity provokes you to evacuate blood a second time, and there is no excuse for it, then draw blood from him on that spot or in the other arm in another vein."
"And the vein called 'funis of the arm' is bloodletted in place of the furca or the basilica when they are not available or concealed, for it is composed of those."
"And the quality of bloodletting from it is that the patient should immerse his hand in cold water until the fleshy part reddens and the vein appears manifestly."
"And it should be stretched out with a linen bandage with moderate tension; and bloodletting should be done according to the transverse line, not latitudinally nor according to the longitude."
"And let the aperture be wide and your bloodletting with which you bloodlet him be on the junction of his hand a little bit."
"And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then immerse your hand in cold water again and let the blood run into the water until your necessity is satisfied."
"But if you are in the days of summer, then you are exempt from immersing your hand in cold water; and let the body's blood be placed in cold water during wintertime."
"And bloodletting from this vein is safer than from all other veins, for it has neither a pulsating vein nor nerves."
"And bloodletting from the little bag of the right hand is beneficial for diseases of the liver."
"And the quality of bloodletting from it is that you should stretch out the hand with linen or your hand, since you have placed it in cold water, until the vein is inflated and clearly demonstrated to view; and draw blood transversely from it; and if you should happen to miss it entirely, do not concern yourself about it."
"And take care that you do not extend your hand too much during bloodletting, for there are the nerves of these veins denuded of flesh."
"And appropriately immerse the hand in cold water and let the blood run into it, for if you do not immerse it in cold water, the blood will coagulate in the opening of the vein and its flow is prohibited."
"And when blood has been extracted according to the quantity required, then place oil and salt on the vein so that it does not close suddenly; and do likewise in every straight vein."
"But the benefit of bloodletting from that of the left hand is that it is beneficial for diseases of the spleen."
"And do likewise in bloodletting from it as you have done with the other."
"And the benefit of bloodletting from the vein called sephena is for diseases that are in the parting of the limbs, such as diseases of the womb, and retention of menses, and for diseases of the joints and ulcers of skin and old scars, and their like diseases."
"And the quality of bloodletting from it is that the patient should immerse his foot in cold water and make friction upon it until the veins appear clearly; and tie a bandage on the junction of the foot; and the place where the vein appears is behind the said foot, and it branches out into many ramifications on the front of the foot."
"And therefore draw blood from the most abundant branch or that which is nearest to the heel behind the aggregation of it; for it is better and safer."
"And if you draw blood from it on the face of the foot, then take care of the nerves that are close to it on the face of the foot, and make your bloodletting with that with which you would cut, namely transversely."
"And if you wish, perform a phlebotomy."
"But if the bleeding is forbidden; then immerse the patient's foot in cold water and let the blood flow into that container until it has stopped."
"And if the phlebotomist errs on the first attempt, then retry with the phlebotomy later in that area because it will have healed by now. And do not fear the patient's maliciousness but be wary of the nerves as we have said."
"And similarly act regarding the vein of the other foot accordingly."
"And concerning the sciatic vein, the location is roughly at the level of the heel on the posterior aspect of the leg."
"The benefit of phlebotomy for him is to ease his hip pain when it is due to hot blood."
"The quality of the phlebotomy for him is that the patient enters into a bath, and he quickly and strongly ties his left hip joint with a long thin bandage so that only that appears."
"And then when it appears, immediately phlebotomize that vein according to your ability and according to the transverse vein, and this is better. Or else cut that with an incision or dissect it with a section because the location of it has healed."
"And it is in many men not visible; and if you find that vein, but it does not appear at all to the touch, then phlebotomize some branch of it, and that is which appears on the back of the hand towards the said auricular and the annular bones."
"And beware of the nerves, and let flow as much blood as you wish."
"And then untie the ligation and pause over the site of phlebotomy until it stops flowing, because it heals quickly."
"Regarding venesection and its qualities for use."
"Wounds are of horn, or of iron, or of vein."
"And ventosing is done in two ways: one is by scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is ventosing without scarification."
"And this ventosing which is done without scarification is performed in two ways: with fire or without fire."
"And the locations on the body where ventosas are administered with scarification and extraction of blood are fourteen in number, of which the first one is placed near the bladder, which is the last section of the head; and the middle location of it, divided into two parts, is at the nape of the neck; and ventosas of the chin beneath the jawbone below the mouth; and ventosas of both shoulders; and ventosas of the hip bones, which are above the buttocks; and ventosas of both knees, which are on both thighs; and ventosas of both ankles; and ventosas of both elbows."
"And ventosing does not extract blood from the large veins, but only from the small ones scattered throughout the flesh, and for this reason it does not draw out the humor by that means, as is done by phlebotomy. And it is not necessary to perform ventosing with fire or without fire in any illness caused bypletion until the whole body has been evacuated."
"But if there is a need to provoke ventosing for an illness or continuous fever, we administer it at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it, and at any time."
"And therefore, whenever there is such a cause in any of those cases, and especially if it is on the third or midday of the month, we command that ventosing be performed after two or three hours have passed since that time."
"And the benefit of ventosing on the nape is that when it relieves heaviness in the head and causes sinking into the eyes. But this should be accompanied by evacuation of the whole body."
"And this ventosing is in the place of phlebotomy on the cephalic vein."
"And it is not lawful to use it for one who has full flesh, or in whom there is catarrh, because it causes great harm."
"And therefore, one should not use it on the elderly, and on those whose heads have hot illnesses."
"But one who is continuous about it may cause forgetfulness. And therefore, you should command the ventosing to pause his hand a little at the beginning of the operation, fearing the generation of forgetfulness."
"But ventosing of alkehel (madder) is in the place of phlebotomy on the vein nigra and basilica: And therefore it causes asthma, and constriction of the lung, and splitting of the windpipe of the lung, and coughing, andpletion."
"And therefore, madder ventosing should be a little paced out, because if it is too sudden it causes weakness in the body and stomach."
"And the ventosing of alhagadhan (henbane) causes accidental pains in the head and inflammation of the eyes, migraine, suffocation, and pains in the roots of teeth. And it is in the place of phlebotomy on the basilica vein."
"And you should command the ventoser not to press his hand with the scarification so that he does not wound the artery and cause bleeding."
"And ventosing of the chin causes coldness in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and appearance of diseases that are in the mouth. And it is in the place of phlebotomy on those veins that are on the two lips."
"But ventosing that is performed on the two spatulas causes headache, which occurs due topletion of heat."
"And the ventosing of both sides of the temples causes benefit from phlebotomy on three veins: namely the basilica, nigra and cephalica. Because it attracts blood from all those veins that are in the flesh, and those small veins that are between the other thicker veins so that the attraction reaches the three veins."
"And command the ventoser not to proceed with scarification because the place is devoid of flesh, and too near are nerves and arteries."
"And it is a ventosing performed on the buttocks which causes hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers nearby."
"And you should command the ventoser to perform a large ventosing with an earthen pot. Because that place requires strong suction; and few subtle attracted ventosings are performed, and it should be scarified with scarification."
"But ventosings on the fleshy camels [thighs] cause strong diminution by clear diminution. Because they attract blood from all over the body and cause old pains in the kidneys and belly, and stimulate menstruation, and cause botch and ademoma [hemorrhoids]. And they are in the place of phlebotomy on two saphenas, alarcochan, and two cavillas."
"However, they debilitate the whole body and cause fainting in many people."
"And from the benefits of alarcochan ventosing, the benefit is close to the benefit of two camber [thigh] ventosings."
"And the quality of the position of ventosings is that you pause the ventosing at the beginning, wait and suck moderately, and do not prolong the position of the ventosings, but rather pause them lightly and remain them carefully. And let the humors come to the place by gentle arrival." "And do not cease iterating this and continuing until you see the place already reddened, swollen, and the appearance of blood's hue."
"And then you should scarify and iterate suction little by little, and carefully consider the disposition of the body."
"Because that person who has tender flesh and few pores should be scarified once only, not more than that. Because the place may become ulcerated."
"And command the ventoser to enlarge the scarification a little and press gently, and temper the suction with ease."
"And if the blood is thickened then you should scarify twice. Because in the first time the way of subtilization of blood and its wateriness is opened." "But in the second one, the extraction of thick blood is obtained through scrutinization."
"And if the blood is very fetid then there should be no scarification in the third time so that it can succeed [the ventosing]."
"Finally, when we want to extract blood little by little or a little, one scarification is enough for us."
"And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we should scarify with many scarifications. And if we know that the blood is thick then we should scarify by pressing scarification."
"And the term of scarification means only the depth of the skin."
If the chain is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, make sure the places for cups are anointed leniently, opened, loosened; if it is summer time, thus with oil of aloe or violet oil, or oil of crushed walnuts, or oil of chamomile flowers; but if it is winter time, then use narcissus oil, or lily oil, or camomile oil, or blood oil, and those like these.
If the swelling is large and fiery, then use oil of amaranth, or balm oil, or aloe oil, or pennyroyal oil, and those like these.
But if the cupping glass has wide pores of tender flesh, then it is necessary to prohibit oil, and for this one the places of cups near the cupping should be washed with warm or hot water of solatrum, or chamomile water, or borages water, and similar things.
And for him whose blood is of much humidity, wash his cups with sour wine or myrtle and sumac water, and similar things.
And for him whose swellings are large, wash his cups with old wine or water of sanicle, which is marjoram, or decoction of fennel, or chamomile, and those like these.
And it is necessary that cupping should be guarded beforehand from bathing. It is also necessary that it should be administered near immersion in the bath for one or two hours, and it is necessary that he should sleep near cupping.
"What is this: That it is necessary to guard the person being cupped before cupping."
At the beginning you should consider: if the one doing the cupping or bleeding is choleric and vents upon hot blood and inflammation, then he should take cooling causes, such as sour cherries, endive with vinegar and lettuce, and secanolbin, and julep, and those like these.
And pause their foods thus as polenta, and fowl meats roasted, and foods seasoned with sour things, and those like these.
And for him whose complexion is cold, it is necessary that he should drink hippocrates syrup of almonds or hippocrates syrup of fennel seeds and sumac, and fragrant wine better between young and old; and that he be commanded to use scarcity of drinking and eating, and pause foods of polenta and canabis and fish and small birds and pigeons.
And it is necessary that on the day of cupping and bleeding he should drink more than eat food.
And it is necessary that in some hours certain people should be given tyriaca altharac or musk medicaments, such as musk or muscated wine before cupping or bleeding or near them, so that the principal members may be comforted and the blood subtilized; but they should not take that scalding.
Mark those cupping glasses that are without scarification as being on the liver, and on the spleen and podagra, and on the navel, in the joints of the loins, and on the anus, because these members do not suffer scarification upon them.
And it is not desired by those except for attraction of blood from the member, thus as pause cupping on the breast in illness of flux of blood from the nose; and they use that for the dissolution of cold ventosity undissolved from the member, such as pause on the belly and navel; because that rarifies the member and scalds it and removes pain because it resolves ventosity.
And already cupping is paused on the nostrils when there occurs in their obstruction or phlegm because by virtue of strong attraction it draws out obstruction and expels phlegm from its place.
Similarly, it does when paused on the liver and spleen to draw forth ventosity that is enclosed within them.
These cupping glasses are administered with suction alone; some times they are administered with fire.
Some times they are administered full of cold water in illnesses of the spleen.
And this is why the cupping glass should be filled and made larger, that is cold water alone or water in which herbs are cooked according to what is convenient.
Form of cupping glass administered with fire: the width of the mouth should be as we have formed it; and the quantity of the preon should be the most of a palm; and it should be on the side of him, in the place that is in the circuit, the most of him, the traction should be little according to the quantity that enters him through a needle.
It should be made of red earthenware or glass, with thick rims, lion's teeth, edges and smooth for that it does not wound the member through its position on him.
And in the middle of it a transverse wick of earthenware or iron should be placed on which a candle is paused with fire.
And already this cupping glass should be much larger than that which we have recommended; and the little one less according to the illnesses and the state of him who uses it.
The cupping glasses of children and weak ones are other than those of youths and strong-bodied people.
The quality of pausing this cupping glass with fire on the member is that it extends the mecha with fire of wood decently before a small candle of wax, and pauses that on the middle of the transverse wick in the middle place of the cupping glass, so that the fire may be kindled around the partition of the sides so that not the skin of the sick person may be burned.
And soon it should be paused on the member of the sick person, and the said thread should be on the traction that we have said, until when we hold the cupping glasses and do not desire to pull the thread, then the vapor will rise over that traction, at that time the cupping glass will soon be dissolved.
And then light the wick according to its manner, and renew it if necessary.
But in cupping glass that is administered in the illness of pleurisy with water, in which there is no transverse wick nor traction, and it is not administered except that it should be filled with water, and it is paused on the member alone.
And this is its shape: This cupping glass the larger it is, the better, for that it can receive a large quantity of water.
Chapter XCVII
Blood-letting cups are not administered on large members except on those in which the position of cupping glasses is not possible because of their smallness, such as the throat and gums and similar ones; or on member denuded of flesh, such as the thigh and nose and theirs.
And the quality of using them is that if found blood-sucking leeches that are in the waters of putridity clean.
And soon they should be placed day and night in putrid water until they are hungry, and that no cause remains in the belly of them; and soon the body should be evacuated at the beginning with phlebotomy and cupping glasses; and soon rub the member of the sick person until it becomes red; and soon pause them on him.
And when they are full and satisfied.
And if it is possible to draw out the matter with cupping glass, it is better in judgment.
But if not, then wash the place with sour wine and soon with much water; and let it be rubbed and expressed.
And if the course of blood is prolonged because of the wound of the blood-sucking leeches, and it becomes red, then you should put a cloth soaked in hot water on him so that the bleeding may be stopped.
"When blood is increased, then powdered vitriol trisulfate is applied, or poultices and similar causes of obstruction are used until the bleeding is stopped; or raw mung beans may be placed on the spot."
"And also, if necessary, the application of leeches for bloodletting should be repeated when possible.
"And if the application of leeches by suspension is prohibited, then the spot should be rubbed with fresh blood or a needle inserted into it until some blood flows out; and immediately afterward compresses should be applied, because those who feel any blood flowing at once should adhere to them."
"And when you want them to stop, powder a little alum Trisulfate or salt or ash on them, and immediately they will cease."
Here begins the prologue of the third part: On restoration. This chapter is very often necessary in the art of medicine, and it concerns the reduction (setting) of fractures and accidental luxations of bones.
"Oh son, know that those who boast about this chapter are foolish doctors and common folk, and those who at any time have not regarded the books of the Ancients nor read even one letter of them."
"And because of this, the manner of practicing the science in our land has become private; and I myself am not oblivious at all to this during this good time. And I have not added what follows except out of respect for the length of reading the books of the Ancients and study on their understanding, so that I might extract the knowledge from them."
"And moreover, I direct this to experiment and study throughout the length of my life."
"And I have already described in this chapter everything that my knowledge contains and on which my experiment has passed; because here I have abbreviated it for you others and delivered it from the occupation of lengthening. And I have abbreviated it to the utmost degree of abbreviation, and I have demonstrated it to the utmost degree of declaration, and I have formed many forms of the instruments that are administered in this one, as is done by addition of declaration, just as I have done in two preceding chapters."
Chapter One
"Summary and collections from the essence of bone fractures, from which a preamble is necessary before we begin to remember the members that have been broken and their different types." "Therefore, I will begin this chapter by stating the summaries of what will be said, and the chapters that require understanding at the beginning for those who wish to master this art and remain firm on its truth; namely you and others who are eager to know or learn this noble art."
"And so I say that when an accident occurs such as a fracture or dislocation or torsion or compression, it is necessary at the beginning to apply flebotomy or bleeding to that person, or sometimes both, if there is no prohibition of any cause such as debility of power, or if he is an infant or old in decrepitude, or during times of great heat or cold."
"And moreover, let him be content with his food of fresh herbs and the flesh of birds and crabs; and let him prohibit heavy meats and filling foods, and all foods that fill the veins with blood, so that you may be sure of a safe cauterization, and not fear an effusion of matter to the member."
"And then return the patient to his first regimen, with which he is accustomed to live."
"And then, when the broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the patient be fed nutritious foods of abundant and heavy nutrition with viscosity, such as foods made from wheat cooked with water, rice, chickpeas, eggs, beef, butter, fresh cheese, thick wine, and similar foods. And with this regimen, coagulation of the fracture occurs more gently and quickly."
"And know that bones are more brittle in men who are in the first age of life and in the decrepit, it is not possible for them to be continued and consolidated according to their nature due to the drying out of their members."
"But nevertheless, nature adjusts and unites the bone that has been broken from any cause similar to glue with which it adheres and strengthens it until they are simultaneously conglutinated and united together, until the end of its strength and firmness, just as fire at the beginning until no cause prohibits it from its work."
"And for this reason it is necessary that you pause the foods of the patient, foods in which there is gravity and viscosity and heaviness, as we have said."
"And know that the species of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the hand; and similarly all other members are diverse among themselves."
"And I come with remembrance of every species of fracture, explained in its own chapter distinguished from the others."
"Great diversity even within the same fracture." "And the species of bone fractures are diversified among themselves; for there is an arched fracture that occurs sometimes in stars; and sometimes there is a fracture according to the length of the bone: these are the fractures of the lower jaw, upper jaw, and additional proceeding and non-proceeding ones, such as those made when preparing a pen to write, and there is a fracture with swelling and disruption at the head, and there is a small fissure-like fracture."
"And for each species there will be its own treatment in the restoration of it, according to what will come later distinguished in its places."
"Many signs of bone fracture." "And for this reason a fracture of the bone is known: its twisting, and the prominence and appearance of it to the touch, and that of it when you compress it with your hand."
"And then when there is no twisting apparent in the place nor is it done by your touch when you touch the bone with agitation and the patient finds little pain, then there is no fracture here."
"It may happen that there is only slight twisting or a small fissure, so it is not necessary to move it with your hand and compress all of it. Rather, pause on this place with the medicines about which remembrance will come at that moment which is appropriate for the place; and especially let there be strictness by means of subtle constriction."
"And know that the place when it is arched and not split into two or other than those that occur in the jawbone, if all the parts of its companion are removed, then you should begin from your own hour to rectify it having applied a cauterizing plaster to it."
"And if a cauterizing plaster is applied to it, then leave it alone for several days until the plaster stops. And then move it according to each manner that you are able by raising and moving."
"And know that the restoration and alignment of it is easier than for the bone in which a jawbone fracture has occurred."
"And then strengthen it according to what will come later its remembrance."
"But if it is the jawbone, then it will be necessary to extend this broken member from both parts, if it is the hand or foot. Or with your hand if the member is small. Or with two ropes or one rope and your hand."
"And let your position be such that you place the affected limb according to its natural shape, while ensuring that the parts are extended as much as possible. Then proceed to remove any excess fluid in accordance with each manner that you may find in their places."
"And be careful according to your skill that you do not harm the patient through your operation of their limbs or cause them any injury. And proceed according to your ability, applying one bone with another according to their best forms."
"And see that at this opportune moment you touch the patient with your hand gently and if there should be any other cause, correct it and reduce it according to the amount of your strength."
"And avoid violent extension and compression, as do many foolish physicians who often cause an abscess to form through their operation, or cause contraction in the limb, as we have seen happen many times."
"And the quality of strapping for a tranquil limb is what I recommend; because you should know that broken limbs are diverse in their smallness and greatness, and in their form."
"And for those that are small, such as the arm, hand, and foot, and similar ones, then the wrapping should be made of very soft cloth."
"But those that are large, such as the thigh or calf, should have a firm and hard wrapping; because the tight wrapping connects the limb strongly on all sides with equal strapping, so that there is no gap."
"And first, begin your evacuation of the hematoma by placing suitable linen on that location for three or four wrappings according to the size of the limb. And bind it tightly with your hand using the linen."
"And then, above that at the beginning of the location of the fracture, bind again with another wrapping so that your previous strapping is not loosened from where you have strapped the fracture." "And then extend your wrapping of the location of the fracture a little further downwards and slowly loosen the strapping a bit at a time until you reach its upper part."
"And then take another bandage and wrap it again over the location of the fracture with a wrapping, and then proceed upwards with the wrappings away from the fracture; and your operation should be in the tightening of the wrapping and loosening of it according to what has been said regarding the first wrapping."
"And then insert between the wrappings a wisp of wool or cloth with which to correct any twisting of the fracture if there is any twisting in it. And if not, do not place anything in it for any reason."
"And then place another bandage on top and bind it gently over these wrappings with proper care, if there is no inflammation or abscess in that location. And if there is an inflammation or abscess, then place the bandage over what covers the inflammation or sits on the abscess; and leave it for a few days. And then you should tighten the wrappings."
"And the splints should be made of soft, fine-grained cane, well-formed; or they may be made of hazelwood; or branches of palm tree. And each splint should be of this width and shape:"
"However, the splint placed over that fracture should be thicker and broader than the other splints, and its length should correspond to the size of the limb. And then bind over the splints with another bandage according to your first strapping. And then tie it gently on top according to what has been said about strapping; and ensure that your strapping is according to the location of the fracture, and the further away from the fracture, the looser should be the strapping."
"And the threads should be soft and fine in thickness. And if the threads are thick, as I have seen some people do when they use cords of twisted flax, it is a great mistake because it makes the strapping uneven."
"And very fine threads are not suitable either because you will not be able to tighten as much with them as you want. And there should not be less than a finger's width between splint and splint."
"And if the patient feels discomfort at the ends of the splints near the strapping, then place some wool or lamb's wool between them until it ceases to cause injury."
"Some fractures are with displacement, such as in the elbow joint, and this happens occasionally. I have spoken about this in Chapter II on Particularities."
"And know that not every fractured limb should be immobilized with splints on the first day. The reason for this is that when a limb is large, it does not require splints to be placed over it immediately, but rather after 2, 3 or more days depending on your assurance of whether an abscess will form."
"And this is the method used by plasterers with which the Ancients used to treat fractures and dislocations and twists."
"Method of plastering commonly used for treating fractures, suitable especially for complicated cases and mainly for women and children because it does not allow heat or friction. And this is how you should proceed: Take some powder from the mill, which is the bran left behind after sifting the flour."
"And then sieve it with album of egg whites and make a paste that is neither too thick nor too thin. And then use this."
"Another method of plastering for treating fractures and dislocations and twists: Take assafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and millet flour, which is ground from wild grains; mix them together with mirrh and aloe in equal parts. Then sift everything thoroughly and combine it with chicory water or egg whites if the condition is scalded. And then use this plaster because it has a good composition and treats lightly fractured bones well. It benefits many people."
"Another method of plastering that is suitable for treating fractures and twists: Take millet flour and white wheat flour in equal parts, 10 drachms each; mirrh and aloe, one-half drachm each; acacia, six drachms; and bol armenic, twenty drachms."
"All these are ground together in a mortar with great care and sifted. Then they are mixed with water or egg whites and applied."
"Method of plastering for joints and bones separated from their places, which cause pain in those areas and for cracks and fractures: Take raw wool, immerse it in sour wine and cooked oil, and place it over the location."
"But this plaster is not useful for restoring broken bones or drawing out pus. It only serves to relieve pain."
"Another method of plastering that restores broken bones: Take fig leaves and wild poppy leaves; combine them together and make a plaster from them."
"A plaster for healing and treating fractures of the bone and to resolve any remaining abscess: take roots of mallow, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, flour from oats, all in equal parts; all ground together and cooked with wine. If the member is not cut."
"If it is scratched, then wash it with cold water or with water from a bunch of celery, and use it."
"Another plaster for healing abscesses that is stronger than the first one, when an abscess occurs during the restoration of a member: take roots of mallow and its seeds, and balm, melilot, marjoram, violet flowers, chamomile, all ground together; all are ground together and cooked with water from walnut trees or with sweet water or with wine, all according to the quality of the member and the restfulness of its color."
"But Hippocrates does not specify in his book that it should be placed on the member when the restoration of it is broken, but rather a plaster made from wax and oil and nothing else; and he recommends that it should be mixed between thickness and fineness."
"However, Galen says that they should be placed on the broken member during its restoration and he gives as causes of drying with little heat, like myrrh, incense and similar things, those same causes which we have recommended."
"A way to make a plaster that relieves injury and pain: take ground frankincense, aloes, peeled human skin or chicken feathers, mallow, salt, all ground together; they should be sieved and sifted and cooked, and made into a plaster."
"However, the quantity that should remain on the bandage and which should be gradually removed is this: if there is no pain or swelling nor is the bone broken, then you do not need to remove it for many days." "And if pain or swelling or inflammation occurs in the place, then you should immediately remove it and discard that plaster."
"And take a cloth and wet sea sponge, and immerse that in hot water, and with it wash the inner part of the place until that swelling has ceased and the pain has been soothed; and then let the member rest for an hour; and then apply over it clean wool immersed in sour wine and oil or rose oil, and wrap it around it for a night so that you are sure of cauterizing the abscess and that the inflammation of the member is removed and the pain from it has gone away."
"And then apply that fine dressing and plaster again in small quantity and do not tighten too much with your first binding, but rather bind it more subtly until it is healed."
"And if at some point the abscess and heat and pain and inflammation and all accidents have been removed entirely, and you need plaster and binding again, then you should apply it in the same way as you did at the beginning."
"And if no cause of those that we have mentioned occurs to the member, then you should not remove it but rather leave it on for three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes all of this is left on for twenty days according to how it appears to you through the removal of the bandage from the member, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and approaches the coagulation of the flesh over it."
"And then tighten the binding more than your first binding all around, and adjust it according to the swelling of the wound of the sick person, as it is recalled."
"But if you see that the place of the fracture has dried out and become shriveled more than it should, then you should know that nourishment is prohibited from coming to that place; therefore, immerse that in hot water every time you remove it, and do this for all three days; and loosen the binding a little, and by this operation the member will receive nourishment, and it will be healed easily."
"But what foolish restorers of the fracture of the member do again when it is not restored at first, according to what is necessary, and is restored crookedly, is error according to their operation, great fear, and if they had been right this would have enlarged the Ancients in their books and taught with that operated."
"And I have not seen any of them do this, so it is more reasonable that they should not do it."
"Chapter according to: On fracture when it occurs in the head."
"The kinds of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and their causes are distinct. For some fractures happen by percussion of a blow, and the percussion leaves all the bone inside the head, which is left behind like the wood in the tree trunk, and for this reason this species is called 'asciacion.' Or the blow cuts through some part of the bone, cutting into the flesh but not passing through to the other side. This species of fracture is called 'levation absolute.'"
"And the plague of these two fractures is great or little, and of fracture that is contusion or abrasion. The cause of it is percussion with heavy blow or impact on stone, and things similar to them."
"And this fracture is penetrating and approaches the periosteum, which is left behind with the bone, or it is on the surface of the bone. The plague of these two fractures is great or little."
"And there is fracture that is jammed into the bone in the thinness of a hair's breadth, and for this reason this species is called 'capillary fracture.'"
"And it is fracture that happens by impact or blow of stone and things similar to it, which causes some lamina of the bone to enter into its parts from within, as happens to the wings of birds when they suffer percussion and their bones are driven in from within."
"And this happens especially in the bodies of moist bones, like those of elephants' heads."
"And therefore for all these species of fractures sought after, they are painful like separated stars." "And I will come back with remembrance of all this in its place."
"And you should know all these species of fracture by detection of those and by inquiry about them with touch and inspection of rotting flesh that is over them."
"And the capillary species is known by this: it is discovered on the bone and cleaned, and touched with a thread, because the fracture appears black."
"But in the treatment of fracture, first consider the accidents of the illness. And then if you see through those accidents that it signifies by clear indication about fear, like vomiting from cholera and extension and loss of consciousness and fainting and syncope and acute fever and discharge of eyes and redness of them and similar things to these in the major dispositions, it is not cured."
"And if you see accidents that are not usual, then hope for health, and then begin the treatment of it."
"And this is because if the plague has come to you at first as it was and that happened in winter days, then you should study the inspection of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all disposition."
"And if it is in summer days, then you should have the bone inspected on the seventh day, having that which is left behind with the bone corrupted by the periosteum, and let those accidents happen that we have recommended."
"And if the fracture has already reached the periosteum covering the brain and is with small partitions and attrition, then you should incise the committed and crushed partition, according to what I will recommend to you."
"It is necessary that you raise the head of the sick person gently, uncover it according to custom and manner as much as possible in accordance with the shape of the plague, and that it be light upon the sick."
"If you detect the swelling, fluxes of blood or hard abscess, then you should pause and prepare what is necessary, and if possible, place cloths infused in wine and rose oil on it, and let the swelling rest until the abscess has sedated, being sure that there are no fluxes of blood; and immediately begin with the circumcision of the swelling and its ablation."
"This is according to one or two methods of operation."
"And the first method is that you cut the swelling with a straight incision thus: And immediately administer another incision somewhat further on than this one..."
"And immediately administer another incision further yet."
"And it is necessary that you make diverse incisions of various lengths, some of which are further apart than others; and some of them are shorter than others and sharp at their ends, made with a knife or scalpel."
"And use them with ease in percussion upon the incisions so that you do not wound the head and harm him."
"And if the swelling is hard and tough, then you should first make a perforation around it before administering the incisions with the tweezers, which are called non-penetrating tweezers."
"And they are not called thus because those do not reach the end of the swelling near where it is thickest, so that the tweezers have a rounded extremity or margin over that which leaves the head sharp like a margin or small circle, which should be submerged and pass through the thickness of the swelling."
"And it is convenient that you take from these tweezers a large number of them, each one convenient for the thickness of each swelling, so that there may be present in all swellings of the brain an extremity which is sharp, and its quantity in length and breadth will be according to the quantity of thickness of this swelling."
"And this is the manner of three kinds of tweezers: The quality of perforating around the broken swelling is that you place the tweezer on the swelling and turn it with your fingers until you know that the swelling has been penetrated; and immediately move the tweezer to another place, and pause when there is between everything the quantity of the thickness of a ray or environ."
"And immediately incise with incisions that which is between each tract of the swelling, and make it as subtle as possible by means of levitation, as we have said before, until you eradicate the swelling, or with your hand, or with some other cause through certain instruments which you will have prepared for this purpose, such as forceps and delicate tweezers."
"And it is necessary that you guard with all caution that the incisions do not touch any cause of the pharynx."
"And then when you have circumcised the swelling with perforations, and if it is separate from the pharynx if it is continuous with it, you will extract it, taking care to raise and separate it in the thickness of it from that which is in the swelling with another instrument similar to incisions, but nevertheless it should be more thin and subtle than other incisions."
"And if any fragment of the little bones remains and sticks out, then take it with ease with that which you have to use among the instruments; and immediately cure the wound with stitches and dressings which we have mentioned."
"And the other manner of operation is light and distant from fear, which is praised by Galen and Avicenna for great praise; and this is their speech: It is necessary for you at the beginning that you begin to uncover the fracture of the bone in the place where it is most violent and manifest, until when you have uncovered that fracture and paused beside it, you will place the extremity of this lent and gentle incision of which this is the form:"
"And it is that the lenticular incision is long and does not incise any cause, and the acute incision is of it on both sides forward in length, as times are; so that the lenticular incision is adapted to the pharynx with the face of the incident acute bone."
"And then strike with a small hammer on the incision with one blow so that you incise all the bone with ease as it revolves, and you are sure of the paniculus that does not occur in it accidentally that you fear in any manner, and if the patient was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly he was asleep."
"Then if any cause is attached to the bone of the paniculus in some places of the bone, incise it with the extremity of this lenticular incision and detach it from it with ease because it has been detached from it without harm and without fear."
"And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the paniculus, and that which is cut off or remains on the bone is its face, and remains in it thickness and subtle adherences, then you should raise this thickness and eradicate those adherences with delicate razors by means of which you have prepared a number of different quantities so that you can use them in all places the most convenient for them and the most upright according to what you perceive about your operation on that broken bone and its figure."
"And you should administer in your operation with which you scrape the bone at the beginning the widest of those razors, and immediately use the most subtle of them, and do not cease to do this continuously until you arrive at administering the thinnest and the most subtle of all of them."
"But in each of the other little capillary fractures and subtle fractures, you should administer cure according to what you perceive regarding their correction."
"And this is because it is not agreed upon by all those who have studied that art." "And we have shown in large fractures regarding this that was mentioned above."
"And if the paniculus is torn when you eradicate the bone, then you should take cloth according to the quantity of the wound and immerse it in rose oil and place it on the opening of the wound; and immediately take another folded or tripled cloth and immerse it in wine and rose oil and place it on the first cloth and do this as lightly as possible so that you do not press the pharynx and immediately apply a wide bandage, and do not stretch it except by the quantity that the wound has alone."
"And leave it with this cure for one or two days until you are sure of the formation of cauterization; and then untie it and immediately apply medicines with which there is superfluous dryness, such as rose water and barley flour, powder of hyssop and aristolochia, and similar things to them."
"And it is that you make these medicines into powder that is finely powdered on the wound as they are dry; and generally, apply to it every medicine with the property of cleaning without biting."
"And guard yourself according to your skill that the wound in your treatment is clean and not in its dirtiness of dressing or other; nor do you allow virulence to gather on it, for when it settles on the brain's paniculus, it corrupts it and makes it putrefy, and immediately brings about severe illness."
"And it happens in the pharynx of the head, especially when the bone is scraped and most when its cure is neglected, and blackness appears on its surface; therefore consider immediately if it happens to the patient the accidents that we have mentioned, you would know that they are fatal without doubt."
If blackness occurs only from the medicine applied above and it is due to that medicine causing this blackness, then you should take some honey and three parts of rose oil, line a cloth with them, place it on the head, and cure it with appropriate remedies until it is healed.
Here comes another sentence:
"On restoring a crushed nose."
"You should know that it is not broken but rather two fractures occurring simultaneously and then healing, or one of those injuries seen sometimes, for which reason in the nose there are two bones, since the fracture leaves behind cartilage, not bone, and therefore what happens here is merely a bruise with tortuosity and sinuosity."
"But if one of the two fractures in the nose is broken, then you must insert your little finger into its nasal cavity and use it to push back that fracture with your thumb inside and index finger outside until the nose returns to its natural shape." "And may you accomplish this with ease, but guard against causing any harm to that person in your operation."
"And if the fracture is in the previously healed part of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, then you should use the tip of a needle with a small thickness."
"And if there are fractures on both sides, then proceed as follows:"
"And strive for restoration of it on the first day following the fracture, if possible; otherwise, you should apply a poultice of boiled linseed or oil, as is appropriate, to avoid an abscess."
"And appropriate to the fracture, insert a wick of cloth into the tip of the nose if it is on one side, or two wicks if it is on both sides, and make them thick enough that they fill the space in the nose."
"And some of the ancient restorers say that the wicks should be wound at the edges and changed daily, but this is not seen by me. However, it is necessary that the wick be wrapped in album honey comfits with powdered myrrh; and appropriate that the wick remains until the bone is firm and the cartilage has hardened."
"And sometimes, instead of wicks, pieces of linen cloth are inserted into the nose, which can cause an accumulation of pus to form and be wrapped in linen. This is especially true if the fracture of the nose is very violent and the patient cannot breathe."
"And this cause is not necessary for you; do as you wish, either use wicks or cloths."
"And if there occurs another abscess, plaster the nose with wax or with cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or with diachylon."
"But if no abscess occurs, then you should plaster it externally with a mixture of barley flour and powdered comfits of iris with honey; appropriate to pause on it with linen bandages, and do not touch the nose for any reason."
"But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or comminuted, then you should split them open and remove them using appropriate instruments; appropriate to suture the wound and heal it with what binds and consolidates, and apply appropriate plasters."
"And if inflammation occurs inside the nose, then you should treat it with wicks and insert lead cannulae until it is completely healed."
Chapter IV
On the restoration of the jawbone when it is broken.
When the lower jawbone is broken and there is no inflammation in the fracture, observe whether it is broken only externally, not in two pieces and curved at the ends inside; then its recognition will be easy.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index finger into the mouth of the patient; and similarly if the fracture is on the left jawbone, then insert the right index finger; and press gently with that finger on the prominence of the fracture inside with facility at the edges outside, using your other hand to hold the edge of the bone outside; do this carefully.
And if the fracture of the jawbone is already separated into two pieces, then you should apply extension to both parts according to a straight line until it is possible to achieve reduction.
And if there is commotion of teeth with disruption, then strengthen those that you expect to break with gold or silver wire or thread; appropriate to plaster the broken jawbone with wax and also plaster it externally with doubled cloth and plaster it externally with a large linen bandage carefully done, or a splint of bone along the length of the jawbone; appropriate to bind it above according to how you have prepared the bandage and what is convenient for its application, until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to rest and remain quiet, and avoid drinking hot liquids.
And if you estimate that the figure has already been altered in some way, then wait and remove it on the third day; appropriate to correct what is altered about it and plaster it with powdered myrrh, honey, or barley flour, since you will have removed the wax from it, and apply a linen bandage over the plaster.
And then with this annexed and properly adjusted plaster on it, if the position of the bone is not altered, leave it in place until it is healed and strengthened; for many times this fracture heals in three weeks.
And if another time an abscess occurs, then apply what has been said many times in its seduction until it is healed and the abscess is removed.
And if the fracture is with inflammation, then consider whether it is a piece of bone separated or displaced; then be careful to remove those displacements using what is appropriate for that purpose among the instruments.
And if the opening of the inflammation is narrow, then you should dilate it with a trocar according to your need.
And appropriate when you have removed those displacements and if there remains no remainder from them, then close the opening of the inflammation if it is wide; and if not, plaster that with one of the plasters that are suitable for that purpose and heal it until it is healed.
Chapter V
On the restoration of the collarbone when it is broken.
Many times the collarbone is broken at its anterior part near the muscle, and this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
For it may be broken, or separated, or separated into two parts without displacements; and this is easy to restore. Or it may be such that displacements occur in it, and this is difficult to restore. Or it may be such that the fracture is with inflammation.
And the operation in that case, when the fracture is without inflammation, is for you to have two assistants present, so that one holds the collarbone with forceps and follows the broken bone, and the other extends the neck at that part.
And appropriate to align the fracture with your fingers until it has been properly shaped according to what is necessary, and there remains neither prominence nor concavity.
And if you need more extension, then it is necessary to place a pad of cloth or wool on the patient's chin according to its size based on your need; elevate and extend the collarbone and compress the pad with your hand while aligning the fracture properly.
And if you cannot draw the end of the collarbone to its external part because it has been pushed forward towards the sternum, then it is necessary for the patient to be seated upright on his neck and place a large folded pad over that muscle.
And the assistant presses on that muscle at its external part until the bone of the collarbone is elevated and brought back to its normal position; then you should correct the fracture and align it with your fingers.
"If you feel pulsations in the collarbone and they are disturbing, then it is necessary to cut over that area and remove those pulsations with ease."
"And if it is retained in the bone, then you should make an incision on that area with one of the incising knives that you have prepared for this purpose, since you had already placed aside the collarbone, which serves as a lever; and it is a tool made of wood or iron, whose shape is thus:"
"And it resembles a spatula, the concave side of which corresponds to this shape; and its width should be according to your needs, depending on the size of the bone or the thickness of it."
"But its length should be according to what is possible for you in the operation; it should have two extremities thus, one of which is wide and the other is narrow."
"And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you extracted the pulsation from the bone is large, and you are certain that it will heal without infection, then you should approximate the two lips of the wound with suturing."
"And if the disruption is small, or you fear infection, then you should fill the wound with dressings and powders according to the quantity of the opening of the wound."
"And if an abscess occurs, then take a cloth soaked in vinegar and rose oil and wine, and place it on that area."
"And all of that, that the steel not be placed on top of the broken bone; and also so that you may see the injury every day, when the bandage becomes moist or you see that the steel is already loosened, then you should correct this and tighten the bandage."
"And also place the sleeping of the injured on top of his neck, and place it somewhat away from his side at night; so that with that the adjutors of him are elevated from the side of him, and therefore the fracture of the clavicle is elevated due to the elevation of the muscle; or the arm of him is tied to his neck."
"And do not remove the bandage until after twelve days if there is no swelling or abscess in that location."
"And also renew the plaster if you see the face of him become moist from that, and adjust it in the compression and restore that until it is restored and the fracture of the clavicle has coagulated."
"And it is strengthened and comforted in about twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some men it can be done in less time than that."
**Chapter VI.**
"For the restoration of a shoulder fracture."
"The spatula is broken at its lateral side and not completely but only on its edges."
"And therefore when it is broken at its middle side — and it is broken in the middle of it — and not known except by touch, then according to the figure of the fracture forcefully prepare it and reduce it according to its natural shape in every way that you can."
"And appropriately pause over the location of powdered chalk with egg white and cover it with linen; and also pause with doubled cloth powder; and also pause over the selected side of the subtle table according to the quantity of the entire spatula or a little more."
"But if you leave the selected side with concavity in some of the locations of the spatula, then you fill that concavity with linen and appropriately press the selected side evenly."
"And also strengthen it from above with a long bandage with appropriate compression and with firmness of the selected side so that it is not displaced from its location."
"And check the bandage every day; and whenever it becomes softened, apply another layer and strengthen it and press the selected side if it has become displaced from its location."
"And apply the plaster over its own side."
"And the bandage is restored in 20 days or 25 days."
"And therefore when this number is completed, then you dissolve the bandage, and be assured that it is of those bones from which the beginning was not feared nor their dissolution."
"And if you proceed from the location of the bone of the elbow and leave the upper arm, then incise over it, evacuate it, and do according to what we have said in the fracture of the collarbone concerning the removal of an abscess if one should occur here."
Chapter VII.
On the restoration of a fracture of the foot.
"The feet sometimes break in the middle of the body, but this is less common. The extremities are more often lame and shattered."
"When the middle of the body is broken by accident, it declines towards the parts within and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood. The fracture is evident in the cavity of the bone and cannot be hidden from sensation."
"And the restoration of it is that the sick person should be laid upon their back on a couch; and between the shoulders of them let there be placed a cushion. And gently press upon the muscles of them, and adjust the bones of them with the hands of two persons, handling the operation with subtilty, and adjusting according to all manner of way that is possible and convenient, until the figure of the bone returneth again into its proper place."
"And then apply plaster and lint, and place them on a subtle table of saunders or of chalk, and let them lie in levitation until you wrap them in cloth. And then handle that upon the broken bone with subtilty, taking care that it be not moved. And sometimes bind it around the back according to its roundness, and strengthen that with decent straitness; and always consider the bandage at every hour, and when it is softened, strengthen it."
"And if there is occasion to remove that bandage through breaking or pressing, pain, swelling, or apostume happening in the place, then thou shalt cut and loose that, and eradicate the plaster, and rectify whatsoever happened thereby with manner of cure thereof. And then again reduce the plaster, sometimes upon the face; and adjust the straitness until it be whole."
Chapter VIII
"Of the restoration of the ribs when they are broken."
"Know that fractures of the ribs occur only in large spaces that lie along the back, and at the extremities of their ends, no injury occurs except for this one because they are cartilage." "You will recognize it by feeling during its inquiry with your fingers."
"And the restoration should be done by setting the fracture with your fingers according to the most possible manner, ensuring that it is well aligned depending on what is necessary, and then apply plaster and strengthen the broken bone with steel if needed."
"And if the rib fracture is displaced inward, then it causes violent pain and puncture, like the puncture that occurs in those who have coughed up blood, because the bone pierces the pleura. It also causes difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting of much blood; this is difficult to treat."
"And already the Ancients knew how to treat it with many devices."
"And they said that one should pause from eating for the duration of the illness that causes inflammation and windiness, so that the abdomen may be inflated and extended, and thus the fracture may be pushed outward."
"But we should not do this because it could easily cause an abscess to form if it is not done carefully. And if one has already formed, then it would be too late."
"And some of them said that one should pause from the windiness and then suck it with force. This is similar reasoning, but however it is feared that the windiness drives the impurities to the place through weakness."
"And some of them said: one should cover the place with wool that has already been immersed in hot oil, and then pause while powders are placed between the ribs until it is full. Then wrap it according to its roundness; and finally treat the illness with food and medicine for pleurisy."
"And if the illness causes violent constriction that cannot be endured, and the bone pierces the pleura with painful puncture, then one fears for the illness. Therefore, it is necessary to cut over the place, uncovering the broken rib, and then place on top of that instrument which retains the cyathiscus, whose memory is recalled earlier, in order to facilitate removing the bone and extracting it."
"And then join the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with suturing, and treat it with plasters until it heals."
"And if an abscess forms inside, then you can also apply powdered rose oil and pause over the place. And treat the illness with what is appropriate for an internal abscess."
"And let him be propped up on pillows while he lies in bed until he is healed."
Chapter IX
On the Restoration of Fractures of the Spine and Neck.
Sometimes fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and sometimes they cause attrition there, and similarly with the spines of the back. "And when this happens to someone and you want to know whether it will heal or not, then consider this: if the sinews are already softened, stunned, deadened, and cannot be moved or extended or stretched, and when you constrict them with your fingers or prick them with a needle they do not feel pain, then you know that it will not heal, and in such cases it is mortal."
"And if they can be moved and feel constriction with your fingers or puncture, then you know that the nape of the neck is safe and the illness will be cured with treatment."
"And if it seems similar to fractures of the spines of the neck, then consider their weight."
"And then if you find that they are already softened like the sinews discussed earlier, and moreover when he lies on his back he feels windiness and expulsion without his will, and sometimes he is propped up on his back and wants to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is mortal, and do not attempt treatment for it."
"But if none of these causes are found, then the cause is better and easier to treat."
"And the treatment for it is to apply hot compresses made with powdered rose oil or hot poultices of wheat flour and honey; pause over that place several times a day until the hard abscess is sedated."
"And then apply one of the comforting and stimulating plasters, and stretch it over that place with linen; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and not to sleep on the part where he feels pain until he is healed."
"And if you find deviances or some other cause that has already separated from it, then you must cut over the spine and remove that bone; and moreover join the two lips of the wound with suturing if it is large; and treat it with some medication for inflammation until it heals."
"But if the end of the bone is broken off, and it is the end of the coccyx, then you must insert your left hand's little finger into the anus, and grasp the broken bone with your other hand according to what is possible for balance's sake; and moreover pause over that place with plaster and bandage if necessary, and also stretch it."
"And if you feel deviant breaks in it, then make an incision over that place, remove that, and treat the wound with the treatment that has been mentioned until it heals."
Chapter X.
"Of the restoration of health."
"The bones of the thighs are often broken, and if they break, the fracture of them is but a communication in the extremities thereof and are inserted in the longitude and decline into the interior parts; and it happens to the patient pain in the place and puncture, and the limb is stunned when it is fractured."
"And the restoration of it is that you stretch your hand over that which is above the fracture which is its figure."
"And if the fracture is only in the extremity thereof, then you shall join it according as it appeareth unto you by Equity, joining together that which is assembled to its natural figure."
"But if the fracture is in the long or that which hath declined to the interior parts thereof, then thou shalt make the patient lie upon his belly within such preparation as thou hast for the restoration of that fracture." "And then when you have joined it, lay upon it a plaster, and apply also upon that asthma of wood or bone, and strengthen it by straitness so that thou needest not fear puncture of fracture nor removal of the splint."
"And join also the concavity with that which filleth it within, and then let him take the straitness according to equality; and command the patient to sleep upon his back or upon his side."
"But if thou shalt perceive an aposteme hard or hot, then cease from the extension and restoration thereof until such time as that aposteme be assuaged, and lay upon it that which assuageth it according as is before spoken; and then return to the restoration of it, and strengthen it even as it behoveth."
"And if thou shalt perceive such in the bone set or comminuted, then thou shall make them whole."
"Chapter xi"
"Of the restoration of a fracture of the thumb."
"The thumb is that which is between the elbow and the head of the shoulder."
"And if it be broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two manners: and the first manner is this, thou shalt take a flat piece of wood of medium thickness of this fashion:"
There are two bands at both extremes, and it should be suspended from a raised place.
The patient should lie on a chair, and extend their broken arm over the backrest so that it reaches the tip of the backrest where the curve of the backrest is attached.
And suspend some heavy weight over that, or the servant stretches it out towards its parts; and then the doctor places his hands on the fracture with his fingers together, so that the fracture returns according to what is necessary.
Another method is for the patient to be propped up on their back and their arm suspended from a sling around their neck. Then, two servants are commanded: one holds what is above the fracture with both hands, while the other holds what is below it; each extends their part accordingly.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then tie another bandage over the fracture and also tie one onto that, and each of the two servants extends their part accordingly.
And if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then one half of the bandage should be placed on the tip and the other below the fracture towards the elbow.
"If a fracture extends to the hip joint, then it is necessary to place a bandage over that area and around the hip."
"If it heals easily and without difficulty, and especially when it is healing properly with good application, then stretch it a little if there is no inflammation."
"However, if inflammation occurs, then leave the bandage in place for about 7 days and change it frequently with warm water and rose oil compresses until the inflammation subsides."
"The method of stretching it is to apply a plaster cast over the fracture and also place a napkin wrap over the plaster cast. Then adjust the arm with that device and place your hand gently on their muscle."
"And pause the napkin and stretch over the arm support device so that the arm is in a fixed position, unless prohibited due to some cause by the broken bone."
"Then use splints."
"And it is necessary to apply that splint which is placed on the inside and fits tightly with the others; place between each splint a pad of suitable width and make the length of the splints according to the fracture, adding three fingers' breadth beyond either side of the break."
"And also stretch over the splints with the tension which has been mentioned at the beginning of this chapter."
"And it is necessary that your tension be stronger at the site of the fracture." "The longer the fracture, the less tension should be applied."
"Therefore, if you find yourself in the situation of having placed the splints and tension as we have said when restoring the member to its normal position, then do it."
"And if you suspect inflammation is developing, then leave the tension and splints on for about 7 days as we have said."
"And also consider the limb in all cases for three days so that no pressure or inflammation occurs; or if food cannot reach the member due to excess tension, then correct everything as we have said."
"But if you are uncertain whether this might cause some harm, do not remove the bandage for at least three days or more."
"And let his bed be inclined upwards at the head so that he may sleep comfortably and have his hands on his stomach."
"And place over the cooking support a full pot of wool wadding and consider every hour of the night or day that the figure of the broken limb is not displaced nor dissolved, or if the limb is softened, then correct everything with your skill."
"And place food for the patient according to the order which we have mentioned earlier, ensuring that the food is finely chopped at first so that it can be swallowed easily; and then gradually make the food coarser."
"However, it is customary for the splint and bandage to be left on for 40 days, after which they should be removed and a warm bath administered along with medicines that will correct any remaining issues."
"And if the fracture is still unhealed, do not remove the limb and splints for up to 10 days or even up to two months."
"Chapter XII."
"On the reduction of fractures of the arm."
"The arm consists of two bones called the 'two forks'; one is small and it is this that supports the thumb, while the other is large and is situated below the small finger."
"And sometimes only the larger fork may be fractured, or just the smaller one, but it also happens that they are both broken together."
"And when the small fork is fractured above, its reduction will be easier and its healing will also be quicker."
"However, when the fork of the arm below the fracture is broken, its reduction is difficult and its healing is slow."
"And it is even worse when both bones are fractured together."
"Therefore, if the bone that is fractured is the small fork above, it is appropriate for the physician to perform its reduction by gently pulling on it until it becomes straight."
"But if it is the large fork that is broken, then more forceful traction must be applied."
"And if both forks are broken together, then you must apply traction with even greater force."
"And during the reduction and traction of the arm, it is necessary for the hand to be placed on a pillow with the palm facing upwards, and for the thumb to be kept above all the other fingers and for the patient to be centered on a well-cushioned chair."
"And place a pillow in front of him at the level of his elbow or shoulder, so that he does not exert himself."
"Then one assistant should extend the arm from below with their hand or a bandage, while another assistant extends it from above in the same manner."
"And then the physician should align the bone so that it can be reduced to its best possible position."
"If during the reduction of the bone any resistance is felt, then you must use all your skill to overcome it and reduce it completely into its place."
"And if during reduction it appears that the elbow joint is dislocated and this was not expected, then you must reduce it according to the method which we have described above."
"But if the fracture is accompanied by inflammation, I have already spoken of this in another chapter, so take care to treat it accordingly."
"And if an abscess forms at the beginning of your reduction, then take a cloth soaked in cerot made from rose oil and white wax, which should be neither too thick nor too thin, and apply it with gentle pressure until the abscess subsides. Then remove the cerot and apply a plaster made from powdered mallow with clay of egg whites, along with splints; and ensure that the splint placed over the fracture is broad and strong."
"And know that in the case of fractures of the arm, it usually requires from two to four splints, depending on whether there is a fracture of one fork or both forks together."
"And then apply your bandage over the site of the fracture with great force and firmness; but if the traction is towards the upper part of the fracture or below it, then apply the bandage a little more loosely according to what was said at the beginning of this chapter."
"And the bandages wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, not hard or rough; and the plaster with which it is strengthened should be neither too thick nor too thin, as we have recommended."
"And consider the limb and splint after several days." "And if any cause arises which requires adjustment, such as swelling of the limb, then you must immerse the limb in warm water until the swelling ceases."
"Then allow the limb to rest without constraint until it has regained its strength, and then reapply the bandage."
"And if the traction is softened and the bone has returned to its proper position, then correct everything with your skill."
"And also consider whether the limb is being deprived of nutrition due to excessive tightness of the bandage; if so, then loosen it a little and leave it like that for several days until nourishment can reach the limb again, and then reapply it."
"But if the patient does not experience any of the causes that we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to remove the bandage for at least twenty days or so."
"And then hang the patient's hand from its own strength of movement, and have them lie on their back to sleep."
"And know that this fracture is usually restored in thirty days or thirty-two days, but it may be restored even more quickly depending on the disposition of the complexion and the strength of the individual."
"Chapter XIII."
"On the restoration of fractures of the little finger and those mentioned above."
"You should know that in the little finger and the toes of the said hand, fracture often occurs, but this rarely happens except for contusions many times."
"And when fracture or contusion occurs in the hand, it is necessary for the patient to lie down and rest on their back with their arms at equal height, placing the affected hand gently above the other extended one."
"And then the servant extends the broken bones and the doctor puts them back together so that they fit well with good alignment."
"And then it is necessary to apply a plaster and gauze, unless there is a wound that needs cauterization. Afterwards, the splint should be applied on top according to the size of the location, and you already have that wrapped in linen cloth."
"But if the fracture is on the inner side of the palm near the belly of the hand, then make a similar bandage out of cloth and command the patient to hold that with their palm wrapped tightly; afterwards it should be wrapped with a long cloth."
"And let the splint be made of leather covered in cloth so that the leather adheres to the palm. And wrap it according to what is necessary."
"But if the fracture is on the outer side of the palm, then it is necessary to apply splints above and below the metacarpal bones on the palm so that the hand is elevated and straight. And afterwards bind with a bandage, as if wrapping around a nut between these said ligaments."
"And if there is a fracture in one of the bones of the said fingers, then if it is the thumb, it should be aligned as necessary and then wrapped around the palm. And if you wish, apply a small splint on top to elevate the fracture and prevent movement."
"But if the fracture is in one of these fingers such as the middle finger, index finger, ring finger or little finger, then align it and wrap it with its respective finger. Or they can all be wrapped together continuously, which is better. Or apply a small splint on top, as we have said for the thumb."
"And consider, in your treatment, and especially that one, the position of an abscess if it is hot and opposed — with your operation — to what should be done when such a cause occurs according to what has been said about this."
"Chapter XIV"
"On the treatment of fractures of the hipbone."
"The hip bone of the thigh is often broken, its condition declared by feeling according to its transformation at the groin and the pubic region."
"And its restoration is accomplished in such a way that the ligaments are stretched over the fracture and other ligaments leave the fracture, and the patient lies prostrate on their stomach and face."
"And accordingly, the minister extends all the ligament to its part according to its quality when the fracture is in the middle of the bone."
"But if it is displaced at the root of the thigh, then the ligament should be brought close to the back at the part of the knee, so that the extension goes downwards, and the other ligament leaves the fracture."
"And similarly, if the break is displaced at the back, then the ligament should be brought close to the back and the extension should go to the parts that are left."
"And accordingly the doctor tightens the bone on both its sides until it reduces according to its natural shape and the bone is joined by good union. At this point it is necessary to apply plaster and strapping, so that there may not occur gangrene in the limb." "But if gangrene occurs, then you should leave it for several days until the gangrene is completely healed and then return to your treatment."
"The strapping should be done in this way: you should wrap a firm bandage over the fracture and fold it two or three times, removing any excess. Then you should wrap the leg so that it reaches the ankle and root of the thigh."
"And you should insert a long needle between the thigh and the leg near the knee joint on both sides. Then bring the ends of the thread out from above each of the two parts, and then wind them around the leg and thigh to remove any excess bandage."
"And then you should tie it over the thigh at the site of that fracture once or twice, and tie one knot on the bone of the leg."
"And then fill in any spaces between the leg and thigh with soft cloths, so that the strapping is firm."
"And then you should begin with a strong strapping of the middle over the site of the fracture with three or four wraps. And whenever you tighten the ligament at the site of the fracture, your strapping should be looser and lighter and softer."
"And then extend both ends of the thread to the ankle joint on both sides, and tighten them with knots on the other side so that the ligament does not come loose from its place."
"And then leave the strapping on until there is no occurrence of corrosion of the limb, gangrene, cauterization, inflammation or resemblance to those. And if any such condition occurs, then you should remove it immediately and correct what has happened at once, as we have said many times."
"But if the bone sticks out where it has been broken, then you should reduce it as much as possible. And if not, then make a cut over it and remove that, and treat it with what is customary for such cases until it heals."
"And sometimes this fracture of the thigh is strengthened with stitches tied around it as we have said in the case of the adjutator and the arm."
"But however you restore it in this way, do not let the patient limp. And if it is restored alone, without applying the other leg, then it will be necessary for him to limp."
"And know that the thigh is strengthened in forty days or a few months, depending on the diversity of constitutions and other conditions."
"Chapter XV."
"On the restoration of a fracture of the kneecap."
"You should know that a fracture of the patella rarely happens on its own, but often occurs along with bruising."
"But if it does happen, then it is only a crack or split in its parts, and this is with pain or without pain. And that is all about the sensation."
"To restore him, it is necessary that what has been broken in his limbs be bound with the said entrails and joined together as much as possible for equality and ease of construction."
"Then apply plaster and compress over that round stone if needed. Then bind it with sufficient strength according to what is appropriate."
"And consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, thus as if it were an apostem caut and similar to those so that it opposes all accidents with what is convenient for him until he is healed."
"Chapter XVI"
"Of the restoration of a fracture of the thighbone."
"Know that in the thighbone there are two bones of which one is thick and is called by the name 'thighbone'; and the other is thin, and is called 'focil'."
"And it happens to some of the kinds of fracture that happen to the two bones of the arm, and therefore its restoration is made like the restoration of the arm simultaneously, and its operation is one."
"And if both bones are broken together, the thighbone becomes completely shattered."
"If only the thin bone is broken, the thighbone becomes partially broken anteriorly."
"And if only the thick bone is broken, it remains behind that one, and it belongs to those causes which are not simultaneous ones."
"And therefore administer extension and equatio and ligament of the splinters according to this equality."
"But nevertheless it is necessary, if the fracture of the thighbone is high having many attempts, that extension be lesser and lighter, and alleviate with your virtue."
"And in the thighbone there is some cause of operation over the arm, and it is when you align the splinters and complete all your operation, then you will take pieces of wood from pine which is placed behind the causes which are placed below, and they are made similarly to branches of palm; select those that are less thick and not too many, and their length should be according to the length of the thighbone, and from the navel to the middle."
"And therefore wrap it around each rope in two wrappings according to its length, and place one on the fracture of the thighbone on one side and the other on the other side, and they should be from the navel to about a third below the knee."
"And therefore bind the two splinters in three places on both extremities and at the middle one, for with this strapping the thighbone is prevented from bending to the right or left side, and stands in good position."
"And now a splint of wood according to the length of the thighbone has been administered; and it is placed on it so that it retains its movement."
"Especially it is necessary that you do this in fracture, especially when with it there is abundant bleeding."
"And therefore examine the thighbone every day and study with it for final study, and you guard against apostema and inflammation or other similar causes; and whenever some cause of those occurs, then place it on it again with what is necessary until it is healed."
"Chapter XVII."
"Of the fracture of the ankle bone and of the bones of the foot and of those ones."
"In the heel, there is no fracture ever; but in the bones of the foot, fractures happen sometimes; and in those of the foot, scarcely ever, and only attrition occurs during periods of disposition."
"If the bones of the foot happen to be fractured, sometimes those bones become elevated above themselves among them, then the patient places their foot on the ground prepared thus while walking."
"And properly pauses the foot over that which is elevated by those bones, and presses them down, grinds them, and pinches them around where they return."
"And properly applies plaster and stops on top, and places under the sole of the foot a small table with two flat heads."
"And properly stretch that ankle with downward traction, since you have wrapped it with cloths and other causes of which you stand in need."
"And after three or four days have passed, then you untie the bandage, for you will find the bones squeezed together, either pinched or displaced, and the operation in those is thus known."
"But if some are pinched together, then you restore them and squeeze them thus with oil and join them together as you would in the restoration of those fingers." "And properly applies splint to the pinched finger according to its length, and places it thus with some slant; and properly places under the foot this table which has been recommended to you, and stretches that ankle with downward traction."
"But if what is pinched among the bones are two or three or more, then you apply splints to each finger according to its quantity wrapped in lion's skin, and stretches the table under the sole of the foot, with one of the heads of the table facing up towards the sole of the foot so that it may have good retention."
"And remember, do not neglect that you should not consider all the causes which have been mentioned to you in the other fractures of accidents that we have said; and apply treatment according to each accident with what is appropriate."
"Chapter XVIII."
"Of the fracture of the hip bone in women and of the bone of the pubis and the penis in men."
"When the hip bone of a woman is pinched together, then cut that with this saw, and properly incline it at the junction of both sides slightly towards the back."
"And properly the midwife pushes the hip bone together and makes it so that it may fit together like a sphere; and properly the woman is turned upside down, and gradually lifts up both sides of her until all is forgotten before the hip bone comes to fit together like a sphere with the bones pinched together."
"And properly applies powders on the hip bone, and when she wants to urinate, gently moves the hip bone with ease and then she urinates, and reduces it back again in the manner by which it was moved at the beginning, and then returns to her first powder."
"And do this for seven days or about those days, because that is restored."
"And if you wish, take an ovine bladder and stretch over the hip bone a reed cannula; and introduce all of the bladder into the hip bone, and then insufflate through the cannula with force until the bladder is inflated within the hip bone because the fracture returns."
"And properly she is turned upright and stays like that for some days as we have recommended, until it is healed."
"And when the bone of the pubis in a man or woman is pinched together, then administers in its restoration and fixation that which we have recommended for the hip bone."
"And that which is right is not hidden in these fractures close together and which have little expense, especially for those who study much and use and understand this my book; because that fracture signifies to you the greatest positions straight up in the restoration and tightening of it, and therefore understand well."
"But in the penis of a man when it is pinched together, take a gourd of oil and put the penis into that; and properly applies around it wrapping with cloth, and then leaves it for three days or about those days, and it will be healed."
"Chapter XIX."
"Of the restoration of fractures of bones when they are with pus."
"It is convenient for that one to whom it happens a fracture with pus, especially if the bone is large such as the thighbone or humerus, or similar to that one of which you are careful and perform phlebotomy at once if the conditions for phlebotomy to you or testify like this as we have said above."
"And if the pus flows out bloody, then it is necessary for you to retain that in such a way that you powder over it with dry plaster, unless another cause is present."
"And properly begins restoring the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong it if otherwise an abscess does not occur."
"But if an abscess occurs hard, then you leave the restoration of it for nine days until the abscess is softened, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day of all, because you will cause bad accidents."
"But if the broken bone protrudes over the uncovered elbow joint, then it is necessary for you to perforate that and reduce it and align it with your hands gently and with little extension."
"But if extension is not prepared for you and the equating of it with your hands, then reduce that with your hands with this instrument; and this instrument is made of iron, the length of which is seven digits or eight and its width according to the quantity of pus. And therefore it is necessary for the physician to take from those three or four according to the quantity that is needed for that in the cure in all kinds of fracture."
"And let it be round and let there be little roughness on it so that it is not doubled by the pressure over it at the time of the operation."
"And let it have an acute extremity with which to insert into its extremities; and let the top of it be thicker tending, and of its middle part thin."
"And this is the shape of it:"
"In Greek it is named 'la brake ventez atelarem', which means little shovel."
"Why should the extremity of the leg be elevated above the prominence of the bone?"
"And press it in such a way that the bone returns to its place, and remains stable with some device."
"And then try to align the extremities of the fracture between them. If one extremity is thin and does not take well with the tool for good reason, you should insert the extremity of that bone so that the tool has power over it."
"But if you cannot reduce the bone with what has been recommended, then use whatever tool you deem fit among those mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in whichever way is possible for you."
"And finally polish that which remains on the bone of its roughness and small scratches."
And when the bone is reduced and yet the reduction causes the patient to feel violent pain, then know that the bone has not returned to its natural place; therefore do this that you may greatly benefit the patient.
Once you have completed your reduction of the bone and then immerse a piece of linen in black wine vinegar, especially if it is summer, do not allow any grease or other ointment to remain on the surface, so that no foulness or corruption may occur.
And precisely at the time of completing your reduction of the bone, administer plaster bandages and leave the surface uncovered in such a way that you may insert them folded and use wrappings according to the quantity of the bandage.
And be very careful that you do not stretch the plaster bandage over the fracture, for many times foolish doctors have done this and caused harm to their patients by producing mortification or gangrene. And if your reduction is light, soft, and different from the usual reduction of other fractures.
And if the bandage is too large or of poor quality, and you fear that it might cause one of those harmful accidents which we have mentioned, and there is pain in the place, then it would not be appropriate to use plaster bandages. Instead, use a dressing of hard linen cloth and stretch it over with great care.
And after about two days, when the bandage has become dry and hard, remove it carefully with vinegar. Then apply compresses to keep warm, using those of our usual custom for treating plaster bandages, such as tetrafarmacon ointment or similar ones.
You should also remove the lining and examine the bandage every morning and evening until it is consolidated and firm. Make sure that the limb is positioned in such a way that the pus can flow easily from the wound to its outer parts.
If many days have passed and the plaster bandage is not consolidated nor separated from the limb, then you should know that this is due to some small errors. Therefore, you should examine the bandage with care. And of those errors, those that are separated and removed should be replaced, while those that do not separate but compress the limb and cause pain should be incised according to what is possible for you to do.
And if the bandage becomes warm or inflamed, this is a sign of inflammation or some other kind of corruption and putrefaction. Therefore, you should pause here for one of those which are mentioned in their own chapter regarding its treatment.
And as for this matter where I should speak more plainly and you present your opinion: when the bone is crushed, do not attempt to expose it like the bones of the wrist or elbow or similar ones of the large limbs. Do not try to attract it nor extract it because many times death has occurred due to this. Leave that alone until it has fallen out by itself in about twenty to thirty days. Then treat the wound if you can see it, otherwise leave it be.
Chapter XX.
Of the treatment of node formation that occurs at the site of some fracture.
Very often node formation occurs at the site of fracture healing, especially near joints, and it distorts the shape of the limb, preventing its natural movement.
Therefore, if the node is recent, apply to it medicines that have astringent properties such as Aloes, Rue, and Myrrh. Also consider using Serracollo or Acacia and similar ones. Take some of these and mix them with wine that has been astringent, or with albumen of egg white, or with vinegar, and apply this mixture to the node using linen cloth, securing it with a good dressing.
"Leave the bandage on for several days without removing it; then remove it and apply another until the swelling has gone down; or press this sheet of lead descended onto it, for lead has the property to reduce everything that is swollen in the members."
"If the swelling has already turned into bone and needs to be cut open, then carefully cut it along the upper part of the wound, incise the excess flesh and membrane, then rinse it with warm water until it is healed."
"Chapter XX."
"The restoration of a fracture when it has been restored, and if the limb remains subtle and does not grow according to its nature."
"When a bone fracture is restored, and if the limb remains subtle and frail, this usually happens for several reasons: one of which is an excess of solution of the ligaments and their formation not according to what is appropriate; or due to excess scarring of the ligaments preventing proper nutrition from reaching the limb; or due to excessive broaching of joints; or due to excessive movement not at its proper time; or due to weakness of blood in the body and debility."
"The treatment for this is to give the patient food so that their body becomes robust and blood is multiplied within them; administer baths; and apply warmth and joy upon them."
"And if there is still weakness in the limb, apply a plaster above it so that the plaster draws out excess moisture, or continue to massage it with warm water until nutrition returns to its natural state."
"Chapter XXII"
"Regarding the treatment of crushed bones that are restored crookedly and require surgical correction."
"When it happens that a limb has healed with crookedness and prominence at the crushed bone site, causing deformity of the limb but not preventing its natural operation, then do not listen to those who claim that the limb is newly crushed."
"But many foolish doctors and healers have done this in our land, and this operation is very blameworthy and leads to great fear whose sign is death."
"But if lameness and stiffness are recent, then they should be massaged with warm water containing softening herbs such as marshmallow and rose hips, mallows, and similar ones; and a plaster made from mallows should be applied; or a poultice made from rose hip mucilage and kneaded with dough or oil of cirami should be applied; or figs fried in pigeon droppings and ground together should be applied as those medicines known as consolidators."
"And sometimes with continuous light friction it can be dissolved even in the most humid parts, and movement of the limb should be administered in all directions at all times."
"But if the crookedness has already advanced and is hard and converted into bone and surgery with iron is necessary, then it is appropriate to cut off what is above the break and dissolve the continuity of the bone, and carefully remove excess callus from that place using fine scissors, and facilitate mobility in that area through diligent and careful study."
"Chapter XXIII"
Of speech in dislocation
Dislocation is the displacement of some of the joints in their location, preventing them from moving, distorting the shape of the limb, and causing great pain and injury to the patient.
Therefore when dislocation occurs, it should be reduced as soon as possible, and not delayed, because if it is delayed, the joint becomes inflamed and it is difficult to reduce the dislocation.
And therefore at that time one should not be moved or stretched out, because many times it causes spasm and severe pain to the patient.
But when this happens, then one should resort to the phlebotomy of the patient, and let him rest until the inflammation subsides; and then the limb should be immersed in hot water and oil, and thus reduced with ease.
And every joint should be treated with that which brings it back to its original position.
And hereafter I will explain the chapters on dislocation as they are presented in fracture, from the head downwards to the foot.
Chapter XXIV.
Of the treatment of dislocation of the lower jaw.
When both jaws are dislocated at once, they are reduced by little movement and mollified a bit; or sometimes they are completely dislocated, until they can be mollified at the point of articulation, when saliva begins to flow from the patient's mouth, indicating that he cannot open his mouth nor close it, and his tongue is stuck in his throat.
But when the dislocation of the jaw is slight, in many cases it returns to its place by itself without any help.
But if the dislocation is complete and entire, then reduction should be administered gently, and not delayed at all.
And let the attendant hold the patient's head, and insert his finger into the joint of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation is on one side; or insert both fingers together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the others should press from outside with which to balance. And tell the patient to keep his jaws still and not move them from their position; then gently push the jaw back into place until it returns to its proper position.
And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both jaws are dislocated at once, then evaporation with hot water and oil should be administered until easy reduction can be made without delay.
And when they return to their place and are well engaged, and the mouth of the patient is closed but not mollified, then apply poultices of cloth with cerot, and make them of wax and rose oil; and let them be tied on easily with soft linen.
And let the patient sleep on his back, with his head between two pillows, so that he cannot move it to the right or left; and do not force him to mastication at all until the pain is gone and the jaws are well engaged. Then he may chew what he wishes.
And when this is administered with ease, and do not work upon the opening of the mouth for eating, drinking, or occlusion until the jaw is engaged and healed.
And if the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated and not returning to their places at once, then often hot applications may be used with soda, and sometimes a gentle purgative is administered to relieve the belly of the patient, and sometimes pure calomel.
And when you do this, know that it is harmful; for many times the person to whom this happens dies in a few days.
Chapter XXV
Of the reduction of dislocation of the collarbone and the extremity of the muscle.
The collarbone is not dislocated from its place by the side due to its continuity with the sternum; but sometimes it is dislocated on the outside and this is detected by touch.
And the restoration of it is that the patient should lie on his back and extend his arms. Then press the dislocation with your palm with a strong pressure, for it will return to its place.
And then apply plasters and poultices and strengthen that side.
But the extremity of that which seizes the heart and is continuous with it is not dislocated at any time. Therefore, it must be reduced and engaged as has been said, according to your ability.
And then apply plasters, poultices, and bandages, and tell the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until it is healed.
And with this same treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter XXVI
"On the reduction of a dislocation of the muscle."
"You should know that the muscle cannot be dislocated except in three ways, one of which is that it is dislocated at the beginning of the little finger."
"And the second way is that it is dislocated at the top of the muscle, which happens rarely. It does not dislocate at the joints behind the shoulder or in front by the nerves."
"And especially it is dislocated and pushed out at the joints of the little finger near the thumb, and this happens more easily in those with less flesh, whereas in those with much flesh, it comes out with difficulty."
"And sometimes it happens to some men that the muscle swells due to a blow or contusion, and an abscess forms which bursts open, causing the muscle to become dislocated."
"Therefore you should proceed with caution in treating such a case, and then proceed with its cure."
"And the dislocation of it is known when it occurs at the joints of the little finger near the thumb; so that you may distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the sound one, because there is great diversity among them. And you find a concavity in the head of the muscle on the side of the little finger near the touch of the head of the muscle like a hole, and the sick person cannot bring his hand to his ear nor move it with any movement."
"If it is dislocated towards the foot or above, you will then find a clear and visible touch, not hidden."
"And this dislocation can be easily reduced when it is fresh and the patient is young."
"And the reduction of it is that the physician raises the hand of the patient above its joints; and approaches with his fingers on either side of the little finger of the patient, and raises the joint with strength to its proper place, while the physician raises the hand of the patient, and extends it upwards; and then approaches it again for it returns easily."
"But if it does not return by what we have said, and some days have passed since the dislocation occurred, then the patient should be bathed in warm water, and administered an embrocation that softens and lubricates like if it were a poultice made of althea root, fenugreek, and marshmallow in water."
"And then the patient should be propped up on his back and paused with his fingers on either side of the little finger until it is loosened between elevation and tension, and then the physician places his heel on the sphere and raises the head of the muscle with strength, and draws the hand of the patient so that it is not hidden at its joints, and another attendant holds the head of the patient so that it is not hidden at its joints for it soon returns to its proper place."
"And if you wish, reduce it in this manner: And have present a man who is taller than the patient, and let him stand on that side; and insert his muscle between the little finger of the patient and raise the little finger of the patient to its joints while the patient is suspended in air, and another attendant draws the hand of the patient from its joints towards its belly." "But if the patient is thin, then another cause should be suspended for him to lean on, lest he cause harm, for the dislocation returns quickly."
"And it is reduced in the same way according to another manner: And have placed on the ground a staff whose head is round in shape like a mortar pestle, neither thick nor thin; and let the patient lean on its side; then let him place his hands on either side of the other end of the staff; then let him extend his hand on the other side; and let him extend his body from that side with strength for the joint returns to its proper place with speed."
"And if the reduction of it is difficult by all the causes that we have mentioned, then use this cure: And take a staff whose length is two cubits and whose width is four digits; and let its thickness be lessened at the end of the little finger in this shape:"
"And place lions' skin on the round head of it for fear that the staff should slip from the patient."
"And let it be placed on either side of the little finger of the patient; and let his hand or arm be extended over the staff to its joints; and let the staff be tied on the assistant's back, on the arm and on the end of the hand."
"And let him place his arm on a step of a ladder according to its width, and let his hand be extended at its joints; and let the other body be suspended from the other side for the joint enters quickly."
"And when the entrance of it is completed according to each manner that is possible for you; then place a bandage of wool of equal quantity on either side of the little finger; and then place an emplaster made from powder of millstone with frankincense and album of egg over all the muscle, thus as it is turned upwards; and then bind it tightly with tension decently; and let the bandage be turned around the emplaster; and let his hand be joined to its collar; and let him be left; and let not his hand be moved for seven days."
"And it is necessary that the diet of the patient be lightened until the member is comforted, for it is easier for it to be healed."
"And then let him be given abundant food after seven or eight days when he has exercised a movement; and if it is firm and not softened, then it is healed."
"But if the joint is dislocated many times by humidity that occurs to it or by another cause, then cauterization should be administered to it with three strokes according to what is said before in the chapter on cauterization."
"And if all this is done and after seven days the bandage is untied and the joint is not firm; and the emplaster and the binding are reduced upon it many times; and it is not firm or hard; and he cannot raise his arm to its joints, then know that the nerves of it, which are at the head of the muscle, are either cut off or stretched or softened; and know that the joint will never be placed in its proper place."
"For the dislocation of that which is made in the knee and breast or joints behind, the reduction is done with impulse and extension with the hands until it returns."
"And let another binding be administered to it; and cure it until it is healed."
"And if heaviness occurs in the member during healing and slowness in its movement, then the patient should use baths many times until that heaviness is lessened and it returns to its former nature."
"Chapter xxvii."
"Of the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder."
"Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated with difficulty and returns likewise; and it is dislocated at all parts, but especially at the front part behind, and its dislocation is not hidden from you because it is evident by looking or touching according to whatever figure it may be dislocated. And when you adjust the dislocated shoulder blade with the palm of your hand, that is made manifestly clear to you because the joint is concave and cannot bend the arm nor touch itself with its muscle."
"And you should choose it and reduce the dislocation as soon as the hot swelling comes because if the hot swelling comes to it, the reduction becomes difficult; and even then it is not completely healed. And especially when it is at the back parts because there it is worse than all other kinds of dislocations and causes more pain, and many deaths occur with that."
The restoration of the patient, when it is possible to reduce him, is that his hand be extended with two masses and his arm be expanded, and the physician's hands be on his knee and let him press the joint with the fists of both his hands together or with the back of his palm.
However if the dislocation is at the palms in front, then he should return as follows: by bending his hand on his own hand, so that he strikes his knee with the back of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply strong traction and powerful force.
And two assistants should extend the arm, holding it firmly with two assistants so that it is not moved during traction.
And furthermore the arm should be rotated in every direction, because it is wrapped around with doubled cloth or bandage.
And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, he should anoint it with some oil to facilitate lubrication of the joint; and moreover he should press the joint vigorously until it returns.
And also the reduction of the elbow that is paused on that empastre in which there is stipitation and excretion with albumen of a bird's egg, and let it be extracted with gentle compression, and the arm should be suspended from the neck for several days.
And also if it is dislocated again, then untie it; and afterwards if the joint has been formed in its proper place, then untie the bandage from it and leave it alone.
And if the joint does not become stronger, then repeat the emplaster and bandage, leaving it for several days until it is healed; and moreover untie that.
But if during the reduction of the joint there occurs gravity in that part, and the disposition is in motion, then apply humidification in a bath with friction and compression until it is alleviated; or place on the joint an alleviation plaster so that it may be of great benefit; and moreover bind it up, leaving it over the bone day and night. And afterwards take off the plaster, and put him in a bath; and when he gets up, then rub the joint with gentle friction, and moreover repeat over it an alleviating plaster so that it may be of great benefit, once, twice, three times And meanwhile keep him in bed until he is cured.
And if you wish, place on that a wet cowhide fold and stick it on him; and do this several times, because it is moist and reduces inflammation.
Chapter XXVIII
Of the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder blade, which is the joint between the arm and the hand
When the shoulder blade of the arm is dislocated occasionally, its reduction is easy; and on the contrary with other joints, but there should be speed in reducing it at the very moment when it has been dislocated before an apostema occurs or that some accident happens in the apostema caut.
And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the hand of the patient on a table and make him extend his arm; and then the doctor places his hand or his palm over the prominence of the joint and pushes it gently until it returns to its proper place.
But it should be taken into consideration whether the palm is already turned towards the front of the hand; if it is, then let the patient place the back of his hand on a table for extension and reduction; but if the dislocation was behind the hand, then let the position of his hand be intrinsically upon the table so that the hand of the doctor may fall upon that prominence of the joint.
And therefore if it returns soon, that is good. But if not, then strengthen it with an emplaster which allows the apostema to subside and leave him; and do not repeat this, because otherwise it would be impossible for you to effect its reduction afterwards when several days have passed.
But if the joint remains tortuous then do not inform the patient of any cause, but tell him that his arm is softened and cannot be strengthened because of some cause. Then you should know that the nerves are pressed or cut, and therefore it does not improve unless it is strengthened by cautery near its attachment and this procedure is followed several times with some cause.
Therefore when the dislocation has returned, then place on it the plaster which we have recommended and let him be left at rest for three days; and moreover bind it up and let him be left at rest with exercises of his arm.
But if the motion of it is stopped and some gravity occurs thereupon, then treat it with warm water and gentle friction several times until it is alleviated.
Chapter XXIX
Of the treatment of dislocation of those [joints].
Sometimes these joints become dislocated all at once.
And when any of these fingers is dislocated on the back or palm side of the hand, then stretch that finger and push the dislocation back with your thumbs until it returns.
And afterwards support the head of the finger and suspend it from the part where it was dislocated, leaving it thus for two days.
And later suspend that [finger] again and stretch it until it is completely straightened within that same day.
And when night falls, bind that [finger] according to this description, and do not cease loosening it during the day and exercising it with movements, and bind it at night. Do this for several days until it is straight.
And do likewise if it is dislocated on the palm of the hand, and bind it at that part and perform your first operation until it is healed.
Similarly, do this in all other cases of dislocation.
**Chapter 30.**
Of the treatment of dislocation of the spinal joints.
When dislocation of one or more spinal joints occurs in the back or neck, and many vertebrae are displaced from their proper places, then there is no hope for cure at that time because death usually ensues.
And the sign of this is that evacuation of the bowels occurs involuntarily and cannot be retained. Many times some limbs become paralyzed on one side or both sides, either one leg or both arms, or one arm. Sometimes one vertebra is displaced from its proper place because many times displacement occurs in four directions.
Therefore, it has already been displaced to the back and is called scoliosis (curvature of the spine).
But its treatment is as follows: first consider if scoliosis occurred in childhood because then there is no cure and it cannot be completely healed.
But those who come later with treatment by plaster or percussion or other similar methods have already discussed the ways of treatment in lengthy speeches. However, I will briefly discuss it as follows because it is appropriate to my intended purpose and I have already explained and demonstrated many instruments for this purpose.
And only those can be cured whose scoliosis occurs specifically in the posterior part as I will recount later.
And let the patient lie on their face with their head close to a wall. Let them be covered with soft pillows so that the spine does not get injured.
And place a straight stick on the ground near the head of the patient and another stick under their feet at the other end.
And let one assistant hold the stick near the head but not in a pit, and another assistant hold the other according to that form.
And place a cap on the patient's head and tie it firmly with soft cloth. Extend the end of one bandage to the stick placed above the patient's head, attach it there, and extend another bandage over the hips and knees of the patient towards both sides. Then adjust all the bandages and attach them to the other stick placed near the patient's feet.
And then each assistant extends the bandages to their respective sticks. The two sticks and the bandages should not be removed from their places but should remain there without being too tightly fastened as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with firmness until it returns to its proper position. Or he may place one foot on that part and adjust himself there. Then he places his feet on the table so that he can return.
But if it does not return by this method, then take a table whose width or length is about three braccia. Then make a hole in the wall near the patient where the end of the table can fit into it. And place the middle of the table on the spine. The doctor places his feet on the other end and presses firmly until the spine is corrected and returns to its proper position.
And if you wish, use a wrench to turn it back with your hand. Lie on the ground near the patient's head between two sticks whose length is one braccio each and place another stick of the same length under their head in the same way. Make sure that there is a palm's width between each stick and make a groove in each stick for the cord to pass through. Ensure that each stick is firmly fixed on the ground so that it does not move.
And place a round stick in which the wrench is inserted into both grooves of the two sticks.
And on one end of it there is a hole in which the stick is formed. The length of this stick is one palm with a groove for turning. The other two sticks have similar holes.
And then tighten the bandages that you have stretched over the spine of the patient on the stick near their head. And also tighten the bandages that you have stretched over their hips and knees onto the stick near their feet.
And then on each stick place an assistant who will turn the wrench with their hand while the doctor presses the spine back into its proper position as we have said.
And once the spine has been corrected and returned to its proper position, then apply a plaster consisting of chalk and album ground together with egg whites. Then place gauze on it and place the plaster on a table whose width is about three digits or somewhat more. The length should be equal to the size of the swelling and placed over the affected part of the spine.
And then wrap it with bandages as we have said and feed the patient a subtle diet until they are healed.
And if there is still some swelling at the end of the healing process, then apply medicines that soften and cleanse using the application of the table for a long time. We have already recommended this method, and it should be applied to that area with a lead plate.
And sometimes swelling occurs at the back of the lower spine due to that dislocation. That bone already threatens death and therefore no pressure should be applied to it with this medicine because it will cause great harm.
Chapter XXI
Of the treatment of a dislocated hip joint.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the thigh meet only by dislocation alone. This does not occur at other joints with small movements or concavities.
And the hip joint can become dislocated in four ways: either inward or outward at its front parts or backward at its rear parts.
It is most commonly dislocated inwardly, and less frequently anteriorly or posteriorly.
The sign of hip dislocation inwardly is that when you compare the length of the healthy limb with the sick one, the sick one appears shorter and its thighbone sticks out more prominently than the healthy one. The patient cannot bend their leg or knee inward, and this area becomes inflamed as if there were a hot abscess. This indicates that the head of the femur has moved into this position.
The sign of dislocation occurring at its outer parts is that its symptoms are opposite to those mentioned previously.
"The sign of one who has suffered a dislocation in front is when the chamber expands according to its nature, yet that part does not bend without pain; if one tries to walk, they cannot do so without discomfort. The urine is retained and the swelling is inflamed, and movement causes pain in the heel."
"The sign of one who has suffered a dislocation in the back is that the knee does not straighten and cannot bend without pain; the chamber of it is shorter than the other one, the swelling is softened, and the head of the matter is turned towards that place."
"But reduction of the species of this dislocation is that you should consider whether the dislocation is ancient and old, which has already become accustomed to having that approach. You then administer reduction according to its condition, but it does not enter into total cure; therefore no traction should be made in that case."
"But in one who has recently suffered a dislocation of any of the four species, you should quickly turn the joint back into place and extend it on both front and rear parts. Then move it to the right and left until it returns completely; then no other treatment is necessary."
"But if it does not return in this manner, then you should prepare a strong bandage and extend the chamber of it from the farthest part, or with its own muscles, or by attaching a bandage above the bone. Then another assistant should extend the arm of that person upwards so that their hands are placed behind their buttocks. And again stretch tightly with a bandage on the root of the matter, and have another assistant hold the extremity of the bandage."
"And stretch it either from its front part to its angle at the collarbone or from its rear part to its angle at the shoulder blade."
"And all these stretches should be done in one session while the patient is lying on their back with their buttocks elevated and knees hanging down."
"This species of extension applies generally to all four species [of dislocation]."
"And therefore if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it will be well. But if not, then it is necessary for each species to undergo its own specific treatment."
"For reduction of its own kind, when it is dislocated from the front parts, the patient should be made to sit up on their left side. Then bind the bandages tightly over the root of the matter at that point between the head of the bone and the angle of the collarbone. And then extend the bandage upwards from the angle of the collarbone towards the upper part of the shoulder blade."
"And then another strong assistant should take hold of both of his arms and press the thick part of the bone against it while stretching forcefully outward so that it returns to its proper place."
"And this species is that which requires the easiest reduction by which this member is returned, compared to the other species [of dislocation]."
"But if it is not reduced by this species of treatment and does not obey the return, then you should lift both legs of the patient together with a light, loose bandage over both thighs and buttocks."
"And let the length of each be as much as four fingerbreadths, and let the bandage be extended further than the other by two fingerbreadths."
"And then suspend the patient over the head of the bed, with their feet on the floor and their legs extended. The distance from the ground should be about two spans."
"And then command a strong youth to press down on the head of the bone and suspend himself together with the patient. And another youth should forcefully press down on the bone so that the joint returns quickly to its proper place."
"But in the proper reduction when it is dislocated outward, the patient should lie on their back as we have recommended in cases of dislocation with swelling. And let the bandage be stretched over the dislocated part itself and over its lower edge."
"And then two posts should be placed, one under the foot and one under the head. And another post should be adjusted in the middle of the elbow with damp cloths wrapped around it so that the patient is not harmed by the post being between their bones, for fear that the extension towards the outer part might pull on it."
"And then each assistant should extend to his part, and the physician with his hand should guide the reduction according to the art."
"But when the dislocation is at the inner part, then let the bandage be extended lightly. And this is how it is done on the elbow: and the physician places the palm of his right hand on the dislocated collarbone and then presses that with his other hand while extending it towards the outer part towards the shoulder blade."
"But when the dislocation is at the back part, then it is not necessary for the patient to be extended towards the outer part, but rather they should be elevated on the ground. And it must be placed on a hard surface, just as in the case of an ankle dislocation outward, according to what we have said about the elevation of it onto two ankles; and this is done with their face downwards and the bandages extended as we have said."
"And compression should be administered with a board over the place where the joint goes."
"So when the reduction is complete, you will know that it has been done correctly if when you extend both bandages and the patient pulls on them and extends their arm without difficulty, then you will know that the member has been returned properly. And then you should adjust two splints and apply pressure firmly while extending with a bandage so that the ankle is not moved from either part; and let the patient remain at rest for three or four days."
"And then untie the bandages and the pressure, and compare one splint with the other."
"Then if you find that those joints are firm, then you will know that the dislocation has been fixed, and at that point you should let the patient go."
"And if you find any sign of loosening, then return and splint it again, extend it according to your first traction, and let it remain for three days."
"And then release that, and let the patient walk about on each foot alternately for several days until they are strengthened."
Chapter XXXII
Of the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder blade.
The shoulder blade can be dislocated in three ways: outward, inward, and more often toward the outer side than towards the back part. It is not dislocated towards the front part."
The sign of dislocation of it is that when you command the patient to apply their arm with the elbow, then you will know that the shoulder blade is dislocated."
And the restoration of all three kinds is that you make the patient sit upright so that they can extend their arm if possible; then press your two hands on its face and place the patient's foot between your feet. Then bring the shoulder blade back with both palms, holding it between your hands strongly until the other minister extends the patient's foot until the shoulder blade returns to its proper place."
"It is a sign of recovery that their bed adheres to them without labor."
"And then, apply this plaster and make the bed adhere to them. Also, tie those wounds with a bandage for three or four days, and then untie them."
"The patient should not use their legs for some days until they are healed and strengthened."
"However, if the reduction of this one is excused, you should then administer a strong extension with traction from those ligaments which were involved in the previous hip operation."
Chapter XXXIII.
About the treatment of ankle dislocation.
The ankle sometimes becomes displaced with slight motion and sometimes becomes dislocated upon completion; its dislocation occurs either inward or outward.
And the sign of ankle dislocation is that sometimes the ankle appears swollen at the site where it is dislocated.
"The cure for moving him is easy to accomplish: he should be gently extended with his hands and turned until he returns."
"However, in the case of a dislocation treated according to all the rules, it is necessary that you keep the patient on their right side, and one assistant must be strong and skilled at placing his hand behind the patient's back in the middle of it."
"And with your right hand grasp the upper part of the thigh near the hip, and with your left hand grasp the lower part of the thigh near the knee."
"And then pull the thigh towards you with your right hand, and hold it there with your left hand for two or three times, and then extend it with your left hand; and press the head of the bone against the hip socket without shaking."
"And perform this procedure twice as we have described."
"And then press the head of the bone into the hip socket on the third attempt, and you are at the ilium."
Therefore if this method is returned to once or twice again, and if the foot swells, that's good; otherwise, then repeat the operation, because that returns.
But if you are forbidden from reducing the hernia with what we have mentioned, then make the patient lie on their side on the ground, and insert a small stone between their thighs, secured firmly to prevent slipping. Then wrap a cloth around them so that they do not move.
And then the minister of the testicles should hold their scrotum, and another minister should extend the leg with its thigh or bandage that lies on the thigh; and each minister should stretch out their own side, and the stone should remain between the thighs of the sick person holding it, so that the body does not move towards its extension.
And then the doctor reduces the dislocation with their hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh on the outside to prevent displacement.
And then when the dislocation returns and it is declared to you that the reduction has been successful, then apply plaster and secure it with bandages very tightly. Then tie the thigh with bandages at the knee.
Be careful or guard yourself from the nerves which are behind the heel, for if you bind it tightly there it will cause pain and hurt them greatly.
And then leave him like that for two or three days; and if the bandage becomes softened, remove it.
And then on the third day or the fourth day, remove the splint from him, and forbid the patient to move for forty days. But if he is forced to walk during that time, it is not guaranteed that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted again, and thus would not receive proper treatment.
But if an abscess forms from the wound, then you should apply the remedies that were mentioned earlier in this narrative regarding cure and embrocation until it is removed.
Chapter XXXIV
Of the treatment of dislocation of the said feet.
It is necessary that one who has suffered a dislocation should be reduced with little extension without struggle; and it should not be difficult to accomplish this, for the leg is lighter.
But if the dislocation is in some joints of the toes of the foot, then you should have the patient lie on their back on the ground or on a table, and hold their leg extended as if they were walking.
And then you stand on your feet, and place your hand beneath the protruding joints, and press down with your foot with force until it returns into its proper position, and make sure that it is properly reduced and does not protrude again.
And then place the sole of the foot on a table that takes up all the leg, which has two ends. Then stretch it properly and firmly with bandages for three days. Then remove them and have him rest from walking for many days until he is healed and the reduction is secure.
Chapter XXXV
"Of dislocation injuries that occur with bruising or fracture or in combination."
When some cause of those occurs, and you perform the cure of that and the restoration of it, many times death succeeds.
"And therefore it is not necessary that one presume about its cure, but rather he who is wise in the art, experienced through long practice, merciful and compassionate, careful, not reckless or presumptuous; and let him begin with medicines that draw out only abscesses, and leave the patient to divine judgment, but also to him whom you hope for healing from destruction, with alleviation of the illness, and in which some hope appears." And therefore strive immediately to reduce it at the beginning of the cause, before an abscess forms.
And then if the limb returns as we wish, afterwards administer regimen which draws out abscess and heals the bruising with whatever is convenient to it of the dried remedies.
And if dislocation occurs with fracture and the broken ends of the bone are displaced, then you perform the reduction of them, and do in this what we have said in the simple cases of that which is precedent in the places of those.
And guard and avoid according to your ability that which enters through the paths of fear, as my prediction has preceded for you; because this is better for your Creator than you deserve, and more lasting for your glory, and more healthy for your true body in your time. Thus endeth the words of Albucasis perfectly, may God bless them! Amen.
