"Oh, sons, since I have completed this book for you, which is the last of medical science, in completing it thus ends its course, and by its explanations and declarations, it seems to me that I fulfill what is lacking for you with this treatise, which deals with manual operation, that is surgery."
For the manual operation is prostrated in our region and time, entirely private, except that very few remain who possess its science, and its signs are lost; there would remain only a few small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have changed their meaning and ended up being guided by those errors and hesitations so that their intentions are closed and its strength is prolonged and its art.
"And it seems to me that I will revive this with an order according to the treatise's method of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and also that it comes with the forms of the cautery instruments and other tools for the work as it is for addition to the declaration, and for preparation of it, which cause is necessary."
"But the cause why there is no good artisan with his hand in this our time is because the art of medicine is long and its performer must be practiced beforehand in the science of anatomy, which includes knowing the structure of members, their connections, separations, the knowledge of bones, nerves, and tendons, their number and their function; and also about the pulsating veins and quiet ones, and the places of their discharge."
"And therefore says Hippocrates that with great words but little work, especially in the art of surgery."
"But we have already said about this at the beginning of this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said about anatomy will certainly fall into error, causing many deaths among men, as I have seen too many cases where some are formed in this science but lack its knowledge and experience."
"For I saw a foolish and inexperienced doctor incision an abscess in the neck of a woman and cut some arteries of the neck, causing her to bleed greatly so that she died among the masses."
"And I saw another doctor who took out a stone from a man who was in his final state, and the stone was large; he came to him and extracted that stone with a piece of the bladder, causing that man to die on the third day."
"And I already warned him not to do it, but he insisted; and I saw that due to the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I knew right away that he would die."
"And I saw another doctor who received payment of one ducat from our land for surgery; he intervened on a black man who had a broken hip joint. The doctor prepared himself with his ignorance and extracted the fracture over the wound using pillows and wedges with great force, not leaving room for respiration."
"And he finished according to his desires and then removed the bandages; but soon afterwards he relapsed and died a few days later because the hip joint became inflamed and gangrenous."
"And I was called to him and prepared myself to remove the bandage; finally there was tranquility and easing of his pains."
"But nevertheless corruption had already spread to the limb, so I could not stop it; and corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until the patient died."
"And I saw another doctor who pierced a cancerous abscess; soon afterwards it became ulcerated and its mischief was magnified by the patient's master."
"This is because the cancerous ulcer is caused by melancholic bile; therefore it should not be treated with fire alone, but rather that member which suffers from it should be cauterized."
"And therefore, my children, it is necessary for you that the operation with the hand be divided into two parts: one is the operation associated with health, and the other is the work in which there is danger in the most difficult situations."
"And I have already pointed this out in all places throughout this book where there is mention of operation involving error and fear; therefore it is necessary for you to keep this in mind and let it go, so that foolish people do not find an opportunity to speak against you."
"And therefore take up your arms with solicitude and protection of God, and treat your patients with gentleness and firmness."
"And use the best way to obtain salvation and laudable success through the grace of God, leave behind terrible diseases difficult to cure, show your arms against that which makes you afraid, so that confidence in your faith and your name does not fail you: for more remains to your glory, both now and hereafter to your sanctity."
"Wherefore already in some of his treatises he said:" "No cure illness poorly, lest you be called bad physicians."
"I have already read this book according to three chapters."
"Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part." "The first chapter orders the entrance into caves, in the forms of instruments and irons for cauterization, and that which is necessary in the operation."
"The division of the second part." "The second chapter, on cutting and piercing, and on cupping glasses, and on plague doctors, and on the extraction of arrows and similar things, all ordered in the forms of instruments."
"The third chapter on restoration and dislocation, and cure of twisted joints and similar ones; chapter ordered with entrance into caves and forms of instruments."
"You should say what is the quality of the instruments used for that cauterization and their non-accidents, and in which complexion it is prohibited to cauterize."
"Therefore I say that the sermon on the quality of the cauterizing instrument and its non-accident is long and prolix, subtle by science, and secret hidden; and already many wise men have spoken about it, and they disagree among themselves, and it suffices me to mention a little bit of their sermons for fear of length."
"And therefore I say that cauterization befits all complexions universally, which are with matter or without matter, except for two complexions, which are called complexions cold without matter."
"In the cold and dry complexion with matter there is disagreement; for some said that cauterization is beneficial to it, and others said the opposite, that cauterization is not convenient in an illness which is by quality and by dryness, because the nature of fire is quality and dryness, and it is inconvenient that an illness which is cold and dry with matter should be healed by something hot and dry."
"And he says that one who says the opposite of this, that cauterization is made beneficial in all cold and dry illnesses which come into the bodies of men, for when you compare the body of man and its humidities to the complexion of fire, you find the body of man hot."
"And I say that this has already been discovered by experience many times."
"But however it is not necessary to come back onto this which has already been discussed and practiced in the chapter on cauterization through previous exercise, and knowing the diversity of the complexion of men and the disposition of illnesses in their meteyssas (i.e. seats), and their causes, accidents, and the space of time of those."
"But in the other complexions, there is no doubt about it, and especially in hot and humid illnesses, for all doctors agree on those, and they are not disagreeing in the use of cauterization in those."
"And know, son, that the secret of cure by cauterization with fire and its goodness is much discussed in burning medicine, because fire is simple, whose action does not extend beyond the member being cauterized, nor does it reach the other member joined to it unless with a little harm."
"But the action of burning medicine reaches to that which is near it in the members, and strong fire brings illness into the member with difficult healing, and strong fire often goes out."
"But fire, because of its sublimity and goodness of substance, does not do anything except superfluously. And it is already known to us by experience and the length of service in studying this art about the truth of causes; and therefore I am excused from the length of the sermon. And if it were not that my book is not read in this place, I would hide from you in this pause a secret with fire, which is the quality of its operation in bodies and its expulsion by which illnesses are expelled, demonstrated with philosophical speech, which would be sharp for your minds."
"And know, son, that they disagree about the time when it is convenient to perform cauterization and they place the best time in spring."
"And I say that cauterization is convenient at all times, because the harm caused by the accidental time is submerged in the benefit of what is drawn by cauterization, and especially if the cauterization is for pains or necessary pains, strong and fistulous ones which do not tolerate delay because it is feared that they will bring malice, which is greater than little harm entering through time."
"And do not put this in your minds, son, for that is only estimated by the common people and foolish doctors, for they think that illness which is healed by cauterization does not have a return at any time, and they place that consequence."
"And the cause is not like that which they think for this reason, because cauterization is only in place of medicine which alters the complexion and dries out the humidities which are the cause why pains come."
"But however cauterization is superfluous over medicine because of the desire for its power and virtue of its operation and greatness of its lord."
"And it is possible that its illness returns at some hour of time, according to the complexion of the sick person and the location of his illness, and the power of cauterization, and what has been prepared in the body for it by the aggregation of superfluities therein, and what has been obtained for it in its acquisition through foods and similar causes; but the illness in which cauterization is administered is subtle in a member with few superfluities and humidities, like cauterization of a tooth for pain and similar ones, it is possible that this pain does not return, but this is done in small things."
"And moreover the common saying is that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, and it is a truer saying than what they understand in it, because they think that there is no cure that profits with medicine nor any other cause that approaches cauterization."
"And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine is only when the methods of cure are administered in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not help, and therefore cauterization is administered at the end of the cause, and it profits for that." "And from here on I say that cauterization is the last remedy of medicine, not according to the intention which the common people and many foolish doctors understand."
"And they said in ancient times that cauterization with gold is better than cauterization with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the sublimity of its substance."
"And they said that the place of cauterization does not burn like that which is absolutely true, for I have already proven and verified that this happens only in certain bodies without others, and cauterization with gold is good and better than with iron as they said; but however when you make a cauterization with fire with gold, it is not declared to you, because the ignition is done according to the quantity that you want because of the hardness of the gold, and it prepares to receive friction; and if you place it on the ignition, the gold will melt by the fire, and some plates will fall into the fire so that the artisan catches by the occupation of that."
"And therefore cauterization with iron should be done more gently and more carefully in order to achieve the right operation."
"And I have already ordered this chapter on cauterization according to chapters, and I have ordered those of the head within the weights, so that later you may ask what you want about it."
"The First Chapter."
"This cautery eliminates humidity and coldness, the accidental cause of which is the excessive flow of phlegm (called corruption) from the head to the eye sockets and ear canals. It also removes excessive sleeping, toothache, and pain in the throat, generally eliminating all illnesses caused by coldness such as paralysis, pleurisy, apoplexy, and similar illnesses."
"The method of this cautery is as follows: first, order the patient to purge their head using laxative medicine for three or four nights, depending on the severity of the illness and the age and constitution of the patient."
"Next, command him to shave his head with a razor. Then make him lie down on a heated stone bench, and place his hands on the stone beneath."
"Next, place your palm over his forehead, with your fingers spreading out towards his eyebrows, and press gently." "But first, when your middle finger has reached the spot, mark that location with ink. Then heat the olive-oil cautery, which looks like this:"
"Then place the cautery on the marked spot, pressing down steadily while twisting it gently to ensure good contact. Keep twisting until you see smoke rising from the skin."
"Then lift your hand gently and observe the spot. If you see some bone exposed on the skin, like a grain of barley, then remove your hand immediately. But if not, return your hand with the iron and continue until you see what I have described."
"Then take some salt and dissolve it on the spot. Leave it there for three days."
"Next, apply a border of wax around the cauterized spot and leave it there until the burn scar has healed completely." "And finally, treat the location with Tetterwax ointment until it is fully healed."
"When the wound remains open, it is better to bind the arm, which is more beneficial and helpful."
"It was said by some of them that the spine should be cauterized inside the bone, and the cautery should be held until some part of it adheres to the substance of the bone."
"And then what sticks to the bone should be scraped off, and then it should be treated."
"And others said that when the cautery reaches the end, it should be pressed strongly onto the bone until the bone cracks, and this is the form of the little cautery." "And they believe that at that point the vapors of the head expire."
"And if the wound remains open for a long time, it should be treated until it is consolidated."
"But I do not see these two kinds of cauteries at all, but rather in some men due to fear; and leave that, it seems to me better with health when there is; because the head is opened by solution of continuity from this way just as we have testified in the other members, and even more so when the head of the sick person is of frail nature."
"And the first kind of cautery is safer and better in my opinion, and with that I do indeed agree, because with that it is healthier."
"Chapter 32." (This means "Chapter According to the Numbering System")
Of cauterizing the head.
"When the head has chronic and long-lasting pain and this is in prolonged illness, and medicines and plasters and cataplasms and poultices and ointments and catarrhs and similar things are used and even if it has already been cauterized with one cautery which does not help for any of those causes, then consider whether the head of the patient is of strong creation in its nature; and if it is not frail but rather somewhat thin-skinned, then that person should be cauterized with another cautery in addition to that one." "And accordingly cauterize him over the horn of his head until the cord is severed." "Cut the cord and uncover the bone as much as we have mentioned and cauterize him with a cautery at the back of the head in the place called 'vass' — that is where the cupping glass is placed." "And do not uncover the bone in this case because the pain caused by it is very different from the pain of all other cauteries on the head."
"And I tell you this cautery is placed in its location because the cautery with which the horns of the head and the occupit are cauterized must be more subtle than that with which the middle of the head is cauterized, and this is the form of it."
"Chapter 33."
Of cauterizing against migraine not accompanied by fever.
"When sudden pain is felt in the part of the head or a persistent pain in the temple, let it be evacuated with medicines that clarify the head, and let the other treatment which I have mentioned in the sections on illnesses be administered; and if nothing helps, then cauterization should be done in one of two ways: either cauterization with a medicine of burning nature or with iron."
"The cautery with a burning medicine is when you take one dram of aloe and scrape it off and cut the ends of it from both heads." "And then incise the place of the pain in the temple with a sharp lancet until it is in the right location near the cord, but hidden."
"And then press it with firm pressure for a descending constriction and leave it like that for the space of three hours; and then remove the cloth and take away the aloe and leave the wound open for two or three days, and then cover it with clean bandages until it makes scar tissue."
"And then treat it with ointment until it is healed."
"And if you wish, do this with some burning medicines which I have written about in the second book of burning medicines."
"But cauterization with iron is done in this way: ignite a cautery which has this shape:"
"and it is called 'closed nails' because the head of it is like the shape of a nail with some curvature, and in the middle of it there is a small elevation."
"And then place it on the place of pain and hold your hand -- so that the cautery is not adhering -- and slowly turn the iron with speed."
"And if the quantity of it that adheres to the skin is thus that most of it adheres, then lift your hand up so that the artery which is underneath does not adhere, lest there come a flow of blood."
"And then wet the wound with salt water and place it on the location and leave it for three days; and then cover it with clean bandages and treat it with ointment until it is healed."
"And if you wish, cauterize with the tip of the scalpel according to cauteries, and beware of incising the artery in this migraine which is properly not accompanied by fever."
"Chapter Four."
Of cauterizing against migraine accompanied by fever.
"When you treat migraine with what we have said about the previous treatment and what we have said in the sections on illnesses, but the treatment is not effective, then sometimes it happens that the illness does not allow for the first cautery with medicine or fire cautery, therefore you should ignite the scalpel cautery until it is heated, because you place your hand on the location of the pain with a line of length which has most of its part, or if you wish, incise the artery so that it enters into the bone."
"But it is necessary for you to guard against the continuity of the jawbone, which is moved during mastication, and that the lacertum does not adhere and the nerves which move it do not suffer spasm."
"And if it is about the guarding and caution of the flow of blood from the artery that is incised because there is fear in its incision, especially for him who does not know what he does and is not studious and experienced; let the operation be done at the beginning."
"And I bring to mind here in this place of this book the regulation of the flow of blood accidentally from the artery according to its manner."
"And if you see this illness not responding to this cautery and you see the patient's body tolerating it well, cauterize it in the middle of the head as we have described, and treat the wound until it is healed."
"And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on constriction of artery with cautery having two tips, because this is better cauterization and more comforting."
"Chapter Five."
Of cauterizing ear pains.
"When in the ear there is pain due to friction and it is treated with laxative causes and other treatments which have been mentioned in the division, but the pain is not removed, therefore ignite the cautery called 'puncta', of which this is the shape:"
"And then puncture around the ignition and move it around the entire ear like a wheel is turned, or in the circumference of each one if the pain is in each one." "Be careful with the cautery near the root of the ear little by little because you have felt the location with your finger."
"And if puncturing ten times all around the ear, and if you wish, cure the locations until they are healed."
"Chapter Six."
Of cautery for quinsy
Quinsy that is cured and with cautery is only of the kinds that come from pleurisy according to what we have said in the divisions of illnesses.
Avoid cauterization of the species that occurs due to dryness or spasm of the nerves.
When you treat that species of tortoise with herbs and caperworts and garlic, and your treatment is not effective, then it is necessary to cauterize the wound with three cauteries: first at the root of the ear, second a little below the temple, and third at the junction of the two lips.
And pause your cautery at the opposite side of the wound's departure, for softening occurs only in the part that appears healed.
And the method of cauterization is as follows: cauterize with the cautery in the right side of the extremity of the ear, then a little above the horn of the head, and on the temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the finger joint; and pause your hand with the cautery until it has consumed about half of the quantity of the species of thread.
And this is the form of the cautery, which belongs to the barber-surgeon, the shape of which is like a sickle before the table. But still it would be better if you saw something like this; and it is necessary that in place of excessive crudeness, there should be a little more finesse.
And afterwards dress the wound with water before it heals completely.
Chapter VII
Of cautery for ancient apoplexy.
When apoplexy is ancient and treated with what we have said and there's no fever, then cauterize him with four cauteries: on all the corners of his head; and one in the middle of the head, as we have said; and one on the neck. The manner of cauterization is done according to what is described above.
And now that the patient has been cauterized over the mouth of the stomach, and it's more serious; then proceed to treat him with what follows.
Chapter VIII
On cauterization for oblivion caused by stroke (apoplexy).
First, give the patient large jars and pills made of groundsel.
Then shave the head of the entire patient and place on his neck the plaster of centaury described in the treatise on plasters.
And keep applying it several times, because this is the manner of cauterization. Then do as I have described above in that order.
And if the patient is not cured well with that, then proceed to make three cauteries on the last part of his head, which should be descending from the highest part of the head down to the lowest part of the neck. And pause between each cautery with the thickness of a finger, and then treat the cautery wound with what has been prescribed.
But if you wish to make the patient more tolerant, then proceed to cauterize him in the middle of his head. And if you wish even greater effectiveness, then cauterize him on both sides of his horns (temples).
Then treat that until it is healed; and let the cauteries be made with olive oil according to the shape given before.
Chapter IX
On cauterization for paralysis and softening of the entire body.
If you proceed with the softening of the head using jars and what has been said; then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize him in the middle of his head, on both sides of his horns (temples), and on the last part of it, and make three cauteries on the vertebrae of his neck.
And if it is necessary in the case of paralysis and too much tolerance of the disease, which is strong, then proceed to cauterize him with four cauteries on the vertebrae of his back, and afterwards make one cautery on the muscle of the thigh, raising your hand. Then treat that until it is healed, and let these cauteries be made with olive oil.
Chapter Ten
De la cauterització de l'epilèpsia
No s'efectua la cauterització en el pacient epilèptic si no és a causa d'un flecma.
Per tant és necessari netejar el cervell del pacient al començament del tractament i amb altres cura que hem explicat en aquesta secció quan el pacient té una malaltia greu i tolera els medicaments excepcionalment.
I si el pacient és un nen que no tolera els medicaments, llavors s'administren gargarismes i masticadors al servei de netejar el cervell, durant diversos dies, amb l'ajuda d'una bona alimentació.
I a continuació es rasca el cabell del pacient i s'efectua una cauterització amb un cauteri al mig del cap segons la manera anterior, i amb un altre cauteri a l'occipuc del mateix, i sobre cada un dels còdols del cap també s'efectua una cauterització. I si el pacient és fort i tolera bé els tractaments, llavors es realitzen les cauteritzacions amb els mateixos cauteris que hem mencionat abans, havent paralíticament i mollificació del cos sobre les vértebres del coll i de la columna vertebral.
I cal utilitzar el mateix cauteri d'oli d'oliva que s'ha esmentat anteriorment.
però si el pacient és un nen, llavors és preferible fer servir un cauteri més suau segons aquesta manera.
Capítol xi
A continuació es presenta el capítol xi del llibre "Cautericum": "De la cauterització en casos de melancolia".
Quan les causes de la melancòlia són humiditats corruptes i inflamacions gruixudes, llavors és necessari efectuar una cauterització amb els mateixos cauteris que hem esmentat anteriorment, havent també un paràlisi.
Si la causa de la melancòlia és l'excés d'humor negre declinant cap a la melancòlia i el cos del pacient és humit, llavors és recomanable donar-li a beure una beguda que neteja el cervell segons el que s'ha explicat anteriorment en aquesta divisió.
I després es rasca el cabell del pacient i es col·loca una tortuga ben curosa a la seva coronilla i, a continuació, es posarà aquesta sobre el mig del cap.
I el pacient hauria de ser estirat en una superfície llisa i assegurat per tots costats.
I després cal aplicar un liniment sobre la ferida, i s'ha d'untar amb greix d'ovella antic. I també s'escalfa el cauteri sobre el foc amb un calent moderat segons la mida de la ferida que s'ha de produir, i després s'aplica al pacient mentre encara està calent. I llavors es col·loca el cauteri al mig del cap del pacient dins del cerclle i s'espera fins que hagi refrescat la seva entrada.
I després s'aplica l'oli al pacient amb el mateix regiment cada setmanalment una vegada fins que la ferida estigui sanada; o també es poden fer petits punts amb el cauteri segons la mida de la ferida, mantenint la mà amb un cauteri ordenat d'aquesta manera: aquest és un tipus de cauteri que humecta el cervell de forma uniforme.
I després s'aplica aquest cotó embolicat en greix d'ovella o en cotó sobre la ferida.
Capítol xii
"Concerning cauterization of descending water in the wound."
"When you notice the start of water descending in the wound, as indicated by the signs I mentioned earlier in this section, then begin to give the patient something to drink that will clarify their head and protect them from all moistures."
"And do that same treatment with baths for several days."
"And promptly order that the patient's head be shaved and cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head; and also cauterize it with two cauteries on both temples if this is the beginning of an inflammation of water in both wounds, or on one temple if this is the beginning of water in one wound."
"Cauterize all veins and arteries that are near the neck; these cauteries should be placed at an equal distance on either side of a line drawn across the forehead."
"And guard against fluxes of blood when cauterizing. And if you see any fluxes of blood, stop them with some medicine that is at your disposal."
"And then come with knowledge about extraction of arteries and about the removal of these and care for fluxes of blood."
"Sometimes it is necessary to cauterize in the nape of the neck near two bones using two large cauteries."
Chapter XIII.
Of Cauterization for Dry Eyes.
When tears from the eyes are abundant and flow through veins and arteries that are visible on the surface of the head, and it is determined that this is a superfluity of blood, then cauterize that area with a cautery which we have described at the beginning of this treatise regarding boiling water in the eyes. Also cauterize the middle of the forehead, two places behind the temples, and two places on either side of the skull bone. If further cautery is needed, then cauterize also on both sides of the cheekbone near the outer corner of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Chapter XIV
Of cautery for removing foul odor from the nose
When you treat that with what we have said in this section and it does not improve, then prepare and give the patient to drink cooked barley for three nights. Then shave his head and cauterize him with a hot cautery followed by an olive-oil cautery. Also cauterize him with a clove cautery, and place two cauteries above the eyebrows on either side of the hair.
Be careful not to burn that area excessively.
And this is how to perform the clove cautery:
**Capitulum XV.**
Concerning the cauterization for softening of eyelids.
When an eyelid is softened by illness or moisture, cauterize that eyelid with this lunar cautery; and this is the method for it:
And if you wish to cauterize across both eyebrows, do so with two cauteries in total, spaced out along the eyebrow ridge, and elongated towards the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of eyebrow.
Do not press too hard with the cautery, but rather according to how much of the third division of the eyelid is adhered.
**Capitulum XVI.**
Concerning cauterization of the eyelid when hairs grow into the inner divisions and poke the eye.
When hairs of the eyelash grow into the inner divisions so as to prick the eye, cauterize them in either of two ways: either with a cautery or with medicated combustion.
If cauterizing with fire, first command the patient to pull out their hairs like those who are being plucked for a depilation, until they have grown long enough; and if they prick at their source of growth, then stretch open the eyelids with a cloth so that no harm is done while the hairs are growing.
Then, when they have grown and become elongated, pause the head of the patient on a high seat, and then bring close over the eyelid of the eye with the hairs with a tent-like device, shaped like a leaf of a mulberry tree, and place its beginning near to the hairs.
And then apply heat enclosed in aloe juice or mucilage of marshmallow onto the eye.
Then kindle the cautery of which this is the shape:
Then cauterize along the figure which is thus marked out, little by little, in several glances, until the surface of the chain which appears like a mulberry leaf has been burnt completely.
The sign of success in this procedure is that you see the eyelid of the eye become contracted and its hairs lifted up from the puncture of the eye.
Then raise your hand and leave it for three days, and then apply cold compresses with a cloth until the scar has healed. Then dress that with ointment until it is healed.
But if the hairs return for some cause near their source and the eyelid becomes softened again, then perform the cautery once more upon that place just as you had done initially.
But if the hairs grow on the eyelid itself, then cauterize that until it is raised to its natural place and elongated, so that the hairs do not prick the eye.
But when cauterizing with medicated combustion, this is what you do: command the patient to pluck out their hairs until they have grown long and elongated, and then make a shape of mulberry leaf from cardboard or cloth.
Then take some known soap and live coals, about nine of each, and quickly mix those ashes well together, and make it quickly so that it does not cool down; then spread that over the cardboard which has been made in the shape of a mulberry leaf, and place that upon one eye or both eyes; and place the eye compress enclosed in aloe juice onto the eye, with the patient's head on a high seat.
Then place your finger upon the medication and press it gently but do not move it until the patient feels the bite of the medication, for the bite is like that of fire.
Then when the patient feels that bite, then release the medication and remove it with your finger; then when the bite ceases, then remove the medication and wash the eye with water. Then observe if perhaps the eyelid is raised as it should be washed by the constriction with fire or incision, for then this is good. And if not, then place back upon that again the medication onto the location where it has not taken effect until the operation is finished and the eye is contracted.
Then place a cold compress on it until the chain of adhesion has been eradicated, and then dress it with soothing ointment or another one until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you, in performing this operation, to guard with unceasing diligence that no dirt from the medication falls into the eye. And if the eyelid becomes softened after several days and some hairs prick the eye for any cause, then perform your medication again upon that location where the eyelid has softened, and especially as you did at the beginning; then continue until it is healed.
And this is the shape of a mulberry leaf:
"Know that the widths of men's eyes are varied according to their size and smallness, and therefore your contraction is made accordingly."
"It shall not be hidden from him who studies this art how to reach the straight path."
"Chapter XVII."
"On the cautery of a fistula that is in the tear duct of the eye."
"When you treat a fistula with what we have said in the divisions of diseases and your treatment does not confer, then you must cauterize it in this manner: Have the patient hold their head steady on the table, and let one servant hold the patient's head between their hands in such a way that it is not moved or agitated by the patient's head."
"And then place cotton soaked in album or mucilage of ptill on the eye of the patient."
"And then apply the cautery, the form of which is as follows:"
"It should be heated, like a reed or an eagle's feather, at one end with which the cautery is made."
"And if you wish, it may also penetrate into the other extremity." "And if you wish, let it be drawn out like a thread."
"But nevertheless, that which is heated is better for your work."
"And then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out of it the sanies and dry it up." "And if it is not open, then make it open and squeeze out the pus from it."
"And then place on it the cautery which has been well heated, and hold it there with your hand but a little bit away from the eye at the opening of the nose, so that you do not err in your hand or disturb the patient. And then place the cautery on the gray of the eye and burn it."
"And if at the beginning of the cautery it goes into the eye, that is good. And if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice if necessary, and leave it like that for three days. And then apply cotton with a drying ointment around it until it is healed."
"But if after eleven days it is not healed, then apply a corrosive medicine on it until the bone is exposed and it is scraped according to what is suitable in its chapter."
"And another method of cauterizing a fistula which some first described: Enter into the location of the fistula and make it open and then place in that fissure a thread as thin as possible, of which this is its form: And take there the quantity of one dram of melted lead; and hold it with your hand with good retention, so that the patient is not harmed so that the molten lead does not reach the eye of that person. And it is necessary to place on the eye of the patient cotton soaked in album of wool or water, because lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it by marvelous healing."
"And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and cure, that is good. And if not, then it is necessary to administer a trocar through the nose and reduce the fistula into the body of the nose according to what will come in its proper place."
"Chapter XVIII."
"For cauterization of the split sinews."
Occasionally, fissures occur in the labia minora, and more frequently in those of infants.
Then if your cure with that which we have said in the divisions does not succeed, then immediately cauterize it with a small iron instrument according to this method.
And let its concavity follow the fineness of a needle's point
Approach carefully with that iron instrument in those fissures until it reaches the center of the fissure.
Then dress it with cerote until it is healed
Chapter XIX
Concerning the cauterization of a fistula in the mouth
When there is an aposteme on the uvula or palate or roots of teeth which breaks open and becomes old and discharges pus, forming a fistula, if you treat it but the treatment does not succeed, then you should cauterize with fire according to the size received in the fistula. Then insert that heated iron into the track of the fistula until the hot iron reaches its center, and do this once or twice. Then dress it with what we have said concerning treatment until it is healed.
And if the cure is hindered and it does not heal, then it is necessary to discover the place and remove the corrupted bone according to what will come later in its chapter.
Chapter XX
Concerning the cauterization of teeth and the softening of gingivae
When the gingivae are softened by moisture and the teeth are painful, and you treat them with medications but they do not improve, then place the head of the illness on the tooth, and quickly insert that heated cautery instrument in its shape thus: Place the quina over the tooth and insert it into that cautery iron swiftly. Then remove your hand a little so that the heat of the fire may reach the root of the tooth.
And then remove your hand, and repeat the cauterization several times according to what you wish.
"The patient should rinse their mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour. Then spit it out, as the foul tooth is fixed, the swollen gum is strengthened, and the corrupted humidity is dried."
"The twenty-first chapter"
"On the cauterization of tooth pain."
"When tooth pain is caused by coldness, or there is rot or worm in it, and the cure cannot be achieved with medicine, then cauterize that one in two ways: either cauterize it with a hot iron, or cauterize it with fire."
"To cauterize with a hot iron: Take a red-hot iron, wrap it in cloth at its tip, and quickly press it onto the painful tooth until it gets heated."
"And repeat this several times until the heat of the fire reaches the root of the teeth."
If you wish, immerse wool or cotton in the border of said powder and place it on the painful tooth, then place a heated iron on top so that the iron reaches the root of the tooth's cavity.
However, when performing cauterization with fire, be sure to wait until the iron is red-hot and glowing, so that the sharpness of the heat does not reach the patient's mouth.
And when the iron is properly heated, apply it to the tooth and press down firmly with your hand until the cautery cools. Repeat this process several times until the pain subsides, either on that day or the following day.
And it is necessary that after this cauterization, the patient rinse their mouth well with warm water and hold it in for an hour before spitting it out. This is the proper way to perform cauterization.
Cauterize as much of the affected area as you see fit, according to your judgment and ability.
And this is how to make the cannula:
"The chapter twenty-two."
"Regarding the cauterization of external hernias."
"When external hernias are filled with phlegm and humors, and do not comply with digestion despite the use of medications and you wish to achieve digestion in that area, then you will cauterize it using a firebrand shaped as follows: having two pointed ends, place one end into the fire until it becomes hot, and then apply the other end onto the tumor for a short while; if necessary, repeat this process several times until the tumor reaches its peak."
"If the tumor is small, then apply the cautery according to its size; afterwards, let it rest for three days and apply it again on the affected area at its edges until what was burnt by the fire has healed."
"And afterwards, dress that wound with ointments, bandages, and cloths until it is healed."
Chapter XXIII
About cauterization of sore throats and constriction of windpipes.
When humidity comes upon the canal of the lung, especially when it is accompanied by coldness, then the patient should initially be evacuated with laxative medicines and cautery applied to that part of the liver near the pressed area.
And be sure not to reach the cautery to the liver or burn any part of it, except for a little bit.
And cauterize that with another cautery at the junction of the neck and the last thoracic spine. And his cautery should be made in this way as was previously described.
And treat him with what has been said above until he is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
On cautery for lung disease and coughing.
When coughing and lung disease are due to moist coldness, and the illness has no fever or spitting and is an old condition, then cauterize with two cauteries on the manubrium sternum in the areas pressed by the shoulders and elbows; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two breasts; and let the cauteries be made as previously described.
And if you wish, your cautery can be done by pricking with the cautery called "puncta," whose shape has been described above in the punctuation of ear pain.
And they should be made thus: and treat him with what was said above until he is healed.
And if the cauteries have three prongs, then one cautery can be made thus; with one attempt you can make three cauteries in this way:
Capítulo XXV. De cauterizacion de dolor de cap.
"The cauterization of titillic, which is the head of the assistant."
"When the head of the assistant is dislocated due to lubricating humidity and it does not remain firm during its return, you should reduce its dislocation before it returns to its usual position. First, gently move it back into place, ensuring that it aligns correctly, as we have witnessed. Then elevate the shoulder blade located behind the titillic with your left hand."
"And moreover, the cautery has two heads; and this is its shape:"
"Moreover, cauterize the shoulder blade so that it enters one within the other. And here is a diagram of cauterization with four heads."
"And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count and for that reason there are eight cauteries."
"And furthermore, pause on the cautery with hot water mixed with salt, and ensure that the dislocation adheres to tranquility, so that the limb may not be moved for some time until it is comforted."
"And if the dislocation is on the upper side and it is necessary to do this, then cauterize over the muscle with a knife-shaped cautery or with pointed cauteries, because the joint is strengthened, humidity is broken up, and the injury is healed."
"Chapter 26."
"On cauterizing the stomach."
"When there is friction and abundant humidity in the stomach that causes it to become enlarged and its contents multiplied excessively, if you continue with the usual treatments without improvement, then it is necessary for the illness to subside on its own, extending the chest and limbs. Then cauterize [the stomach] with three cauteries: one on the left side of the pit of the stomach with a knife-shaped cautery about the size of a finger, and two on either side of the ribcage in such a way that they form a triangular shape; avoid those areas that are not adjusted to prevent burning."
"And if the depth of the cautery is equal to twice the thickness of the skin."
"And let the figure of the cautery be according to this shape with addition. And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form: and this is one cautery according to the form of a circle according to this form:"
"And if the stomach is punctured according to that which frightens from this cautery: and thus, you may make punctures on the stomach with a needle according to the quantity you wish, then cauterize those points with a cautery; and then treat it with the treatment that is previously mentioned until it is healed."
"Chapter 27."
"On cauterizing a feverish liver."
"When there is pain in the liver due to coldness or humidity or excessive windiness causing it to deviate from its normal condition by superfluous evacuation, and if this illness is treated with what we have said and does not improve, then it is necessary for the illness to subside on its own on its own side. Then make three punctures according to this form and quantity evenly spaced over the liver on the left side of the hypochondrium, where a man lies on his right side."
"And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the right hand."
"And do not compress too much with the cautery."
"And if the quantity of what is adhered to is equal to the thickness of a finger's width, and it is not well-adjusted; and if the illness remains on its weight; and if it is not standing up, then have him lie down, having already extended his limbs, elevate his arms."
"And it may be possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a knife-shaped cautery, if you have subtlety and prudence in the art."
"And be careful not to proceed too quickly with the cautery, and let the skin adhere all over so that the entire body adheres and comes within reach of the vessels, for the skin is thin here; know this."
"Chapter 28."
Perforation of an abscess of the liver using a cautery
If you want to know if an abscess or swelling in the liver is located within the substance of the liver or beneath its capsule, then if it's within the substance of the liver, the patient will have severe pain that becomes more acute.
And if it is beneath the capsule of the liver, there is intense pain which often exhausts the patient and discourages doctors from attempting to treat it.
Therefore, the patient should be placed on their back. Then carefully locate the site of the abscess with your fingers and bring the cautery, which is shaped like a hook, to that place. And burn it with that cautery until the entire chain [of inflammation] is burned away, so that it reaches the diaphragm, so that clean flame comes out.
And then cure the other abscesses as you would any others until they are healed.
And this form of cautery should be used only by those who have studied medicine extensively and have had experience treating many illnesses. Although someone may have tried it a few times, it is better for them to leave it to those who are more experienced.
Chapter XXIX
On the cautery of pleurisy
The ancients used cauteries of the liver for pleurisy in this way: you should take a long, dry cautery from the liver and insert it into the hole until it is found. It should be as thick as your finger.
"Then immerse this in oil and place it on the fire, then cauterize with a pointed cautery at the location between the continuation of the furcula and the collar; and with two small cauteries leave them guided, one slightly declining towards the departure that is below the beard, and with two cauteries at what declines between the fifth rib and the armpit, declining slightly towards the rear departures; and with another cautery in the middle location of the chest; and with another on the stomach, and with three cauteries on the rear departures; and with one cautery in that location which is between the two shoulders, and with two cauteries on both sides of the chest, leaving the cautery which is between two shoulders."
"This does not require purchasing your hand with the cautery, rather it should be in the chain of work in manifestation."
"And already the ancient authors said that these are the ancient people who use cauteries of iron similar to a rod and ignite that one in that location which is between the ribs, entering until reaching that aposteme and let it be purified healthy, thus as we have said in the aposteme of the liver."
"But in this perforation with cautery there is no fear, for someone died immediately after it happened in that location called fistula which was not healed."
"Chapter .xxx."
Of the cauterization of the melon.
"When you treat the disease of the melon with what we have said about the cure in the division and do not confer your cure, then cauterize in it according to three manners, all of which are correct. The first is that you make three cauteries or four, following the length of the melon according to the figure of the liver cauteries, whose figure has been preceded."
"And let the thickness between each cautery be that of a finger or a little more, and the manner of cautery should be the same as we have said for the liver cautery equally."
"And do not press your hand with the cautery; and let the disease be even on its own side."
"And another manner of cauterizing is that you ignite the cautery having two vents, which cause we have mentioned in the chapter on dislocation of the muscle, and raise the chain which is in the direction of the melon where it reaches the location of the left disease."
"And let your elevation be such that when you raise the chain, it is according to the length of the body, so that cauteries are made according to the width of the body."
"And then insert the two vents and ignite it quickly in that place where with those you penetrate the chain from the other side."
"And then extract the cautery, and thus four cauteries are made."
"And if you wish, cauterize with a cautery having three vents."
"And then cure the cautery because it has remained to remove the bandage for too many days, for more is conferred that the other causes preceding in the cure."
"Chapter .xxxi."
"On cauterization of dropsy."
"No cautery is used in dropsy except in certain instances properly."
"When you treat the dropsical patient according to the methods of treatment mentioned in the division, if your treatment does not succeed, then cauterize with four cauteries around the navel and one on the stomach, another on the liver, another on the spleen, two between the shoulder blades of the back, one on the right side of the foot, and another on the stomach." "And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the thickness of the skin."
"And also leave the cautery upright so that it gets cold slowly."
"And do not remove the patient from treatment immediately after the cautery with something hot, because it is necessary to add two ointments and then bandage it hurriedly with the aid of healing."
"The shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized should be like a claw according to its previous form, and that with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped according to its preceding form."
"Chapter XXXII."
"Of cautery for the feet and for the thighs."
"When the feet are swollen with dropsy and filled with turbid water, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the instep of the foot near where the ear is joined, lift your hand up with the cautery but do not twist it; then lift your hand up again without returning it completely, for the turbid water will drain."
"A cautery is made in this way: Then place two cauteries on both thighs and make a cautery on each thigh with the point of the knife-like cautery." "Make the cautery along the length of the thigh, leaving one below the knee and another at mid-thigh level. On each thigh place two cauteries."
"And leave the boil open without treatment for a long time until all water drains from it."
"Then treat it with those causes which we have mentioned."
Chapter 33
"On cauterization of the body below the belly."
"When the belly suffers from heat and excessive humidity causing weakness of the powers, so it is that the digestive and retentive powers are weakened, which reside in the stomach and intestines. It is treated by these methods of treatment without referring to them, sometimes the illness exhibits signs of cauterization, at which time cauterize with a large cautery on the top of his stomach according to what has been said previously about the cauterization of the stomach, using the circular cautery and four subtle pin-like cauteries around it, as well as cauterizing on the spleen near the left kidney using either one or two cauteries."
"And if sometimes there are excessive humidities and the illness tolerates it, then cauterize him on the diaphragm and on the intestines, placing two cauteries close together on the stomach near the groin, for this is a perfect cure that will not fail."
Chapter 34
"Regarding the cauterization of external hemorrhoids."
"When there are external hemorrhoids that do not heal or one of the large veins is rubbed or corrupted by humidities, and they are cured with what we have said in the division without following this method of treatment, then cauterize them with three cauteries on each side of the anus, placed small by small triangularly, and place another cautery above the navel for two days."
"If the stomach is cold and the food not digested, and the face is pale or inflamed, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and apply another cautery to the liver and one with a pointed cautery to the spleen, leaving the cauteries in place for some time until the interior has healed."
Chapter XXXV
"Regarding cauterization after an incision of hemorrhoids."
When you excise the hemorrhoids, then ignite the cautery that is assembled like a dart. Next, insert the ignited cautery into the excised hemorrhoid and burn the remaining tissue inside until it reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood flows.
And do this once or twice, because if there are too many hemorrhoids, then cauterize each one according to what we have described, and cure them with what is recommended for internal swellings until they are healed.
"If you cauterize with a large cautery over any part of the anus, it will be more painful."
Chapter XXXVI
"Regarding the cauterization of fistulas that occur naturally in the parts of the body."
"When nature does not obey the work we have recommended for its place, and the patient is afraid of this, let it be healed with cautery."
"Therefore, when there is some fistula in the derriere that is old and corrupted by dryness and corrupt moisture, it is more appropriate to try to cure it with the aforementioned probe, carefully determining the quantity of its depth."
"A suitable cautery would be one resembling a ray [of light]." "And apply this cauterizing iron to this fistula, according to the depth that the probe has reached."
"Brandish the cautery over that area until those corrupted bodies are consumed entirely in one go or two or three, according to your need."
"Be careful not to burn nerves and veins. If the fistula is located in the bladder or intestine, beware of all those areas. Do this only when the fistula is in a fatty location and you believe it is not penetrating."
"And then treat the area that needs healing."
"If the location is sealed and all materials have been cut off from it, and remains that way for a long time, then you should know that it is completely healed."
"If the materials are not removed from it, then you should know that it is penetrating or there is corruption in its vicinity, or this occurs due to those causes which will be remembered later in its location."
Chapter XXXVII
"On cauterizing wounds."
When pain occurs in the lungs due to coldness or congestion, and because of this the patient's heart is saddened, it is necessary to cauterize that area with a pointed cautery on each lung.
And for the second cauterization make it smaller, so that three cauteries will be straight, and then use more cauteries in succession.
Chapter .xxxviii
Of the cautery of the bladder.
When debility and softness occur in the bladder due to coldness and humidity so that the patient cannot retain urine, cauterize it at its beginning on the right side where the pubic hair starts, and cauterize with one cautery on the right side and another on the left.
And let the length of each cautery be according to the amount of flesh at the mouth of the bladder; and cauterize it with one cautery at its lowest part on the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And the cautery should be pointed depending on what is needed
Chapter .xxxix
Of the cautery of the liver.
When there is coldness and humidity in the liver, which inhibits conception, corrupts menstrual flows, delays their onset, and causes pain during menstruation, then that place should be cauterized with three pointed cauteries around the navel, as we have said for the cautery of the bladder; and with one cautery on the lowest part at the back, or with two cauteries.
De cauterizacion del coracoard.
"Of cautery for the dislocation of the ankle."
"When mucus is unduly produced at the ankle joint, and this is due to the displacement of its location, a sign of which is that one part extends over another when they are compared together." "And the site of dislocation can be found in the lower leg."
"Then you should cauterize the patient above the ankle joint with a circular cautery device, because after having marked around the edge of the joint as it is turned, the mark will fall in the middle of the circle."
"And the cautery mentioned above has the same shape as that used for cauterizing the stomach."
"And if this cautery is not available, then cauterize it with three olive-sized cauteries."
"And let the cautery be according to the quantity of heat required for the whole chain [of dislocated bones]; and then carefully dress it until it is healed."
"Chapter 41"
"Of cauterizing the sciatic vein."
"When pain occurs in the ankle joint due to friction and humidity, the patient is cured with what has been said above if it is recent. However, if it is old and confirmed, then you should open the patient's flesh with fetid pills or artificial pills or similar ones; and then cauterize it."
"And the method of cautery in this case is according to two methods: either cautery with burning medicines or cautery with fire."
"Choose according to two known methods, of which one is to cauterize it above the ankle joint with three triangular cauteries arranged thus; and make them with good depth." "And let the space between each cautery be equal to the thickness of a finger, if it is an olive-sized or larger cautery."
"But sometimes place the cauteries above the middle of the joint on top of the ankle bone because there are four cauteries."
"And if you wish, cauterize with the circle described in the form of cautery for dislocation of the ankle joint, which should be a continuous circle and burn the heat throughout the chain."
"And this is the method of cautery in sciatica when pain is adherent to the ankle and not extended within the joint capsule."
"But if it is extended within the joint capsule, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the capsule above the point where you feel the pain that is causing the discomfort; and one cautery on the heel about four fingers' width down from the shinbone on the outer side."
"And if using a cauterizing knife, let the depth of the cautery be according to the quantity of heat required for the whole chain [of dislocated bones]."
"And if the pain extends to the point near the said weights [ankle bones], then cauterize it there with cauteries at three or four points or more as needed."
"And if the pain extends to behind the capsule, then cauterize it there with one cautery using a cauterizing knife."
"And be careful in all cautery that you do not burn too deeply with the cautery so that you burn large nerves or arteries, and thus cause greater harm or contraction."
"And I have seen some of those who cauterized on the heel and burned too deeply during cautery, and the leg became so swollen that the tumor reached the foot; and it was perforated and completely corrupted [gangrenous]." "And thus a frequent complication of this is a solution of continuity of the intestines, which often leads to death."
"And if pain is in two parts at once, then cauterize each one according to this method."
"And the wise have said that in cauterizing the ankle, this is the method of cautery: make it like a circular iron ring whose circumference is about half a palm; and it should be deep near its opening according to the thickness of a hazelnut kernel or somewhat less."
"And then draw another third circle inside that one; and let the space between them be equal to the thickness of a nut from an oak tree. And they should be open at two points, with their length being one or two nuts. Make the edges of those rings smooth with iron decently fitted into the circles."
"And first let it be heated in the fire until it becomes red-hot and throws sparks. And then place it on the part of the ankle where the pain is located, with the malady on its lateral side." "And thus cauterize it with three cauteries redone in one session."
"And then leave that for three days; also plaster it with a border and let the plaster remain open for too many days; and also cure it with poultices until it is healed."
"Albucasis says: 'O son, of this kind of cautery we have used little because of the fear of causing damage to it [the ankle], and therefore few are those who dare perform it.'"
"But many have suffered from those cauteries that dared to apply them to that part."
"But cautery with adherent medicines is what you should do: make two circles, having an opening pierced in each of which you insert the tip of the iron gate. Let the thickness of their walls be equal to that of two nuts or slightly larger."
"And if the space between each one is equal to the thickness of a finger. And they should be open on both sides and above, and let them contain something between them in this form:"
"And then place it on the part of the ankle where the pain is located with the malady facing its lateral side, and press your hand firmly over the part of the ankle. And then take hot water and pour it between the two circles, and let that water be heated gradually with fire for about one hour until the heat causes a biting sensation and adheres to it — for that pain is like the bite of fire — until the biting sensation stops."
"And then raise your hand with the instrument and remove the hot water from all around the ankle with lukewarm water."
"And then leave it for three days and apply a plaster to it until the blackness of the adhering is removed. And let this remain for a few more days and then massage it gently with oil; this is the last treatment."
"And then cure it with poultices until it is healed."
"And if the pain extends to the foot or leg, then do to it as was done for the ankle as described above."
"This is the method of hot water, and I have already written about this in my treatise on the correction of medicines." "Take some alkali and some unslaked lime from both parts of the anvil, crush them together, and place them in a new earthenware vessel with a small hole pierced on one side according to the amount that enters it through its mouth."
"And then place another earthenware vessel upside down on top of the first one. And pour over it some live water with which it is covered by about half a finger's width. Then press it firmly with your hand, and let the hot water that remains flow out through the hole pierced on its lateral side into the inverted vessel."
"And then adjust all that water, and pour it over more live lime and fresh alkali because its heat will be very strong at this time. It is administered in many medical operations and in the cautery of other members because it acts as fire."
"And some medicines with which the ankle is cauterized are thus: turmeric and honey mixed together with lime in such a way that they are well mixed."
"And Galen recounts an operation and cure with which he healed pain in the ankle and sciatic nerve. He greatly praises it and says that no other treatment is necessary because it heals in one application as he describes, for his experience in this matter was great."
"And if fresh wormwood is not available, then take a fig recently picked; grind it with a little salt and place it on the water in which the pain is located, or on the cushion, or on the bed."
"And let him be left like that for three hours or for the quantity that the patient feels the need to reduce the swelling."
"Then take him out of the bath and once his body is warm, put him on the ground for then the pain ceases and he is healed."
"And know that it is not necessary to use cauterization with these medicines except in cases of evacuation of the body."
"But already Aesculapius said that when the goat vein is cut open and cauterized, it will benefit him much. And the cauterization should be done this way: take wool, soak it in old oil, and place it between his hands and feet."
"And also take dry goat's hair, burn it on the fire until it becomes charcoal, and place him on the ashes so that he may rest." "And repeat this process until the sensation of pain reaches the water and then stop doing it for then the pain will cease."
"And this method of cauterization is called cauterization of goats."
"Chapter XLII."
"About the cauterization of pain in the back."
"Sometimes pain occurs in the back due to various causes, such as from coughing or from blows or from excessive evacuation, and also for similar reasons, due to the infiltration of moist and warm matter."
"And cauterization is only used in this single case which occurs from an effusion of hot matter."
"Therefore, after evacuating the illness with pills made of fritillaria and similar ones, they should be placed on the back where the pain is felt, three lines apart according to its width. For then cauterization should be done in each line, three or more times, depending on the amount that can be tolerated by the patient and the strength of the medicine."
"And cauterization should be performed with a cautery tip."
"And if you wish, cauterize three or four times with a hot iron brand according to this pattern:"
"Chapter XLIII."
"About cauterization at the beginning of jaundice."
"Many times this illness occurs in young children, and the sign of its beginning in children is that it happens suddenly on their skin, which becomes elevated and moves."
"And also you will find in the last dorsal vertebra of the back and its neighboring vertebrae that have already begun to protrude above the others."
"Therefore, when you see this and want to stop it, immediately cauterize there with a hot iron brand that is round according to this pattern:" "That the cautery should be placed across the entire width of the spine."
"And if you wish, cauterize around the spine with a cautery tip two or three lines away." "And let the points be close together between them."
"And then cure that place until it is healed with what we have said."
"But be careful not to administer cautery in jaundice caused by spasm of the nerves."
"Chapter XLIV."
"About cauterization for gout and pain in joints."
"When pain in joints is caused by hot humors which are enclosed in each member of the body, then when pains occur in the feet, it is customary for physicians to call that gout properly."
"And therefore when gout caused by heat is treated with a remedy and the pains are not removed, then remove them with cautery."
"And if you cauterize there after evacuation, do it in the circumference of the joint of the foot with many cauteries."
"And let the cautery be an olive-shaped one, of which this is the shape:"
"And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a cautery tip." "And if the pains persist in the toes or other joints, and this happens many times, then cauterize there over each painful spot with three or four olive-shaped cauteries across its entire width."
"And if many cauteries are necessary for you, then cauterize them and do not press the hot iron brand too hard on your hand beforehand, but only just around its surface."
"And if the pains persist in the toe and the back, then administer the cautery which we have said in its chapter."
"And if the pains are only in the hand and it is called sweating, then make points in the circumference of the fingers thus as they turn, making them two lines apart."
"And if the pains remain in these places, then make points in the circumference of the fingers over each joint and over the thumb."
"And if the pains persist near those days to the elbows or the muscles, then cauterize each of them across its entire length."
"And do not rely on good regimen and reception of medicines, for if there is good regimen and evacuation is done with this cautery and yet it does not heal, God help us."
"Chapter XLIV."
"About cauterization of fractures."
"When a fracture occurs in the thighs and hips, and this is how it begins, then you should order the patient to abstain from food on that day and to use gentle remedies so that the wound may close up from his belly."
"And then place the patient between your hands over his back, and order him to hold his breath so that his belly is drawn in or appears to be empty."
"And then return him with your hands and press the fracture onto the bone of the sternum, signaling the end of it which is like half of a circle on both sides of the body."
"And then heat the cautery of which this is the shape:"
"until it becomes very hot and gives off sparks." "And then reduce the bowel or the belly to its concavity, and place your hand over that place so that it does not escape."
"And you have now placed yourself between the patient's thighs and left him one thigh uncovered, and another servant holds his arms down, and another holds his feet, which he should hold with his hands."
"And then place the cautery on that signal with your hand, applying it cautiously and directly, until you succeed in reaching the sternum bone midway between the breasts. Repeat this again if you do not succeed on the first attempt."
"And observe carefully the movement of the bowel at the time of your cauterization, lest you burn it and bring harm or great mischief upon the patient."
"And know that if you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your operation is worthless."
"And it is necessary that the cautery for children be thin according to their size and measure."
"And then dress the place of the cautery for three days with lint, until the scar from the fire has healed."
"And then dress it with other ointments until it is healed."
"And the patient should lie on his back for forty days until the place and the wound are sealed."
"And it is necessary that you withhold nourishment from him according to the length of time for his healing, which makes the belly loose, and that the bowel does not come out through effort in recovering."
"And then when he wants to get up after forty days, gradually administer food to him, and keep him for another forty days."
"And he should be spared from work and from abundant food and drink, and from violent coughing, for if he uses this regimen of healing completely, he will surely be healed."
"I speak of the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the belly, and at the beginning, if it is not too severe, cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and this should extend as far as the third part of the rupture; then cure it with what we have said."
"Some earlier authors said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this shape, which is indicated by the diagram:"
"And the line that they drew across for its width on either side of the rupture is continued upwards; another line is drawn above it. Then place your hand on it with a cautery shaped like this, but use the first cautery more lightly and better."
"Chapter 46."
"On cauterizing a hernia."
"If there is pain in any of the limbs due to compression or percussion and that pain persists for a long time without being relieved by medical treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery."
"And let the cautery be made according to the size and smallness of the limb, its strength and weakness, its location and the severity of the pain."
"If it is healed by the first cautery, that's good. But if not, then apply the cautery again over it; because those kinds of pains are often punctured in the limb closest to the one being treated, so you should continue with the cautery until that pain is healed."
"Chapter 47."
"On cauterizing leprosy."
"Some lepers have been seen to benefit little from cautery, and it is even harmful if the type of leprosy is caused by putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy."
"And so when you wish to cauterize someone with leprosy, consider if the leprosy is contagious and if it has been cured by what we have said in the division of it. If not, and you fear that the corruption will spread throughout their entire body and complexion, then cauterize them on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, another further out from it, even unto the end of the hair; and two on each horn; and one behind, on the nape or servant's neck."
"And finish your work with the cautery by pressing it a little bit in to leave a small impression on the bone, and let the scabs be removed from there so that the expiration of thick vapors may be alleviated. And cauterize on the chest as is necessary."
"And if the leprosy has already spread over the person and appears manifestly, then you must cauterize them with those cauteries which we have mentioned for the head; and also cauterize on the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on each cheekbone, and two cauteries on two spine bones of the neck, and six cauteries on the spine bones of the back, and one large one on the spine bones near the buttocks, and one on the buttocks themselves, and two on each ankle bone, and one on each ankle bone itself, and two on each knee joint, and two on each muscle of the thigh; and cauterize them on all the joints of those limbs and also on each heel of their feet, and on the balls of their feet."
"And be careful not to burn the nerves that are located on the heel."
"And sometimes one is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the breastbone, and another on the mouth of the stomach, and yet another on the liver."
"And know that the more closely you apply cauteries, the greater the benefit and help. And know that the person does not feel pain from the cautery, as they do from their sores, because their body is already numbed."
"And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or small according to the members and joints as is prescribed by the specifics of the instruments."
"Then apply the cautery with barley flour cooked with honey, and with other remedies within to promote healing."
Chapter XLVIII
Of cauterization for numbness.
When any limb is numb or paralyzed and is treated with medications, oils, and plasters, but does not heal, then cauterize that numb limb with cauteries according to its size or smallness.
And let your cautery enter a little bit into the thickness of the flesh. Then treat that with an ointment so that it may heal.
And sometimes some numbness which is in the arms and legs, and in the spine of the back, is cauterized where the nerves that cause that limb to be paralyzed come out, and the paralysis is removed.
But let no one presume to do this unless he is knowledgeable in the anatomy of the limbs and the exit of the nerves that move all the body.
De cauterizacion d'uncas e de cicatrices.
"Burning of the whites of the eyes that is disfigured."
"If the whites of the eye are ancient and don't benefit from treatment by any means of medicine, then cauterize over that area with a hot cautery iron a little according to the quantity of the inflammation that has taken away the whiteness and color of it, until its color is changed."
"And appropriate treatment for it is with flour of barley and lentils mixed with olive oil and leaves of rose geranium, and with dove's blood or hen's blood, giving each one a part and mixing them all together, and then applying it to a cloth and placing it on the location until it is healed."
"Chapter 1."
"Cauterization of the crab."
"If cancer begins and you want to cauterize it, then cauterize around its circumference using a circular cautery iron in the same way that it is revolved."
"And some experts say that it should be cauterized with the last cautery iron in the middle of it; but I have not seen this, because I fear that it may become ulcerated, and I have seen this happen sometimes."
"And then it is advisable to cauterize around its circumference with circular cautery irons as we have said before, or with many small cautery irons."
"Chapter 12."
Cauterization of varicose veins.
When varicose veins are delayed in maturation, this is due to the superfluity of that area, or because of the state of the patient's health, as they are old and decrepit with little blood, or because of time, and you want to hasten the maturation of varicose veins; therefore cauterize around it with a small pointed cautery needle; and leave that alone until it has matured.
But if you want to perform the cauterization with a cautery needle, then heat the cautery needle of which this is the shape: and afterwards place it in the middle of the varicose veins where the cord enters.
And if you cauterize that location which is lower down, so that the arm's vein may be alleviated; and then dress it until it is healed.
Chapter LII
Of cautery for burning.
"Corrosion that wanders in limbs, which corrodes as fire consumes dry wood."
Therefore, if you find that corrosion in the place where cautery with fire is suffered, then you should ignite cautery cloves, both few and large ones, according to what is convenient for that place where the corrosion is.
And accordingly cauterize the whole affected area so as to eradicate all corrosion and ensure there remains no cause of it.
And let them rest for three days, applying olive oil mixed with honey to the cauterized areas, until all scabs are eradicated and all corruption is gone.
And thus cure it with healing flesh-producing herbs.
But if after three days the flesh grows healthy without corruption, that is good. But if not, then repeat the cautery upon what remains corrupted in those places.
And corrosion should be treated sometimes with sharp medicine, because it acts like cautery in its place. But nevertheless cautery by fire is the lighter remedy for relief.
And I have already mentioned in that section how corrosion can be cured with sharp medicine, so take that when you begin to have an occurrence of it.
Chapter 53
Of the cautery of warts and similar affections.
Many times it happens that the disease called "claw" appears in the toes of the sick foot, and it is caused by a thick, entrenched humor that adheres to the foot; and cauteries are used for this in two ways: namely, cautery with fire and cautery with cold water.
Cautery with fire is done using an iron cautery shaped like a vulture's tail feather, which should be made according to the size that encompasses all the claw of each toe, and it should have fine edges.
Then place that heated cautery upon the claw and gently rotate your hand with the cautery around the edge of the claw until it reaches the depth of the claw. Leave it on for three days until it begins to form scab. Then apply a plaster made from three parts wild mallow leaves mixed with salt, and leave it on overnight, for the inflammation will be eradicated from its roots.
Then dress the wound with a unguent made of regenerative flesh until it is healed.
E si so no-convertitz: If it is not converted.
And then you should also come over those of their wounds that are on the surface of the body, especially those on the thighs and legs.
And cure those puss that the roots of nails were eradicated with water from egg whites which makes skin grow again
Chapter IV.
On cauterization of tremors.
When you encounter a tremor due to friction in the nerves or fever caused by heat, or other similar causes, then you should cauterize it with four cauteries or five on the shoulders of the back, placing one cautery between each shoulder blade; and also place a cautery on the foot and one on the stomach with an olive-sized cautery.
And the tremor will cease and recovery from the heat-related illness will be hastened.
Chapter LV.
"Regarding cautery treatment of sudden accidents in the body."
"When the body is suddenly affected by sores and pustules are formed which are made of corrupt matter, it is necessary at the beginning to appear with caution so that the head of the fistula may be cauterized with a thin cautery made from myrtle wood, the end of which has been extended in fire; or with long tweezers made for this purpose; or with lenticular cauteries."
"And in recurrent sores they are cauterized again at the beginning of their discharge according to this manner; and they are not believed [to be healed], and the superfuities are disrupted making those [sores] and healing them."
"But it is necessary that this be done near evacuation with phlebotomy."
"Chapter LVI"
"Regarding the cautery treatment of accidental flux of blood by incision with an arrow."
"Many times in that place where blood flows by incision with an arrow which is inserted into the flesh which there is a defect, or into the incision of an aposteme or cautery of the member, and it then seems, it is difficult to remain quiet."
"Therefore when it happens to someone that place, immediately you cover with your hand the horror of the arrow, and press on that spot until the blood flow ceases from that place, so that it does not escape."
"And immediately apply to the fire the olive-shaped cauteries, both small and large, by number many, and blow on them until they are sufficiently heated."
"And then take one of those, either small or large according to the place and the size of the flesh in which the artery has been broken, and press it quickly upon that vein until you have stopped the blood flow, and hold the cautery there until it is attached and restrains the blood."
"And if blood is expelled from the mouth of the artery when you release your finger and press the cautery, then immediately take another cautery carefully from those which are prepared in the fire, and do not cease doing this until the blood has been restrained."
"And be careful that you do not burn any nerve that is nearby, lest it come upon some other injury or mischief."
"And know that when blood flows from the artery, it is not possible to restrain it with those means unless by one of four methods: either with cautery as already said, or with extraction when it is not extracted, because when it is extracted the ends of the marrow are burned and the blood is restrained; or else it should be tied with pitch or linen by strong tension, or placed upon medicines whose virtue is to restrain blood, and they should be pressed on with a pulvinar and proper constriction."
"But he who administers restraint properly with linen and tension with bandages or by position of cauteries and similar things, does not heal but harms."
"But if this happens to someone and there is no doctor present nor medicine, then press your finger on the mouth of that vein as already said, and understand to make a great tension on the inside so that blood may be stopped from the supreme part of the flesh, and let the finger not be removed from the artery; and upon the arrowlet sprinkle with cold water rubbed much until the blood is coagulated and thickened; and more consider if there is need for cautery or medicine."
Surgical procedures involving cutting, piercing, suctioning, bloodletting, plague treatment, and similar afflictions.
We have said in the first chapter all illness in which burning cautery is beneficial and medicine burns, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for it with the forms of cauteries; and we have arranged the chapters on the superiority of the head down to the feet.
And you shall proceed in this chapter with that same method for which it will be pleasing to him who seeks it, so that he may find what he has asked about.
Before you begin this, know, son, that in this chapter is the explanation of what is in the first chapter on cautery.
And for that reason, it is necessary to be very careful in this operation which is explained in this chapter, for many times there occurs evacuation with blood from which life depends; thus, you should aspire the vein or make an incision over the abscess or opening of fistulas or purification of gangrene or extraction of arrows or incision of stones and similar things. And all these operations are accompanied by fear and trembling, and in many of them death often occurs.
And I advise you not to fall into that in which there is danger, for sometimes you will encounter situations where you must deal with men who have many illnesses. And among them are some who die with their illness, and it is easy for death to come from that, because of the vehemence of their illness and its duration, and because the illness brings fear which signifies death.
And among them is he who gives you his wealth and says to you, "Wait until I am healthy," but his illness is fatal.
Therefore, do not consent to him who comes to you with this manner; and let your caution be greater than greediness, and your rapacity; and do not presume anything about it unless you have certain knowledge which proves it for you, and to which there succeeds a praiseworthy outcome.
And use in the curing of all your illnesses prognosis and indication of that to which health is converted, for in that you will find help towards acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
Oh, sons, God breathes His understanding into you and does not remove from you direction and protection, for that is in His hand.
And I have ordered this chapter divided into chapters according to what is said in the chapter on cautery, concerning the treatment of the head down to the feet, so that it may be easy for you to find what you ask for and what you need.
Chapter one.
Concerning the cure of water which is contained in the head of infants.
Know that this illness often happens to infants during childbirth, when the midwife stretches the infant's head without gentleness.
And sometimes it happens for a hidden cause which is not known.
I have only seen this illness in children; and in all those whom I saw affected by it, death soon followed. Therefore it seems to me that this is a neglected matter in these cases.
And you have seen that a child whose head was filled with water had its head so greatly enlarged that it could not cease growing and eventually died from the excess moisture.
And this humidity either collects between the spine and the skull or gathers beneath the bone at the back of the neck.
If the humidity is between the spine and the bone and the abscess is small, then you should make an incision in the middle of the head along its width; let the length of the incision be two fingerbreadths so that the moisture can flow out. This is how to perform the operation:
And if the humidity has increased and the abscess is larger, then you should make two incisions in this manner:
If the moisture is left on the bone, it is a sign that you should open the corners of the head widely and squeeze out the water when you press that with your hand inside. That you make three incisions in the middle of the head in this manner:
And near the incision remove all moisture;
"It is another method of incision that considers where the boil appears and the collection of water, for sometimes it is more in the occiput or at the front, right, or left; therefore attend to the incision where the boil appears and the gathering of water, and do as best pleases you."
"And observe that thou dost not cut the artery and cause a flow of blood, which would make the patient worse by that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity."
Chapter Two
"When some catsar or wound appears in the eye or foot, and this becomes old, and the cure with medicines does not help, then the last cure for this is incision of those two arteries."
"And thus when you wish to incise those [arteries] that the disease has its seat in the head, and close the place with rough cloth so that the arteries appear, and also bind the patient's neck with some cloth; and also consider where the vein pulsates; for the places of each are above the places which are near the lower ears, and they may be hidden unless in certain men."
"And thus sign over the artery with ink, and then incise each one with a scalpel of each sharp point made for entering into the bone, and this should be done through the thickness of the head."
"And if you wish, insert the scalpel between the artery and cut it where the incisions have been made above."
"And let the length of the incision be as those two points set [apart], for when any vein is incised blood immediately issues with pulsatile exit, which often flows forth with frequent flow."
"But if the artery does not appear at the beginning, then you should measure from the ear the amount of space between three fingers, and thus sign with ink, and then enter into the bone."
"And know that the amount of blood to be let is about one quarter [of a pint], for less or more can be let depending on the quantity which appears of the strength of the disease and the fullness of the artery."
"And thus consider the plague, and if anything remains on the bone which could cause aphthae, then incise that in order to prevent any ulceration."
"And thus strengthen the wound with cotton and bandages of linen cloth, and then cure it with ointment until it is healed."
Chapter III
On the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
When ancient migraine or catarrh occurs due to moist humors and poor quality in the temples' nerves, if it is ancient and violent like those, and it is treated with medical remedies but does not improve, then we resort to these ailments by extracting from the arteries of the temples, or cauterizing them as we have shown.
The manner of operation and extraction is as follows: the patient lies down on their back with their head supported by a pillow. Locate the temporal artery visible at the temple as shown by its pulse, which is usually palpable but may be hidden in some individuals due to excessive hair growth.
If the artery is not palpable, then place a strap around the patient's neck to compress it. Then rub the area with a rough cloth or apply hot water compress until the artery becomes clearly visible. Then take the following instruments which are shaped as follows: "Then carefully remove the skin with ease until you reach the bone; then throw it away and extract that which is above it within the flesh, so as to remove that from the bone and uncover those coverings which are left there, of every part."
"If the artery is small, then envelop it with the tip of your finger; and carefully cut into it one part according to the length by which its ends are stretched out and contracted, and blood will not flow out, because if they are not cut, blood will not pass through."
"And now evacuate three drops of fresh blood."
"And if the artery is large, then you should tie it in two places with strong thread or cord, so that it does not decay before the wound is healed, and blood will not flow out."
"And then cut off the superfluity which lies between two ligaments; and do this at that time or another appropriate time."
"And if you wish, cauterize it with a hot iron between the incisions of its extremities, and this will take the place of that operation."
"And it is better if the patient has fever or is of hot complexion; for cauterization is among those causes which help the final humidities, and therefore it is better in healing."
"And also regarding the extraction of arteries which are prominent at the site of the cut, they should be covered with powders made appropriately and carefully, and then dressed with dry medicines that make flesh grow and with ointments so that it may be healed."
"And if while performing these operations there occurs bleeding from the artery again, then you should stop that blood flow with a ligature or cautery, or press your hand on the site of the wound until the bleeding has stopped." "And if none of these causes is present, then press your finger on the place until the bleeding stops, and apply cold water to the place until the pain subsides, and then bandage it according to what is necessary."
"And what is easiest in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two points, because you have pierced both places with a probe, and then each one separately, lighted, until they reach the bone and cut through the vein in two places, so that it may be elongated between its extremities, for they are not completely solidified by this cautery."
"And this is the form of the cautery:"
"The sharpness of both knives should be tested." "But if the edges are not sharp enough, one knife is better than two, because if they are very sharp like knives, it will cut the flesh quickly."
"Therefore, with some thickness in them (the intestines), heat from the fire is held in them and the flesh is cut gently."
"And this task is better than any other and easier."
"And let the space between two knives be equal to the thickness of a finger."
"Chapter Four."
"Of the care of eyes with acute and chronic tears."
"When tears are chronic and there is no cure for the medicine of that cause, sometimes the face of the sick person becomes reddened and they feel ants crawling on their forehead like ants, and their eyes become weak and wet, so much so that even the eyelashes stick together, and the skin around them is cracked due to the sharpness of the tears. For this operation, a hot poultice is prepared for its treatment, without using any other cure."
"And you will command the sick person to raise their eyebrows and then incise three equally spaced cuts into the forehead according to its length." "And if the length of the incision is two fingers: one cut should be made equidistant from the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length slightly below the movement of the eyelids which are at the tear gland, and the third on the other side."
"And be careful not to cut the arteries located on both sides, and extend your hand along the continuation of both jawbones." "And if the space between each incision is equal to three fingers' width adjusted."
"And if you have a piece of sponge or dry cloth cut into many parts with which you can dry the blood."
"And then insert spatula of two sharp ends, of which this is the shape of its incision:" "This is from the departure of the temples into the second incision." "Excise all the skin along this line that is between two incisions with the knife that is on the bone, and then do the same for the second incision." "And then immediately in this space enter again into the first incision with another instrument called a cutellar, sharp on one side and not on the other."
"And then pause the cut on that sharp side close to the attached flesh along the skin, and enter with it into the bone, and employ this way until you reach the second furrow, and cut away with it all the vessels that descend from the head to the ears."
"Make sure the incision continues until you meet the skin, and then do this in the second furrow into another furrow."
"And because a considerable amount of blood will flow out, compress the places where the vessels of the blood are connected."
"And then pause in each furrow carefully with hot iron, and pause on those powdered spices wrapped in wine and oil and vinegar, and make sure it does not become gangrenous."
"And on the third day untie the ligature and administer a large infusion of cold water or decoction, and then dress it with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil and other appropriate medicines until the wounds are healed."
Chapter 5
"On the treatment of wounds by cauterization and on the ears descending from the divisions inside the head."
"When there are wounds cauterized and continuous, and the ears of the sick are thin and small, and their condition is debilitated, and the eyelids are ulcerated and their hairs fall out, and there is acute pain in the forehead with subsequent swelling, you should know that these materials and cauteries come only from certain veins that originate from inside."
"And the best treatment for these cases is: order the patient to shave his forehead, and then make an incision in that middle part of the forehead, about half an inch wide (beginning at the left temple entering into the right temple; and let the incision be within the bone until it reaches the bone), removing your hand from the cartilage of the temples which are attached by mastication, until the bone is exposed."
"Absorb all the blood with sponge or dry cloth and then fill the furrow between the two lips of the incision with hot iron or cloth." "And then sprinkle above it powder wrapped in wine and oil to prevent gangrene cautery."
"And when you remove it and see that the gangrene has diminished, then you must scrape the bone where flesh grows, and dress it with an astringent remedy which makes the flesh dry out, as if you take two parts of flour from wheat and four parts of colophony, mix them together, make a plaster, and apply it to these wounds until new flesh is generated."
Chapter 6
"The treatment for what falls into the ears."
"Every cause that falls into the ears is of four kinds: it may be mineral as stone or similar to it like iron and bronze; or it may be from plants like chickpeas or beans; or it may be fluid like water and vinegar and their relatives; or some creature."
"And therefore when a stone falls into the ear or other cause similar to those causes that do not adjust nor adhere in the ear, and blocks the ear canal, it distills some oil or rosewater at certain times, and appropriately administers its extraction; and makes them sneeze with certain conditions, and then covers their nose during the onset of sneezing." "And appropriately blocks the ear canal with some pieces of cloth or wool, and stretches the ear outward on its parts above, because many times it has been forgotten with these causes."
"And if it is not removed, then appropriately administers extraction from it using the instrument called 'epiciclos gesture of subtle', whose form is as follows:"
"And if it is forgotten with the gesture, that's fine; but otherwise, then appropriately administers extraction from it using a subtle hook of little duplication."
"And therefore if it is not removed by this method, then make a cannula of iron and insert the extremity of the cannula into the tract of the ear and seal around the cannula with wax and softened oil so that only the cannula may be inserted." "And therefore extract with a gentle wind with strong attraction, because many times it has been counted with this method that we have recounted."
"But if it is not removed in this manner, then take some burning sulphur or sometimes prepared with which the eggs are taken in small quantity, and place that on the extremity of the wick, and appropriately wrap it carefully around that area." "And therefore insert that into the tract of the ear with ease, and appropriately remove the ear from humidity."
"And therefore if it is not removed with all the causes that we have recounted, then you should attempt to cut that before it becomes an abscess or spasm."
"And the manner of cutting that is as follows: first sanctify the disease of the vein sepsis and extract blood according to its virtue, and then make that incision between your thumbs and turn the ear outward on its parts above, and finally make a small fissure in the root of the ear where you feel its grease." "And let the incision be in the shape of a crescent moon and extend it to the ear bone, and once the bone is exposed, remove that if possible with appropriate instruments; and then quickly close the incision at that time, and care for it until it is healed."
"And if the cause is in the ear is one of those grease that rises and swells, then administer care and extraction from it. But if it does not obey your treatment, then take a thin subtle spatula according to this form:" "And therefore use that spatula to perform the abscess of that grease which has fallen into the ear."
"And do not perform this when you think that it has already been moistened by the vapor of the ear. Instead, place it in several pieces and gently extract from those with tweezers or subtle gesture, or use an incision as mentioned earlier, for this facilitates extraction."
"But when water enters the ear, it is necessary for the disease to sneeze at the beginning with condition, and fill its ear with some cotton wool, and press on that ear in which there is water. And if by doing this it is not removed, then take thin flints and pebbles according to the length of your finger, heat them a little in the fire, and the patient inserts one of those into the tract of their ear and presses one side of that part with that stone, and strikes with another stone on the stone which is inside the ear." "So do not cease doing this until all the water has been removed."
"So do not cease doing this until all the water has been removed." "And if the water is not removed in this way, then take some paper or gauze, and put one end of it into the ear and extend the other end with fire until most of it burns."
"And then put in another gauze and do this several times until all the water has been removed. Then remove it with a cannula as mentioned earlier of the stone extractor."
"But in the extraction of a beast entering that ear, if it is a small creature, then press it and do it similarly. Care for it as mentioned earlier in this section. But if it is a large creature which causes pain at the sensation, then administer its extraction with gestures and tweezers. And the cause of this is pus, lighter than all other causes that occur in the ear."
"But in the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you care for it with what has been said earlier in this section and in the treatise on distillations, but your treatment does not improve, then you must examine the ear by the light."
"And then if you see any cause of worms here, then extract them with gestures or subtle tweezers. But if you do not see any cause, then take a cannula narrow at its base and wide at its mouth, of which this is the shape:" "And insert the narrow end of the cannula into the ear according to how much it can tolerate. And then suck with that using strong suction, and do this several times until all the worms have been removed."
"But if it does not obey your treatment, then plug and close the circuit of the cannula with wax as mentioned earlier. Then administer distillations which have already been proven in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillations."
"And let your effusion be with which you pour medicinal oils into the ear with this instrument, of which this is its shape:" "And make it of silver or bronze, narrow at its base, with a small tract in it and flat on top."
"And therefore let it be made such that it pushes into what is inside the cavity of the cannula when necessary." "And if you wish, take the reed and wrap its end decently with cotton wool, then pour oil into the cavity of the instrument or juice of some herb, or whatever medicinal liquid you want into the cannula — which is in the ear — and then insert the reed with cotton wool on top and gently squeeze it with your hand so that the oil is expelled into the cavity of the instrument and the patient feels the oil inside."
"And whatever is poured into the ear should already be heated a little by fire." "And take care that the cause which you distill in the ear is not too hot, for medicinals for the ear do not tolerate that."
"Chapter VII"
"On the treatment of impacted ears."
Sometimes, some children are born from their mothers' wombs imperfectly, and this has happened to certain men, obstruction in the ear's meatus due to mucus or hardened flesh there; and this obstruction sometimes occurs in the front of the ear canal which does not permit seeing through it, and sometimes it is in the outer parts thereof.
And that which occurs at the front of it, which does not allow seeing through it, is among the most difficult conditions to treat.
And in that case where you can see through it, you should hold the sick person's ear towards the sunlight and look into it. And thus if there appears to be obstruction, open that with a subtle spatula, which is its shape:
If the tip of it where you should make the incision is small in width, with one end sharp and the other blunt; and the spatula should be double-sided to prevent injury to the ear.
And if the obstruction is due to hardened flesh in the ear or its meatus, then use fine forceps and cut that with great ease until all the flesh is removed.
And if obstruction occurs at the front of the ear canal, then take a thin reed and heat it gently over fire, and carefully insert it into the meatus of the ear.
And thus if there is a sensation of obstruction with what the patient finds easy to pass through, due to heaviness or deafness, remove that obstruction gently without injuring the nerves of the ear.
And then place the ear dropper on the ear according to the quantity of the width of the tube that you have inserted into the Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the dressing. Or take some wax, crush it, moisten it with warm water, powder it finely, and use it; and if the ear becomes inflamed, then grind the wax and replace it with new wax mixed with rose oil, so that the inflammation may be cauterized; and dress it until healed.
But if there is bleeding from the ear, then soak a sponge or cloth in warm water and place it on the ear, and use other treatment that will stop the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Chapter VIII
Of the treatment of swelling that occurs on the eyelids.
"Dry the excess moisture that occasionally collects on the eyelids of the eyes; sometimes they are dry."
"It is necessary that you have those towels ready or at hand, and unfold them from their folds, and place them over the locations as indicated."
"Moreover, if pain comes with a flow of blood, then you should cauterize it with a small anticlinal cautery."
"And the best cauterization is when the incisions and wounds are made repeatedly until there is no longer any cause for them to reopen; and when they are cauterized with fire, those causes are burned and do not return."
Chapter IX
Treatment of swelling that comes to the eyelids.
Often, some cause arises in the eyelids that resembles hardness and toughness, which is why it is called swelling.
And it is an accumulation of thick humidity in the left eyelid upwards.
Therefore, the operation for them is to consider if the swelling comes from there because it appears above the eyelid and is spread all over; and its cause is light.
Therefore, cut above that with a latitudinal incision, and then carefully spread open from there until it evacuates easily. Then suspend it with a bandage and cauterize it.
And if the swelling is large, then adjust it with sutures; and care for it until it heals.
And if it is small, then do not worry because that ointment will restore it and make it grow back together again.
And if the swelling descends to the inner parts of the eyelid underneath its surface, then lift up the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a bandage without making any incision. Press it all over and if the eyelid becomes elongated because of an incision, then there is no cause for that either.
And after the incision, wash the eye with salt water and dress the wound with something that encourages healing until it is healed.
Chapter X.
Of the treatment of swelling above the eyelid.
"Eyesore is caused by the growth of tissue on the eyelid, occurring more often in children, it aggravates their eyes and hinders their sight, causing tears to flow."
"And therefore they often wipe their faces, and even sleep with their faces covered. And because of this the eyelids become swollen and inflamed, showing signs of infection in the eye."
"And some method of operation is in that one who stops the disease by placing his head in a certain position, and covers him with cloth and hot water, makes a circle according to the amount of moisture in the eye, and places it over that eye and presses it with the tips of his fingers so that the arcernac may be drawn towards the center of the circle, and then finishes in the middle of that humidity with a probe inserted with an incision along the width, and the incision should not be larger than the one made in trepanation."
"But in the front it is necessary to cut through the entire chain until you reach the arcernac, for in most cases procedures process arcernac through an incision according to the shape of a white mass."
"Therefore remove it with cloths which you have wrapped between your fingers, and roll it back and forth between the right and left hands until it has disappeared."
"And be careful not to insert the probe into the incision, lest with the probe you reach the eye and damage it."
"But if your arcernac does not appear at the beginning of the incision, then insert a small probe gently until it processes arcernac; and then remove it as we have said; and then wipe cloths on him with water and vinegar and place them over the location and strain them with powders."
"And some also grind salt and place it in the concavity of the incision, lest anything remain of that moisture."
"And then take care of him until he is healed."
"But if it happens in the location of an aposteme, then cure it with cedar plasters until it is healed."
"Chapter XI"
"Of methods for touching the eye."
When the eyelids are born from improperly attached hairs, then those are called blepharitis and they cause conditions such as constant tears and swelling of the eyelids, which if not treated, can lead to destruction of the eye, a condition known as trachoma. It is cured in four ways: either by cauterization with fire; or by acute medicine, as mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery; or by incision and stitching; or by cupping.
Then you should grasp the head of the patient with your left hand; next, carefully turn back the eyelid of the eye with your right hand. If it is already turned back, good. Otherwise, insert a needle into that part where the hairs begin to grow out from under the eyelid, and make the needle pierce through above the hairs, close to the edge of the eyelid where the hairs grow out, and pull the thread upwards with the eyelid turned back, and turn it over again with your thumb.
Next, insert scissors into the parted eyelid beneath the hairs and cut the lacrimal caruncle entering the lacrimal sac; then extract the thread and put it aside the eyelid using small forceps made of cotton or cloth. Then press upon the eyelid with your thumb, so that it is like a leaf of myrtle.
However, the pressure applied to the eyelid should vary according to the amount of swelling present. For men, this is already diversified as some may require a greater incision on the eyelid depending on how much it has swollen up.
Then take the forceps and place it on both lines you have marked earlier, starting from the lacrimal caruncle going into the lacrimal sac. And if your incision is close to the natural hairs, make it as thick as a barleycorn.
Then place a needle on one of the two angles of the wound, and carefully cut it all out. Next, adjust both lips with thread or fine wool, and wipe away any blood. If you wish to do so, make some adhesive with viscous substances and attach what is superfluous from the threads onto both eyebrows; otherwise, don't bother with this step.
Then leave the stitches in place for three or four days before removing them and caring for the wound.
If desired, you can leave the plaster without stitching and care for it using something drying and constricting since the eyelid swells due to the sealing of the plaster and the application of grease. However, stitching is better. This is what the ancient authorities on taxanir say.
However, if there is urgency regarding the illness, it is good to operate and there should be no fear in doing so.
And there is another method of taxanir: press upon the eyelid so that it resembles a myrtle leaf, and then lift up the eyelid with three fingers placed separately and joined together in this manner:
If this is not possible, hold the eyelids, and if it is not enough, then take a needle with thread and place it in the middle of the figure, and insert another thread near the larger lacrimal, and the second thread near the smaller lacrimal, adjust the threads evenly between your fingers, and raise your hand with equal elevation, raising the entire chain upon which this is indicated as we have recommended.
Then close the two lips of the wound with suture, and care for the area that has been healed.
But if an abscess forms after your incision or wound, lance it with cautery and similar treatment, and dress it.
And sometimes the eyelashes turn inward, causing discomfort. In such cases, you should use what we have mentioned about incision; however, closing them with stitches is more artificial.
To treat a cataract according to this method: "It is necessary that you invert the eyelid and cut the figure that is inside according to what has been described; then, using artifice, make two small cannulae or needles whose length matches the length of the eyelid and whose width is less than the width of a needle." "And you have already inserted into the ends of each parted extremity where you hold the threads."
"Next, carefully apply each [thread] underneath what is superfluous of the eyelid skin, and press the cannulae into each parted extremity with great force; leave them like that for several days so that the thread may die and be ejected naturally, and the wound will heal."
"But if it is delayed, then break it with tweezers and carefully remove the plug until it is healed."
"So once it has healed, the eyelid will be lifted up and the hairs will not touch [the eye]."
"And this is how you make two cannulae according to this shape:" "and let the quantity of its length and width be neither more nor less."
"Chapter Twelve."
"On lifting hairs that touch the eye when the hair is hard."
When it is caused by unnatural, harsh and rough humors that pierce the holes, then the operation for him is that you take a subtle needle and place it in that vein of cedar wood and lion, and then carefully adjust the extremities of it. And let the length of the needles be as long as half a palm.
Next, take another subtle needle and place it beside him shortly, and then if you wish, adjust the extremities of that one.
Next, hold the patient's head firmly on the pillow, and let it be near the sun so that your work may be clear, for it is a subtle and delicate operation.
And quickly insert the needle into the shaved skin where necessary and make it penetrate into the eyelid swiftly before pulling it back out above the natural skin.
And then pull back the skin while inserting the needle underneath, and let there be one or two or three hairs at most.
Then carefully remove your hand while pulling out that hair along with it beneath the eyelid and bring it back up through the natural skin.
But if the eyelid is pulled too much and the skin does not come out, then pull the eyelid outward with the needle that you have placed there, until the eyelid of the wound opens beneath.
And then close it with the sight of the wound, for later when you remove the eyelid and needle, carefully wash each eye with warm water and keep them closed for two or three days until the skin adheres to its place and grows good flesh over it.
And if the skin is too short, then take a long hair from the natural hairs and sew it with that one, or leave it until it grows longer some distance away, and then raise it.
Chapter XIII
Of the treatment of the inflammation that occurs on the eyelid above.
When inflammation occurs in the eye, and there is contraction of the eyelid when it contracts above on either side due to poor healing of wound or cut or burn, it is called blepharitis. This inflammation may be natural or accidental, caused by poor healing of wounds or cuts or burns, or resembling those that are badly treated.
"The manner of the operation on him is that you should cleave that consolidation and separate the lips of it, then place in it between those a wick of cloth dipped in pitch, and bind them together until they are healed."
"And it is not necessary that you use any cure for him from the causes which dry out and constrain, because if you do this, he will return to his former condition even worse than before."
"Use in that one of the causes which soften, such as fenugreek, and crush with hot water in which almonds have been cooked and strained from it, or diacylglycerol, which should be liquefied with some oil, and immerse the wick in that, and treat him with it."
"And the treasure of your cure is that you persevere with all energy until nothing is consolidated according to the form that was at the beginning."
"And this operation which we have spoken of is only some rectification of ichthyosis which does not return to its former form."
"Chapter XIV"
"Of the treatment of ichthyosis which occurs on the left eyelid."
This operation called "alxacrati" is performed on the eyelid, properly known as "alxacrati"; it is of two kinds, natural or accidental.
Accidental alxacrati is done by plague or cut or burn or other similar causes.
The procedure for this operation is to take a needle with doubled thread and insert it into the flesh, passing it from the left tear duct to the right, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then stretch the skin at its edges with the needle and cut it with the needle, then open it wide with a broad spatula. And then return the eyelid to its proper shape. If it doesn't return properly, take thread and sew up the split, turning the eyelid back into shape, and close both incisions on the inner side of the left eyelid.
And if both ends of the incisions meet at two corners of the cut, then make sure that when they come together, they form a closed figure with both ends.
And this figure is called the Greek letter "lambda".
Then remove the excess skin along the side of the incision on the inner side of the eyelid, so that it secures the eyelid.
Then adjust the separated parts and sew them together with wool thread. And then dress it with the moistening medicines and bandages that we mentioned, until it heals.
And if there is any inflammation afterwards due to a split, stitching or burning, it is necessary to make an incision with a flat blade over the skin of the eyelid as was previously mentioned. Then separate with a bandage between the two lips according to what we have said.
In the final words of the speech on the treatment of algebra when it is high or absent, let water run in its operation according to what has been prepared in the form of algebra, and that is in the form of many diversities.
And the skilled artisan always prepares various tools in every way possible so that he can bring the figure back to its natural form or close to it, and this patient according to what is suitable for them from the operation and the instruments in the greatest positions.
Chapter XV
On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or the cornea.
When this adhesion occurs in many people, so that the eyelid is firmly stuck upwards with the albumen of wool and prohibited from its natural movements and works, then you should insert the tip of a needle between the eyelid and lift it up or extend it with forceps.
And then you should cut the adhesion with a fine spatula that is not sharp for incisions, having an obtuse tip to avoid injuring the patient during the operation. Be careful not to let the spatula slip and scratch the eye with its sharp edge.
And your incision should be such that it easily removes that adhesion, so that the eyelid returns to its natural shape and all the adhesion is healed.
And then you should apply saltwater to the eye, with which you rinse it; or distill in its place juice of rue dissolved in water.
And then separate the eyelid from the eye with a finger, and press on the eye a compress of wool soaked in egg white. On the third day apply consolidating remedies so that it may heal.
Chapter XVI
On Incision of Nail and Excrescence of Flesh from the Lacrimal Apparatus
Know that nail can be of two kinds: either nervous, resembling hard and fine skin; or non-nervous, resembling congealed white moisture. When you touch it with forceps, if the latter kind is present, you may take hold of it with forceps, cut it off, but the forceps should not penetrate into it.
And in both kinds, they begin only from the outer canthus of the eye, gradually increasing until they cover the pupil and prohibit light and movement of the eyelid.
But the manner of operating in its incision is that the patient should place his head in a suitable position and open the eyes wide. Then elevate the eyelid with your hand and grasp the nail with forceps with little duplication, and extend it upwards at its sides. Then take a needle and insert it into the nail about a horsehair or bull's hair thickness, or use similar thread of strong gut. Duplicate the tip of the needle little by little and place it in the middle of the nail, penetrate it with the needle, tie the nail with thread; extend it upwards at its sides, and remove the excess nail that covers the pupil using the thread. "And thus you shall proceed by applying the hair cloth at the back of him."
"And then you shall incise the caruncle at the corner of the eyelid with a fine spatula or small forceps, and lift up the skin of the lacrimal sac so that there may be no continuous flow of tears through the incision."
"And sometimes the nail extends beyond the skin or is curved upwards, as we have said, and therefore it should be cut away with this lion-shaped spatula of which here is a drawing:"
"And take care that with the spatula you do not touch the tunica cornea and cause its rupture, and that the pupil is perforated."
"Then sprinkle a little salt or powder of sinapis into the wound and leave it alone for another day; but take care to wash that wound with water until it is healed."
"And if the nail is not nerve-rich and you cannot insert the needle into it, or the needle is not fixed in that nail, then sometimes this type of nail is cured with medications, and healed as described in the division [section]."
"And if you wish to incise it, then open the wound of the disease and take a thin pointed spatula made of iron according to this form:" "with subtlety." "And if it happens that it is rarified and becomes congested and pressed in that region, then distill some of your spit into the wound with a little powder of sinapis or rue or salt, and cover the wound until the next day."
"And again perform the operation on it until all of that has been removed, but instead a counter-abscess forms in the wound, for then you will leave it alone and treat the abscess at the beginning so that it may heal."
"And again perform your operation on it with reason until it is healed."
"The prominence of the lacrimal caruncle, if it appears in the wound causing great harm, should be suspended with a thread; and incise that from there with one cut, but do not extend the incision too far so as not to cause excessive tearing."
"And again distill into the lacrimal sac a little powder of rue and sinapis until it is healed."
"Chapter XVII."
"Of incision of an aposteme and of that which is born of flesh adhered in the wound."
"Sometimes in the wounds of some people flesh is born, rough and overgrown so that it covers the pupil, or it approaches and adheres to the eyelids, pressing them tightly together at the edges, and it becomes assembled like a coral branch."
"The operation in this case is to pause the head of that patient on a cloth, and then open the wounds of it, collect all of that flesh with convenient forceps or pincers, take it away with tweezers or pliers; and again incise the flesh at the beginning until everything is finished with the scissors, taking care of the wound so as not to leave anything behind due to your operation."
"And let your incision be with that which you use to incise those or with the spatula which we have recommended in the section on nail incision, or with little forceps according to what is appropriate for this case, as will come later in this chapter."
"Therefore, when your incision is complete and all of that flesh has been removed, then fill the wound with finely ground salt or distill into it powdered medicines like corrosives, and apply a poultice of egg-white over it until a dry abscess forms."
"And if any cause of aposteme remains and is secretly present, but you fear a dry abscess, then leave the wound alone and treat that abscess with whatever cures it, and again perform an operation on it until it is healed; similarly act for the flesh adhered in wounds of this kind."
"But nonetheless you must be careful not to omit all treatment of the wound freely through natural or accidental means, operating with iron, and do not put your hand in any of these operations until you see that that limb can withstand this operation."
"Chapter XVIII."
"Of collection of pus in the wound."
"Know that veins are often enlarged upon the bone, hindering its movement, and this should be uncovered gradually over many days."
"Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you examine whether the bone in which swelling has occurred is strong and whether there is not another illness causing the swelling; then you should gather that swelling."
"And you should order the patient to place their head back in a straight position and suspend those veins with an ounce or two of your choosing, using this type of delicate bandage:"
"or gradually increase it up to two ounces."
"And then bind those veins with delicate forceps, delicately, and wipe away the blood hour by hour until you see that those veins are detached from the bone and turned back."
"And be sure that you do not compress the bone with the ends of the forceps. And if your operation takes place in the middle of the day before the sun, then be very careful in your operation so that you grasp only those veins."
"And once you have completed this, then apply vinegar or rue to the bone chief so that with its sharpness it may corrode what has been detached from the bone."
"But if you cannot complete this in one hour, then plaster all of it with whatever relieves pain from it, and leave it alone for a few days until the pain has subsided and it is assured that there will be no abscess."
"And afterwards apply ointment over it according to the most medicinal way until it is healed."
"And this is the form of forceps:"
"Chapter XIX"
"Of the reduction of fractures of the nose."
When a wound burns with cautery or sharp medicine as described but does not heal, then do not incise into it, but wait until the abscess reaches maturity. Then remove all moisture from within it and ensure that the bone is exposed.
Then when the bone is exposed and you see corruption or blackness in it, then remove it with an instrument of which this is the shape
And it is called the "sharp head," made of iron. Its head should be round, like this, pierced with holes made by a chisel or awl through subtle punching (as shown in the following figure).
And press that onto the corrupted part of the bone. Then rotate it between your fingers and gently push it in until you know that all corruption is scraped away
Then do this several times, and next restore the area with drying and astringent causes
Therefore, if the area is consolidated and there is new healthy skin in its place, and the flesh has been severed from the sound parts and remains for forty days, without renewing or suppurating or recurring again, then you know that it is healed.
But if not, then it is necessary to reduce the opening into a nasal shape and in this manner:
"The iron's tip should be triangular, and its shaft carefully tapered at the end like this."
"Then pause the hammer on the bone near the lacrimal, and stretch your hand a little further down the hole. Then rotate your hand around the trial until it penetrates the entire bone, and the patient feels pain as you withdraw your hand."
"Then you should restore the area with medicines that are astringent and drying, such as you have here."
"Then when the flesh is cut and the area is closed, the matter that flowed out returns to its place. Therefore, it is easier to bear the pain."
"Chapter 20."
"On the reduction of nasal humps."
"If the hump is prominent along its entire length and does not show signs of inflammation or decrease in size, then you should relieve the pain, follow up carefully, and pause your ventouses on the nape without scarification, suc
"For the manner of powders: take linen cloths and fold each one into four layers. Make them from those mastic grains."
"And pause those ones on top of another according to the quantity that the hump requires." "And strengthen them with a hard cloth with strong compression. Repeat the cupping with suction without scarification. Then remove the cups and leave the hump uncovered day and night."
"But if in the meantime the bandage becomes softened, then it should be made tighter."
"And remove the bandage day and night as we have said."
"And if sometimes the hump has already been reduced, that is good. But if not, then repeat the application of the plaster with powders and compression and cupping until it is healed."
"Chapter 21."
"On the incision of the nasal hump."
"When there is disruption in the tunic of the eye, and if it protrudes beyond the eyelids like a grain of barley, and appears like a human form because of that, and you wish to incise it, then the operation in that case is as follows: insert the needle into the ridge of the eye from below upwards, and insert another needle on the side where the lacrimal is located. Make the latter needle penetrate and let the first needle follow its course. Then incise the location of the double thread and remove the piece of the tunic with that, pulling it tightly."
"And then extract the needle and apply lanolin infused in egg white onto the wound. Leave it on until the thread adheres with the blood."
"Then dress the wound with something that will promote healing until the wound is healed."
"And sometimes, all the excess skin with a band of cloth around it is gathered together into one large prominence. Then pierce it with a fine spatula that comes to the front of the hump, so that the whitish fluid runs out, and the hump descends immediately."
"And then compress until it is healed."
"Chapter 22."
Of treating eye diseases
This disease called alconati is none other than watery humor descending into the eye, not that one.
To treat this condition, place the patient's head on the prepared seat and hold it in both hands. When you see that watery fluid is about to flow into the eye, quickly dry it up with lint and cover the eye with a bandage. Then observe the causes of the condition as follows:
And if it does not flow downwards, know that it is water.
But if the descent of the watery humor is not prepared as said above, then make the patient sit between your hands and take a thin spatula. Then gently press it onto the panicle surrounding a small part of the conjunctiva near the junction with the cornea (at that location), so that the watery humor flows outwards.
Then, when the fluid has flowed outwards, collect it in a vessel containing water mixed with honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then treat it with other causes as appropriate until it is healed.
Chapter XXII
Of the treatment of watery humor descending downwards.
"We have previously discussed the types of water in the division, and which is suitable for boring with clear speech, now according to health."
"You must make the patient lie between your thighs on a pillow and tie their hands and feet together tightly."
"And then place your left hand near the eyelid of their left eye if it is the left eye where the water is inserted; or with your right hand if it is the right eye."
"And then take a probe with your right hand if the eye is left; or with your left hand if it is right."
"And then place the tip of the probe near the edge of the eye's cornea, about the thickness of a needle from the corner of the tear duct, and gently rotate it with your finger."
"And then penetrate into the eye's cornea and feel that the probe has reached the bottom of the tear duct."
"And you should measure the distance of the probe at the front to be the same as the space from the pupil to the end of the black hole, which is the edge of the eye; because through that pupil you will see with the vision of the eye through the clarity of the corneal tissue."
"And then place the probe into the location where the water is inserted, and then pull it down once or twice, and if the water descends immediately, at that moment you will see the disease on which the eye's vision depends, and the probe in its place."
"And then pause for a moment; if the water has descended, then pull it back down again, making sure that the probe is not dislodged."
"And then when it is full and does not descend, you should gently remove the probe, rotate it gently with your hand, dissolve a little bit of ground crystal salt in water and wash the inside of the eye with it; and then close the eye gently or apply cotton soaked in rose oil and eye ointment and wipe around the edge of the eye."
"But those who are not of our time pause over that treatment with eye ointment."
"And if the probe does not obey you when entering the eye due to its hardness - because it is one of those people whose eyes are very hard - then you should take the spatula, which is called an 'alberid' and has this shape:"
"And then pierce with that the conjunctiva, and do not move your hand from the track, and if you cannot find the probe's location, make a small incision there."
"And then insert the probe as we have said."
"And you should prepare for your work by ensuring that the patient is asleep, lying down in a room where they can sleep on their back in darkness, and prohibiting all movements."
"And pause for a moment to examine the nature of the water you are using to ensure it is clear, and do not move the patient's head to the right or left at all."
"And place the ligature according to its position on the third day."
"And then untie it in that dark room and expose the eye to light, show them some objects, and then put the ligature back on again on the seventh day."
"And this should not be done during the time of treatment or immediately after the infusion." "Therefore, you should be careful with this because water can flow gently but also strongly and forcefully due to excessive pressure."
"But if an abscess forms, you should untie the eye on the seventh day and then treat it with something that will cause the abscess to burst."
"Then uncover the eye and pause for a moment on the face of the patient while they are facing the direction of the light, allowing them to see dimly through it for a few days while remaining in the dark room."
"And then gradually lead them out of that dark room and converse with them about their condition."
"And know that the student of optics is not exempt from some observations, and therefore you should be bold about the operation."
"And it has come to our knowledge that some of those who are skilled in this art have said that fire should be made in the Eye, using a probe made for that purpose which sucks up water."
"But however we have not seen anyone in our land who has perfected this method, nor is it mentioned in any of the books of the ancients; and therefore it may be considered to be a new method."
"And these are the forms of the probes used for this purpose, so that those who do not know them can understand them:"
"And they should be made of iron or steel specifically, and their tips should be triangular and sharp-pointed like this, as shown in the diagram."
"Chapter XXIV."
"Of the treatment of flesh-colored growths in the nose."
"When flesh of diverse kinds is born in the nose, some cause of which is assembled like a scorpion with heavy breath, or a polyp; and this illness is called polyps when it resembles that fish." "And its flesh is cancerous, gangrenous, dark-colored; and it is said to be the flesh of a lion but not dark-colored."
"Therefore in that which is in these lion-like flesh not fraudulent nor cancerous, you should cut the disease between your hands and place it in the sun, and open its nostrils and pierce its head where those flesh are." "And then extract that from its boundaries, and also cut through what you have grasped of those with a sharp, subtle spatula, from one part where you knew all the flesh was removed; but if any cause remains for which amputation is possible, at that hour remove it with one of these instruments easily and skillfully where no cause remained." "But if it is accompanied by sanctification or occurs an aposteme cautery, then you should apply to it what is necessary; but if they are malignant apostemes, then cut and cauterize it until it is amputated, the blood is stopped, and all the cavities are opened."
"And also let it be steeped in the nose with an incision of wine and water or vinegar." "But if the nose is open and there flows moisture into the palate from it, then you know that it is healed."
"If moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you would know that the flesh within is corrupt beneath the elevated bones of the nose where no cauterization has been performed."
"Therefore, you should insert thick threads into the wound and tie each knot with the quantity of a finger or less. Then stretch the patient and insert one end of the thread into the nose along with wax or another suitable substance."
"And after that is done, cause the patient to sneeze so that the thread reaches the nostrils' canals. Then have them lie on their back, just as children do in schools when they practice this action. It will be easy for one who wants to do it."
"And then tie the two ends of the thread, one that comes out of the nose and the other that remains inside. And also apply sutures of flesh to the knots on the thread, making sure that the flesh is already attached to the knots before you do this."
"And then extract the thread, and pause its removal until after the extraction of blood from the nose once. Then do this for three days or more until the medicine has corrupted all that is rotting in the flesh."
"And finally, at the end of the treatment, insert a lead cannula into the nose for several days until it is healed."
"But if you find a dryness in the cure, use that one instead."
"And this is how to make the purge-causer instrument with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nostrils:"
"And make it of silver or brass, resembling a small open lantern, like a small jug, and the mouth similarly."
"And if you wish, make it with a closed cannula like this (illustration), and the opening of the purge-causer instrument is flat and open. Then attach a handle at the end to hold it when you pour in oil or water or any other substance you want from the juices."
"Chapter XXV."
"Of swellings born in the external parts of the nose."
"It is very rarely seen that a swelling appears in the external parts of the nose. It can be treated and cured in a few days if it is seen early."
"And for this reason, you should apply that (remedy) at the beginning of its appearance, and remove all of it." "And then place cautery or medicine that burns where it is."
"But if the incision has been delayed until it is suppurated, then consider whether it is livid, hard, of dark color and insensitive. Then do not touch that with iron for it is a cancerous ulcer; for many times those who cut into this ulcer do great harm to him whom they had intended to heal."
"And if the ulcer is caused by a lion's bite and not of dark color, and sometimes an incision can be made anywhere on it, then evacuate the illness and cut into that without fear, and dress the wound with something that dries and contracts until it is healed."
"Chapter xxvi."
"On the suture of the nose, lips, and ear when continuity has been destroyed by plague or injury."
"You should know that when a solution of continuity occurs in one of these cartilages, little is gained from that operation except in some cases."
"So if you encounter one of these cases, first examine whether it is a fresh plague with its usual sanguineous appearance. Then approximate the two lips of the wound by suture and apply dressings until healed."
"And if the lips of a solution of continuity are already separated and each is healthy, then you should excise each part of its apparent margin until no more blood flows." "And then approximate the two lips by suture and strengthen them with a compress, dusting over it powder of dragon's blood and mastic. Then place on top of the powder a piece of plasters of diachylon or some other consolidative plaster, and leave it for two or three days. Then remove it and change the plaster, allowing the flesh to heal by itself. Finally dress with ointment until healed."
"But the manner of suture is that you approximate the solution of continuity with needles as we have recommended in the suture of the belly, or use filiform sutures as you are accustomed to do."
"Chapter xxvii."
"On the extraction of those causes that appear between the two lips in wounds."
"Often seen in many men in wounds between the lips are hard abscesses resembling fatty tumors, some of which are small and others large."
"So you should incise the lips and open each of those hard swellings on all sides, then perform an abscess incision with bistoury until no more blood flows. Then wash the area with vinegar and dress it with astringent water until healed."
"Chapter xxviii."
"On incision of adherent skin in the gums."
"Often happens that adherent skin covers the gum which anciently was called albus. Therefore you should elevate it with a hook or hold it with forceps and incise it along its length, allowing the healthy tissue to heal or the blood to flow."
"And then apply powdered bistoury or other styptic or caustic powders."
"And if that skin returns, then incise it again and cauterize it so that it does not return."
"Chapter xxix."
"On the causes of toothache with iron."
"When on the surface of teeth in wounds or furrows and between adherent gums there are rough, dry, dark spots, sometimes yellowish-green or greenish-yellow in color, which indicate corruption in the gum and the teeth are loose."
"And therefore you should press the pain between your hands and place the head of it in the nape of the neck, then scrape the teeth in which those rough spots appear until no cause remains. And this is done for the blackness and yellowness and other discolorations until they are cleaned."
"Then if the cause of those conditions at the beginning of this chapter is removed, well and good. Otherwise, repeat the treatment on those teeth over another day and a second and third until you achieve your desired result."
"And know that teeth require many kinds of files with diverse shapes and figures, according to how they are prepared for your operation." "And therefore the file with which you scrape a tooth from a wound is different from that used to rasp between teeth according to other forms. And these forms of files should be prepared by you as follows:"
"Chapter xxx."
"On the removal of teeth."
"You should care for the tooth with all diligence and patience in every extraction, because there is no cause that can excuse the pain when it is extracted, because it is a sublime substance whose removal causes suffering."
"But when the pain forces the extraction of that tooth, you should be firmly certain which is the painful tooth, because often the pain seems to come from a healthy tooth and you extract it, but the pain does not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, as we have seen happen in operations by barbers."
"Therefore when you are certain which is the painful tooth and know it well, then scrape around the tooth with a spatula having some virtue in it until the gum surrounding the tooth is dissolved. Then grasp that tooth with your fingers or with subtle forceps little by little until it loosens."
"And then take strong tenacula for good traction or sturdy leverage and place the head of the pain between your thumbs so that you hold it firmly without hurting it. Then pull the tooth straightly in such a way that you do not break it nor cause greater pain."
"And if the tooth is not forgotten, then take one of those instruments and place it on both sides of it with ease and effort to remove it as was done at the beginning."
"But if the tooth is broken or decayed, then you should fill that breach with cloth and strengthen it with the end of a thin needle so that it does not break during your compression with forceps."
"And you should work carefully with the scraping around the entire gum and guard your strength so that you do not break it nor cause greater pain than the original pain."
"And beware that you do not do what many ignorant and daring barbers do in their haste and audacity regarding extraction, without administering what we have recommended. For often they cause great illnesses in people which are harder to treat than the teeth themselves were to extract, and some leave behind entire roots or some of them, or remove a tooth with part of the jawbone as we have witnessed many times."
"And after the extraction has been washed, rinse the mouth with warm or vinegar water mixed with salt."
"And if there is bleeding afterwards, as often happens, then sprinkle some quantity of powdered sage on the wound and apply it. And if the bleeding does not stop, cauterize."
"The form of the forceps and subtle tenacula with which you grasp the tooth at the beginning should have a long extremity, short handle, and be thick so that they do not bend when you work with them."
"And they should be shaped like this: thick in the middle, tapering at both ends, so that when you grasp something with them, they do not bend and are short at the tips."
"And they should be made of India iron, straight-edged, and have teeth on their extremities which interlock with each other to grasp tightly. Sometimes the extremities are shaped like a bird's beak called 'ciconia', that is, hooked, and provide strong grasping."
Capital Thirty-One
To remove wisdom teeth and extract trapped jaw bones.
When removing a tooth that is tightly clenched there may remain some cause for concern,
The limbs of the patient are affected as if by file or scourge.
And if you do not obey the previous instructions with these forceps or tongs, then you should press on the razis and remove all flesh and insert this instrument called "tongs," whose shape is as follows:
And it should be of short length and thick at the end, so that it is not inserted too deep to avoid injury.
Therefore if the razis is torn away, it's good; and otherwise, help yourself with these other instruments whose shapes are as follows: the shape of the first instrument is triangular at the end, and has some thickness.
The second instrument should have a triangular form and a very fine tip.
And then, helped by this instrument having two branches whose shape is approximately as follows: and with other instruments which will be described later in the form of tooth-cutting blades; for they are useful in this procedure and have this shape:
of a triangular tip curved or short, which is somewhat thick, and should not be inserted too deep to avoid injury.
Also know that the instruments for removing teeth are similar in form to the other instruments.
But the skilled and subtle artisan in this art will find for himself mates suitable to his purpose according to what he understands about the operation and various diseases; because there are diseases for which the ancients neither gave nor reserved any proper instruments due to the variety of their forms.
But if the bone of the jaw or other bones of the mouth is injured or torn away, then it should be treated immediately with whatever is convenient of the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned for the extraction of dental roots. And help yourself with this gesture whose form is as follows:
And gradually increase the pressure, holding it tightly with your mouth to prevent it from escaping or fleeing until the bone is completely healed. Then apply appropriate medicines to restore the area.
But if there is a small puncture in the bone, then remove that part of the bone with the puncture and its darkness, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter XXXII
Of the care of prominent teeth above the others.
When teeth protrude unnaturally from their natural course, especially in women, and more so in venerable elderly ones; therefore you should consider: if the tooth is not close to another, and it cannot be straightened or aligned, then its root must be removed. But if it is attached to another tooth, then cut that one with this instrument, which resembles a pig's bristle, made of Indian steel with an extremely sharp point.
And your incision should be made in such a way that you cut through that tooth in three days due to its hardness, without damaging any other teeth.
And if it's an erupted tooth to be filed down, then file it with this Indian steel file whose shape is like this:
And let it be made entirely of Indian steel with very sharp edges; and let its points be thus made like the teeth of a file, with which the tooth should be filed little by little over many days with ease, so that no other tooth is damaged or injured. And afterwards polish it off at the end and scrape it smooth with small rasps
And if it's a tooth whose sharp edge is cutting the tongue and causing difficulty in speaking, then you should grind down that part until its sharpness is blunted and smoothed out, so that the tongue does not get hurt and speech is not impaired.
Chapter XXXIII
Of restoring broken teeth with gold or silver foil
When teeth are broken off due to concussion and removal by percussion or falling, and the patient cannot chew properly despite your treatment with astringent medications, then you should restore those that can be strengthened with gold foil (and not silver), for silver will tarnish and darken over time, whereas gold never changes.
And let the foil be made so thin and fine according to the amount that can fit between the teeth. And the method of applying it is as follows: take the foil and fold it double lengthwise between two healthy teeth, and then twist it in two places between the broken teeth or one if there are fewer, until the foil reaches the healthy part of the other tooth. And then repeat the twisting movement within the broken portion where you began, using your hand with gentleness and skill so that nothing is broken further.
And let your pressure be such that you hold the foil tightly against the roots of the teeth, but do not squeeze it out between them
And then cut off the excess ends of the foil with forceps or scissors, and push those pieces back into their places with your fingers, and tuck them in between the healthy tooth and the broken one, so that they do not cause injury to the tongue. And then let it remain thus tightly as if glued together
But if it becomes loose or breaks off, reinforce it or them with more foil in the same manner at all times.
And this is how you repair two healthy teeth and two broken ones, as shown in this diagram:
And when a tooth or two return to their proper places after falling out and have been rebuilt as described earlier, but still remain loose
Then only an experienced and skillful artisan can accomplish this
Sometimes it happens that bones from cattle are suitable for this purpose, and they can be shaped like teeth and placed in the location where the tooth is missing. They are then secured in place with gold foil as previously described, and remain there serving well for a long time
Chapter XXXIV
On incision of the frenulum that causes difficulty in speech.
This frenulum that hangs below the tongue sometimes may be present naturally or may occur accidentally due to scar tissue that has already healed.
The procedure is as follows: open the patient's mouth with your hand under his chin, raise his tongue gently, and then incise the frenulum transversely until the tongue is freed from its attachment.
But if there is hardness or toughness in that area due to scar tissue from previous injury, then take an awl and cut through it transversely until you have completely incised the frenulum and released the toughened tissue.
Take care not to make a deep incision in the front of the flesh, for this could cause bleeding.
Then rinse the site of the incision with warm water or vinegar and water, or with salted water to prevent infection. Afterwards, apply a dressing of linen over the tongue to protect it from becoming adherent again in the future.
But if bleeding occurs, apply a dressing of lint soaked in vinegar to the area. If the bleeding continues, then cauterize the location with a silver caustic pencil that is suitable for this purpose. And then treat it with other remedies as appropriate until it is healed.
Chapter XXXV
On the removal of a ranula from beneath the tongue
Sometimes, an abscess resembling a small tumor appears under the tongue and interferes with its natural movement. When this happens, it is difficult to open one's mouth wide.
The procedure is as follows: have the patient sit facing the sun and examine the tumor carefully.
If it appears dark in color or black, hard, and if the patient feels no pain, then do not touch it because it is a cancer.
But if it appears white and feels moist, then insert an awl into it, incise it with a sharp instrument, and cut it completely away. If bleeding occurs during the procedure, apply a dressing soaked in vinegar to stop the flow of blood.
Then return to your work and remove it completely with the help of others, taking care to wash the area with vinegar and salt afterwards. Then treat it with other appropriate remedies until it is healed.
Chapter XXXVI
"The extraction of an abscess from both ears and that which is found in the groin, as well as other abscesses."
"When an abscess forms in the groin, it is called a gland that has accumulated some time ago. These often occur outside and are named 'two ears.' If you treat them with what we have mentioned in the division but they do not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, dark-colored, and insensitive. Then do not touch it with an iron."
"And if it is red in color and the root is large, then do not touch it with an iron due to the flow of blood. Let it be left alone until it ripens, and then you will remove it, or else it will break open on its own."
"And if it is white in color, round, and its root is thin, then that one should be incised."
"And the operation on it is to consider, before the operation, if the abscess has already been allowed to rest with complete rest or if it has decreased somewhat. Then make the incision facing the sun, and have its head tilted downwards. Open its mouth widely, and the assistant takes a cloth between his fingers and presses the tongue of the patient gently with a noble instrument whose shape is as follows:"
"And it should be made of silver or copper, thin like a razor."
"Therefore, when you press with that the tongue and reveal the abscess, and kneel over it gently, then press down on it and insert your finger into it. Then pull it outwards in all directions as much as possible." "Then, if you remove some of the tunics, and wish to incise with that instrument whose shape is this:"
"Then, if you remove some of the tunics, and wish to incise with that instrument whose shape is this:" "And is shaped like forceps, but its extremities are curved so that the sharp edge of each one is directed towards the other, very sharp, and it should be made of forged iron."
"But if that instrument is not available to you, then incise with this spatula whose shape is as follows: it should be sharp on one side and not sharp on the other."
"And after you have made one incision, make another according to this same method of incising. Then clean the wound with water that has been boiled."
"But if there is a flow of blood, cleanse it with water from a decoction of wormwood or myrtle leaves, similar to those substances that have astringent properties so that the flow of blood may be restricted. Then treat it until it heals."
"And sometimes in the groin appear other abscesses besides those of the ears, and incise them according to what has been said about the incision of two equal swellings."
"And there was once treated a woman with an abscess that had appeared in her groin. This abscess was dark-colored and little sensitive, and the groin had already been closed up. The woman breathed with difficulty, nourishment and water had been prohibited to her, and she was close to death if not for one or two days more."
"And the abscess had already grown so much that it had extended through two months, having broken out through two openings."
"Therefore, I extracted it surgically and remained in one of their orifices, and pulled out that which was drawn from a large part, and immediately I inserted this into the other track where it understood, and then I opened its mouth, compressed its tongue, and finally placed the orifice in that abscess."
"And you also cut off a large part of him, from which hardly any blood flowed." "Soon enough the woman recovered from that illness and began drinking water again, and also ate food. And I continued to examine that abscess many times over a long period of time, and it eventually healed in its place, although it left behind a scar."
"So I applied heat and cauterized the wound on him, and then added a dressing; but later, as I walked about, I did not know what God had done to that man."
"Chapter XXXVII."
"Of the examination of a swollen gland when it is abscessed."
"When pus flows from the gland, and it is abscessed and elongated, then it is called a carbuncle. But if it is located in the thick fatty tissue and is rounded, then it is called a boil."
"But when it is cured with the treatment we have mentioned and does not heal as expected, especially if an abscess that has been cauterized still remains and is deep-seated and subtle, then you should incise the one that is attached roundly. And if it is of that length and it oozes blood, which is dark-colored or blackish, and it does not improve at all, then you should be cautious about examining it, for there is fear of severe illness in that."
"And when you find it according to the manner I have described as being white and elongated, then make sure that you alleviate the illness by pressing its tongue with an instrument of such shape that you can place your finger on it at once, and pull it downwards and incise it with one of those instruments used for the incision of boils."
"And you should not incise more than what is appropriate to its natural extent without adding anything, for if you incise too much, you will destroy it."
"And during the incision, use what we have recommended in the incision of boils, and treat it until it is healed."
"But if the illness is frightened by the incision of it, then you should use a cautery on it without fear, and the manner of cauterizing it is not other than with sharp water. And thus: take hold of the head of the illness in its thick part, and press its tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, and take some of the hot water that we have spoken of in the chapter on cautery, and apply it with that live coal, pouring it onto the thickness or subtlety of it, and fill up the concavity of the instrument, which has this shape:"
"The extremity of the concavity in which the medicine is placed should be as round as that of a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine onto the wound. And let the illness lie on its side so that saliva or mucus from its mouth does not enter through the opening of it for some reason, lest it cause harm to it."
"And then place your hand on the medicine and press it onto the uvula for half an hour until you see that it has become blackened and satisfied by the biting of the medicine."
"And if you wish, take cotton and wrap it around the extremity of the ray, and immerse the cotton in the medicine. Then insert the ray with the cotton into a tube that is thin enough so that the cotton adheres to it. Do this several times until you achieve what you want from the cautery of the wound, and then leave it alone because it will dry up and fall off after about three or four days."
"And if you need to repeat the medicine, repeat it. And during the cautery, cleanse around the wound with cotton dipped in border. Then wipe away what remains of the medicine from the area around it with that same cotton, rinse it with warm water, and afterwards treat it with embrocation, and then bandage it until it is healed."
"And this kind of cure has been preserved for us that incision and pus are fearful."
"Sometimes the uvula is cured with something so subtle that cautery and incision are fearful. For it is treated by inhalation in this manner: take calamint, hyssop, origanum, rue, saffron, chamomile, and similar herbs of those kinds, and adjust all or some of them in an earthenware pot, and submerge them with sour wine, and boil them. And the pot should be well luted on the outside with good clay, and there should be a tube in the middle of it, over which is placed a concave instrument made of silver or brass."
"And insert the extremity into the mouth of the sick one so that the vapor can reach the uvula above it until the uvula becomes moistened."
"And then repeat this several times until it becomes dry again. And be sure that you do not perform this cure at the beginning of an occurrence of apostumes, for it would too tightly fit onto the apostume and therefore you should not do this, but rather declare the cautery of the apostume."
"But if you do not have this instrument present, then take a reed and put a wad of cotton at its extremity, so that the mouth of the sick one is covered because the wad of cotton prevents the steam from burning the mouth."
"And this cure is good for health."
"Chapter XXXVI."
Of the extraction of splinters and of that which adheres in the wound and of other causes.
Many times there adhere in the wound a fishbone or a thorn or some other cause.
Therefore you must extract that which is apparent of them, on which the sight falls, because you press the tongue with an instrument towards the sun so that what is in the wound may be declared to you.
And that which is not apparent and is hidden in the wound, it behooves you to make the sick one vomit before the food has been digested in the stomach because the cause annexed to the wound will be expelled by vomiting. Or let the sick one swallow a piece of walnut or radish leaf or a mouthful of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge, and tie it strongly with pitch, and then have the sick one swallow that because when it reaches the place where its spines are located, they will be extracted, and therefore they will be forgotten. And more you can take an eel and tie it with pitch, and afterwards place it in the wound and gently extract it. Or take a syringe and gently insert it and then gently withdraw it.
But if they are not forgotten with those causes which we have mentioned, then you must use an instrument of lead made in this form:
And let it be a little thicker than a small finger, and at its extremity there should be concavity which you insert into the wound gently.
And let him raise his head up high, and see to it that the touch of its bone does not affect the flesh or that which envelops the bone or the splinter itself because that doctor touches it with his hand.
But nevertheless let the sick one insert it himself better, because of his knowledge of the place where the cause adheres and envelops itself in him, and pull his hand with the instrument upwards until everything is forgotten which was prepared there.
"Chapter 39."
"On the removal of sanguinary tumors attached to the gallbladder."
"When the sanguinary tumor is treated with medicines as previously mentioned in this division on treatment and does not improve, consider the time of day when it occurs in relation to the sun, because you have understood the tongue of the patient using the instrument that we have recommended."
"Therefore, if you wish to remove the sanguinary tumor, do so with gentle force or subtle gestures appropriately."
"And if it is not possible for you to remove it in that way, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the gallbladder of the patient, and properly place inside the concavity of the cannula an ignited iron instrument, doing this many times (until the sanguinary tumor is dead and removed from the gallbladder), and afterwards abstain from giving the patient any water all day."
"And then take a vessel full of water and apply the mouth of it to that (the cannula), and wash out the mouth with it; do not spill any of that water, but keep it in its vessel for an hour or so more, because the sanguinary tumor is immediately attracted by water."
"But if it is forgotten in this procedure that we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with incense or asafetida using the instrument that we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula."
"Do this, and thus you will be cured."
"And another method of operation in the suffumigation of that (the patient), is to take an earthenware vessel in which there are burning coals, and the vessel be covered with a cover having a hole in its middle, through which the extremity of the instrument should be placed; and immediately raise the suffumigation; and place the patient's mouth at the end of the canula, and close their mouth so that the suffumigation is not forgotten until you know that it has reached the sanguisugua (the bloodstream)."
"And if not so, then repeat the suffumigation many times, and withhold water from the patient, let them eat salted foods and almonds, and do not give them water; and thus it is necessary that this regimen be forgotten."
"And this is the form of the instrument with which blood is drawn from the vein when it appears; and it resembles forceps thus much, except that it has some curvature:" The joint pain is placed on the trigger, and its end resembles a stork's beak, which is called a glove, in which sandpaper is sharpened.
Here comes the next sentence to translate:
In which the sum of speech in regard to apostemes (abscesses) and their incision is contained.
Abscesses are many species, with many different treatments according to the remembrance of them, each one mentioned in this book.
And so diverse are they in perforation and incision of them by two methods, one of which is for the species of internal abscesses; and the other, what we receive from humidity.
And the second method is appropriate for the places where accidents of the body occur, because the abscess that happens in the head is different from the one that happens in the buttocks; and the one that happens in the fleshy location is different from the one that happens at a joint; and each one has its own treatment through operation.
And more about abscesses: some of them should not be perforated, but rather waited for their ripening or completion on their own.
There are other abscesses that should be removed when they are hard and not yet ripe according to their completion, like those close to joints. For when an abscess is near a joint, its essence extends into what is around it, and often the ligaments or nerves of that joint are corrupted by it, causing contraction of that member; or if it is near a principal member, delaying the perforation until it is ripe causes harm to the principal member; or if it is near the buttocks, then perforate it without waiting for it to be fully digested. You should not perforate it raw and incompletely digested, except when it is near the buttocks, so that you do not damage its front and prolong it into the inner parts of the buttocks, causing a fistula or making it unsanitary in its term. You should know that the time for perforating an abscess is when it has ripened.
You should know that an abscess has ripened when there is a decrease in pain and fever, as well as a reduction of heat and swelling around it, and when the head of the abscess becomes pointed, and other signs appear.
You should know that the incision to drain an abscess should be made where there is less skin over the abscess and away from its head, avoiding the emission of pus during healing.
Always perform an incision along the length of the skin or body if the abscess is located on the thigh or leg, and avoid places where there are nerves, arteries, or joints. In all other locations, make the incision accordingly to that member.
When the abscess is in a fleshy location, it's better to leave its perforation until digestion is confirmed after completion, as we have said; for if you perforate that before, the pus from it will spread out much filthily, and strongly its lips are hardened and its depth increased.
Moreover, abscesses that have been pierced according to the extent of the flesh or body's need, or according to what the member requires.
You should make small perforations for small abscesses, large ones for large abscesses with wide openings or multiple incisions according to the diversity of their size.
And there are those abscesses in which the skin must be drawn together and incised when they are about to burst, like those that occur suddenly as in cases of impetigo or boils.
And there are those that are incised with three-angle sections; and there are those in which it is incised like a figure of a spearhead, as in the cases of inguinal hernias.
And there are those in which a round incision or crescent-shaped incision is made, resembling these.
"Yet for that one to whom it is not so easy as superficial abscesses, you should perform this operation with careful depth, not just on the surface."
"And when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, you should not hesitate to extract all of it at once; however, after extracting some, apply a dressing and return on the following day to extract more, gradually increasing the amount extracted until the abscess is entirely drained."
"And especially if the patient is of delicate constitution, a pregnant woman, an infant, or an elderly person in decline, because the animal spirit is often weakened during the discharge of pus, and such patients are easily harmed; therefore operate cautiously."
"And guard this chapter with great care, and also the operation through which you perform these abscesses; for you must wipe away the pus and consider well if the opening of the abscess is small or wide. If it is small, then administer a narrow probe or an old one. But if the abscess is large and the incisions are deep, then pause carefully in each stroke until they unite together."
"And if in the course of an abscess a portion of the skin is cut off or concave around its circumference, then you should fill it with old cotton or lint, like when tying up bandages without moisture; and tighten it on the third day; and then treat it with what is appropriate for wounds until it is healed."
"But if bleeding occurs during your operation, then apply water mixed with vinegar and a little wine on lint, and place it over the bleeding area several times."
"But if the bleeding persists, then you must apply ligature and dressing, and powders which are recommended in many places throughout this book and division."
"But if it is wintertime and the location of the abscess has many nerves, then you should apply powders made from hot wine and oil, and place them on those locations."
"And if it is summertime and the locations are fleshy, then you should apply powders mixed with water and oil or with wine and oil, all of which must be rubbed until the third day as we have said; then open the abscess, wipe it clean, and administer treatment appropriate for it until it heals."
"And this is what is necessary to know about the treatment of abscesses in general, but according to the way of distinction I have already said how each type of abscess should be treated particularly by chapters."
Chapter XLII
"Of the incision of abscesses which occur in the neck of the head."
In the neck of the head, small abscesses appear, and they are of species of knots containing tunics which are formed from them; and their species are many."
"And among them are pimples, and those contain humidity resembling milk." "And those are the ones containing moisture resembling dust, and resembling them; and those that are stony, hard."
"And in the section of all [organs], and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, since their extraction does not cause harsh difficulty."
"And the operation in section of those is that you expose them with an instrument whose shape appears approximately like this [drawing], which is called 'entromes', until you knew that it contained."
"For if what it contains is moisture, then cut it with a section along its length through a superficial section according to this shape:"
"And begin in the section of line .B. to line .G. Therefore, when the moisture is evacuated, then you strip that from which that moisture came, and do not leave it with any cause for concern, because viewed wounds return, if something remains."
"And approximately immerse it in Egyptian pitch, if available, and otherwise in water and salt; fill it with that and leave it there for another day, because with this you corrode all that remains of that skin."
"And approximately iterate over that coto with Egyptian pitch secondly and thirdly if you need it, until you are confident that there remains no cause of that skin; then cure the wound with oil until it is healed."
"And if an aposteme contains fatty knots, then cut it according to this shape:" "with a section having the form of a cross, and make incisions between both lips of the section and scrape that from all parts, and exert your strength in extracting the tunic which contains it."
"But if your arrow causes difficulty, then do what I told you first."
"And similarly do with the lapidated aposteme in section and cure according to what we have told you; and a section on an apostemate is easier, because it has little blood and little moisture."
"And sometimes some of these apostemes are in the head of certain men who have little moisture; and this cause is that someone incised on an aposteme in the head of an old woman and scraped it like deaf stone, rough and white, which could not be crushed, and if anyone had been struck with it, he would be wounded."
"But in other accidental apostemes on the head that are not of this kind, like those that come to children's heads and around the roots of the ears, the section of these all is a superficial section."
"And pause the perforation of those that are lower down because their root is to alleviate the body from the pain in the lower parts."
"And approximately cure these with whatever you deem suitable for that cure."
Chapter XLII
Of the section of scrofulas which occur in the neck.
Many times these apostemes appear in the neck, armpits, and groins; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
"And those that occur in the neck are many and are often generated between them, and all scrofula of these is within its own tunic, like the knots and apostemes of the head, as we have mentioned."
"And the species of these scrofulas are many, because among them there are some that are lapidated, and others contain moisture, and still others are malignant which do not yield to cure."
Therefore in that one which you find to have good disposition in the Touching, of which the color of what is manifested is reddish like the skin, and is swollen all over, and is not annexed with the nerves of the neck, nor with the veins, nor with the artery, and is not tender, it is necessary to incise it with a superficial section from above to below on the body line from G. between the line B., and scrape it from all parts, and extend the lips of the skin with an incision or with many incisions if you have need of them, as we said in the apostemes of the head, and extract it little by little."
"And more caution that the vein or nerve is not incised."
"And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that it does not hurt your hand when incising or cause injury to the patient, and do not incise what is not necessary to incise; because if you incised a vein or artery and hindered yourself from your operation, then pause in the wet vitriol plaster or other powders which stop the flow of blood, and stretch the plaster and leave it inside until the sharpness of the aposteme has paused and the plaster becomes softened and begins to be moistened." When the blood is absorbed.
Therefore return to your operation until it is completed.
"And approximately ask with the little finger if there are any causes of other small scrofulas, then incise those and clean them."
"And if it is in the root of a large scrofula vein, then do not incise that scrofula from its root." "Then tie it with doubled thread strongly and leave it inside until it falls by itself without harm."
"And approximately fill the plaster with wax old which you have already melted in Egyptian ointment, and approximately cure it."
"And if you incise that scrofula entirely, then it is necessary that you join the two lips of the plaster and cure immediately afterwards so that there remains no superfluity."
"But if you see that there remains superfluity due to the size of the scrofula, then it is necessary that you intend to incise its root, and draw it out and administer suture and what is said."
"And those of the scrofulas that contain moisture, pierce them with a superficial perforation where it appears to you the place of maturation of it, and pause the perforation from what is below the body, as we said."
"And approximately administer perforation, cauterize with ointment and similar things, for that which is left of the corruption." "And approximately when you see the plaster already cleaned, then cure it with ointment of generation flesh until it is healed."
Chapter XLIII.
Of the section of the aposteme accidentally within the wallet
It was said by the ancients this section in the epilote, and we have not seen anyone in our land that it has been done.
And this is the inscription of the discourse of those.
But in men there is squintness, therefore it is necessary to avoid the extraction of the epiglottis, because through this there would be no advantage for that all the veins and the largest of the patient are here.
But in those who have apostemes cauterized in the mouth or throat or both ears when the disease is not in the canal it is necessary to perform section of the epiglottis to avoid the harm which occurs by perforation.
Therefore when we want to do this, it is necessary to incise the epiglottis three circles away from the circles of the epiglottis or four with a small section for width in that which is between two circles by quantity, so that the section is in cartilage and not in flesh and the vessels of blood of it are distant. This place is convenient for section because it is deprived of flesh and the vessels of blood of it are distant.
And if the doctor is fearful then let him extend the chain of the throat with a hook and approximately cut the chain until it reaches the canal but avoid the vessels of blood if he sees any cause.
Approximately, "Then carefully insert the catheter as previously instructed. This signifies entry into the urethra via the opening from which the fluid has escaped due to rupture and by suction of the voice."
"Leave the wound uncovered for some time."
Therefore, once the hour has passed in which perforation is feared, add two lips of the skin of the wound, and cut away only the cartilage.
Then administer medications that cause flesh to grow within until it is healed.
Albucasis states that the essence of this discussion is that some of these apostemes have already filled up the throat of the patient, and the disease has entered into death. The lung of the one affected has become obstructed, and some proceed to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe over the site of the wound for a short breath, thereby saving him from death.
And thus it is commanded to leave the wound uncovered until the mischief of the disease is consumed. The mischief remains for three days. Afterwards the wound should be closed and cared for until healed.
And this I have seen with my own eyes, that a servant took a knife and thrust it into his throat and made an incision there with one stroke of the knife, cutting off a portion of the lung. When I was called to attend him, he groaned like one in agony, and I uncovered the wound and found that much blood had issued from it.
Therefore I concluded that he had not cut any vein or artery, and the wind was issuing from the wound. I treated him until he was healed.
And the servant did not die if he had anything in his voice-box, and after some days he returned to his usual state of health.
And now you say that there is no fear in the section of the epiglottis.
Chapter XLIV
Of incision over an aposteme which occurs in the throat externally, and is called a hernia of the throat.
This aposteme called "hernia of the throat" is large according to the size of the body, and it is common in women.
And it occurs in two ways: either naturally or accidentally.
And in the natural [case], it is not necessary to cure it.
And the accidental [case] occurs in two ways: one is similar to fatty swellings, and the other way is similar to an aposteme that occurs due to a blockage of an artery, and in this case there is danger. And it is not necessary to perform an incision with iron except when it is required. And you should approach that [aposteme] and examine it closely with your finger, and if you find it similar to fatty swellings and not suspended by any veins, then incise it like a node, extract what is inside it from the skin and bursicle; but if not, then carefully examine its entire nature, and afterwards treat that place with whatever remedy is necessary until it is healed.
Chapter XLIV
Of incision of different kinds of nodes
There are many species of nodes, and I have already mentioned all their kinds in the division.
And it is necessary that you explain clearly the difference between a node and an excrescence when there is doubt.
Therefore I say that with an excrescence there is heat and fever and intense pain until the boiling off of the superfluity is finished; but it is completed putrefaction when the fever, pain, and heat cease.
But with a node there is no heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains either fluid or solid matter in its own sac.
And it is according to the size of the body, and its beginning is like a small pimple, and it becomes like a bag, whether large or small, and there are two kinds: either fatty ones containing fluid, with many colors of fluid as I have mentioned in the division.
Therefore, when you arrive at the cure of nodes, it is necessary to examine that [node] and inquire into its beginning with an instrument called "intromissum," according to what will be discussed in the chapter which follows this one.
And this is the method of examining apostemes and all nodes: you should take this instrument and insert it into the moistest place that you find in the aposteme, and slowly rotate your fingers with it until you know that the instrument has penetrated the node.
And then stretch out your hand according to the size of the aposteme, and extract the intromissum and observe what comes out in its track.
And if running fluid of whatever color is discharged, then incise it with a superficial incision as I have said concerning other apostemas.
But if you do not find any humidity in the track of the intromissum, then know that it is fatty.
And dry it with an incision having the shape of a cross according to this form: Thus as I have shown you, and suspend it with forceps, and carefully excise the node from all sides, keeping the skin or sac if possible, and extract that node.
But if it is broken during the operation, then it is not possible to extract that node intact; nevertheless, often you will find something there, and therefore extract it piece by piece until nothing remains of it.
For if any cause remains from it, little or much, the node returns according to the manner which is greatest.
And if you find that some small part remains, then complete the wound with a poultice of sharp corrosive powders and strengthen the poultice, and apply it to the cauterized wound, and cure that [wound] with other remedies until it is healed.
And if it is a large node, then cut both lips of it and cure it with what is appropriate.
But if a pulsating vein is found on the opposite side, or non-pulsating, then tie and bind the place with triple bandages made of linen soaked in vinegar, leaving that strait for two or three days until the wound closes up and bleeding stops; and then return to excising what remains of the node.
Chapter XLVI
Of the shapes of instruments necessary in incision and perforation.
There are three kinds of shapes of intromissum: some large, others medium-sized, and others small.
The shape of the large intromissum is as follows:
"The method for treating smallpox is as follows"
"They should be made of iron, wool, or soft skin, so that they can be inserted into the blisters without delay."
"And these are some examples of remedies, and among them is one called balsam"
"And it is made from three spices, because they are abundant: cinnamon and little pepper."
"The remedy for the great disease is as follows:"
"Here's how you make the gout remedy:"
"Here is the recipe for the remedy for little (illness):"
"It helps with those blisters, discharges, fistulas, and boils that are caused by bone issues and other causes."
"And red-hot needles, large ones like big sewing needles with which the blisters are pierced and drawn out, made of iron, bronze, or silver. The best ones are those made of bronze."
"And remedies made of black pitch are prepared to open up those fistulas in whose concavity reflections are made, that they may be reflected by their own weight with those reflections."
"And it is made from three spices: some are long, others medium-length, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the tightness of its opening."
"Formula for the great lead remedy:"
"Formula for the medium-sized lead remedy:"
"This is the shape of the experiment performed using lead:"
"The shapes of onions are of many species, for some are simple ones that have only one curvature, and they are of three species: large, few, and medium."
"And among them there are onion eyes, and they are of three species."
"Among those there are onions with two curvature, which are also of three species."
"And among them there are ones with three curvature, and they are also of three species."
"And all of these are necessary in their place."
"How to anoint the left hand: its form:"
"Form of large ear ointment with two curves:" "Form of right ear ointment having two curves:" "How to anoint the left ear having two curves:"
"Form for large ear ointment with three curves:"
"Form of right ear ointment with three curves:"
"And these are the forms of the scalpels with which nodules and boils are cut and scraped, and they are of three kinds: large, middle-sized, and small."
"How to use a large scalpel:"
"Form of medium scalpel:"
"Form of small scalpel:"
"The extreme points of those with which section is made are sharp and the other extreme points are not sharp, nor are they paused in this manner, but so that the incision may be done judiciously in the scraping of nodules without fear of cutting a vein or nerve, and so that the illness may be healed and tranquility obtained by a little through the cautery which follows after the scraping of the boil."
"And these are the forms of tweezers, and they are of three kinds: large, medium-sized, and small, as you see."
"The forms of ear candles are like rods with which brandy is made."
"And it has at its end a hole pierced with a spatula hidden inside, and in that part there are openings both inside and outside, whenever you wish, as you see."
"The forms of spatulas, which are hidden among the said devices for the perforation of boils and are not perceived by the sick, and they are of three kinds: large, medium-sized, and small." "And these are the forms of those:"
"The forms of bloodletting cups with which the flow of blood is extracted, and they are of three kinds: large, medium-sized, and small. The forms of them are like this:"
"They are made of citrus peel, round with some length, and they are thin."
"And it is necessary that these kinds of bloodletting cups be large, medium-sized, and small, so that by means of them the flow of blood may be extracted quickly in necessity, and also when you first begin to practice medicine."
"However, do not use them to extract blood in any part of the body, and only use them on fleshy areas, such as those near the armpits and groin, the arms, breasts, abdomen, buttocks, and similar moist flesh."
"And sometimes these instruments are made of small pieces resembling little scissors according to this form; with which blood is extracted when it is done by flebotomy, or by incision of a vein or artery."
"And sometimes they are made round according to this form:"
"Chapter XLVI."
"Of the care of men's breasts, which resemble those of women."
"Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen during sleep with the beginning of becoming hairy, and then they are also swollen like those of women, and we call them 'apostemous'."
"And he who suffers from that should incise it with a crescent-shaped incision according to this form, along the line from B to G, and then remove all of the thickness, and then fill the wound with an embrocation containing medicine for healing, and then join the two lips of the wound with stitching, and care for it until it is healed."
"But if the breast declines toward the sides and is softened by its size as happens in women, then it should be split into two of its own parts with two crescent-shaped incisions, each contained within the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the smaller according to this form from B to G. And then remove the chain which is between the two lips of the wound, drain the pus, and apply what has been said about stitching and powders as necessary in its care until it is healed."
"And if you do not complete the incision of that which should be incised for the relief of the disease and the flow of blood, then it is necessary to fill the wound with cotton soaked in corrosive ointment and let that corrodes that which is swollen until it rots away, and then care for it until it is healed."
"Chapter XLVIII."
"Of the perforation of boils that come from beneath the armpits."
"Those boils that come from beneath the armpits are of the species of scrofulous, hard ones, which contain a core that is discharged."
"And among those there are some that contain moisture; and those that contain moisture should be incised with a crescent-shaped incision according to this figure: from G to B. And when all that is inside the boil has been evacuated, then fill it with cotton wool and leave it alone for another day."
"And then remove the cotton wool and care for it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed."
"And if the boil is of the kind that is nodular or scrofulous, then incise it as we have said in the section on swollenness."
"But if the wound is extended to such an extent that it leaves a scar, then apply cautery as we have said before."
"Chapter XLIX."
"Of the incision of boils that occur through an artery or vein."
"When an artery is broken and the cord above it becomes swollen, then many times a boil occurs. And the signs by which it is known that inflammation and boil are due to an artery or vein: for when a boil is due to an artery it is elongated in front of the body; and when you press on the boil with your fingers, you feel a rustling noise."
"And that which is due to a vein appears on the surface of the body."
"And incision on this boil is an error, and especially so in those that are near the armpits, in the angles of the chest, in the neck, and in many other parts of the body. And it is very large, therefore its cure with iron should be avoided; but if it is on the extremities or on the head, then it should be avoided."
"But concerning that which is due to inflammation of the sheath of the artery, incise along the cord in a long line; and then widen the incision with forceps and expose the artery, and free it from its tunics until it is exposed."
"And then place that needle and make it penetrate to the other side, and tie the artery with double thread in two places, — which is what you do when extracting two arteries which are on the temples."
"And then pierce the place that is between the two threads with a spatula until all the blood in it is discharged and the boil is resolved."
"And then apply treatment where putrefaction has occurred until the threads fall off; and then care for it with an appropriate ointment until it is healed."
"And if it is a boil due to the section of a vein, then you should hold as much of the boil with your hand as possible near the cord, and then insert the needle beyond the place where you have held it with your hand, and make it penetrate; and thread that double thread through which you extract it from the other side, and then tie the boil with two threads according to what I told you in the section on the grapevine of two parts with two ends of the thread."
"If you fear the thread may slip out, then insert the needle with that hook and remove all the abscess through the first incision, and strengthen your thread in four places."
"After you have dried the abscess in its middle part within which it was exited, then incise the surplus of the cord, and leave that which is tied."
"And furthermore, place on the wound the powder which you have submerged in wine and oil, and then apply the treatment made with bandages and compresses until it is healed."
Chapter 1: On Abscess caused by twisting of nerves
"So too does abscess occur in arteries and veins, and similarly it occurs in nerves when they are struck or subjected to excessive labor."
"And this happens more often in the locations of the elbows or heels, or in any place where the joints are more movable."
"And it is a severe abscess, similar in color to the rest of the body, and is in its greatest dispositions without release when pressed with violence; then it feels like a stupor."
"And it is not aggregated abscess in the front of the body; therefore it leaves the cord behind and moves to all parts but does not go before nor after them."
"Therefore those that are in the joints need not be treated with iron, for it would cause great contraction."
"But that which is in the head or forehead should cut the cord with a scalpel." If it's a small abscess, then apply leeches to it and cut it out in pieces.
And if it's large, then suspend a sling under it, cut it open, and remove its contents. Then adjust the wound with stitches, and treat it until it heals.
Chapter 52.
Of the incision of an abscess which occurs in the thigh that occurs on the abdomen.
And therefore it is necessary to observe how often this disease occurs in the bellies of those people and in other parts of their body which are called fungous because of their similarity with fungi; whose root is subtle but whose head is thick; and sometimes its lips become inverted, and there are some that are small, and others that are very large.
And I have seen one which had two parts in its belly that resembled fungi more; and there was no difference between them, both were white with thin roots.
And the lips of those were inverted and opened, and moisture flowed from it all the time.
Therefore I incised them and removed one weighing eighteen ounces and the other six ounces.
"And the operation for this condition is to consider first if the patient is humid, and if the color of their skin is pale, humid, and subtle. Then you should incise with a broad knife, and have cauteries in the fire present, because many times much blood will be expelled from the section; and if blood comes out, cauterize that."
"And if the patient is pale and afraid, guard yourself from incising with iron; but rather take fresh lead, and apply it to that skin, in the manner which we have said above; and leave it for two days."
"And appropriate to the narrowing of the lead thread; therefore, do not cease applying the lead until it is absorbed and falls away by itself without your effort."
"But if the patient has thick skin, then in incising it there is cause for fear and trembling, especially one who is in the belly."
"But it is possible that you may cut the membrane of it, and appropriately cauterize it so that it does not return."
"And then treat what has been healed from the plague."
"And be careful not to presume to incise a member that is dark in color, insensitive, or poorly regarded, for such is highly malignant."
"And then bring me some remembrance of crane fat herewith."
"The capital [letter] .lii."
"On the treatment of prominence of the navel."
"Prominence of the navel may occur due to many causes: from fissures of the cicatrix which is on the abdomen, and sometimes from a hernia arising from it; or from blood that flows from veins or arteries, as mentioned earlier; or from constriction of wind in it."
"But if it is due to a fissure of the cicatrix and protrusion of tissue, then the color of the tumor resembles that of the skin; and there is no pain, and it appears suddenly in various locations." "And if it is due to protrusion of the hernia, then its situation is more variable than what has been mentioned earlier. When you press on it with your fingers, it disappears and returns suddenly; it is hard and loud when sound is produced, and there is much difficulty in passing baths and severe distress."
"But if it is due to moisture, then there is no pain, nor does it disappear when you press on it with your hand; nor is it constricted or swollen."
"And if it is due to blood, then the tumor appears dark in color."
"But if it is due to raw flesh, then the tumor is large, thick and hard; it is filled according to its quantity."
"But if it is due to wind, then touching it causes no pain."
"And the operation for it is that you should consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to blood from an artery or vein, or to wind; then if so, you should refrain from treating it, because in such cases there is fear and dread, as has been taught in the chapter where I have spoken about tumors resulting from arteries and veins."
"And if the prominence of the navel is due to hernia or tissue, then you should order the patient to lie on his back with his legs extended. Then sign all around the navel with a tent, and immediately order him to lie face down between your hands over the two hips, and immediately encircle it with a broad spatula in the circuit of the navel where you have signed with the tent; then extend the mouth of the tumor upwards with a large hook, and ligate around it tightly with strong flax or thread using a proper tying method."
"And immediately grasp the middle of the extended tumor with your left hand and introduce your finger into its mouth seeking for the hernia; if you find it caught by the membrane, then release it carefully and push the hernia back into its place inside the abdomen."
"And if you have found tissue, then grasp it with a hook; cut away its excess."
"But if it is opposed to your artery or vein, then encircle that area and immediately return to your operation. Then take two needles and thread them with strong flax, and introduce the needles into the circuit which you have made around the tumor in such a way as to cross each other; pierce these through; then tighten the tumor in four places over the needles."
"And if you wish to do so, remove the needles and let the wound heal by itself with the flesh extended. Or else cut it when it is ripe and ready to burst, and then treat it with a suitable ointment for wounds until it heals."
"And if the prominence of the navel is made of raw flesh or due to moisture, then you should evacuate the tumor as has been said and remove the blood or moisture which you find in it. Then treat it with a suitable ointment and dressing that will consolidate the area."
Chapter LIII
About the treatment of cancer.
We have already spoken in the division of cancer and how it is treated with medicines, and that surgery should be avoided for fear of causing an ulcer. We have also said that cancer can be generated from a mole orwart.
And the ancients said that sometimes cancer can be removed from a place where it is possible to eradicate it, as in the case of cancer found in the breasts or scrotum, which they deemed appropriate to excise entirely, especially when it is still small.
But when it is advanced and large, it is not appropriate to approach it, for I have never seen anyone healed from such an ulcer nor have I heard of any other way.
And the operation in such cases is as follows: first prepare and let the patient lie down. Then purge him with black colic medicine several times, and if there is a manifest tumor, mark it off with a tent.
Then prepare the patient for surgery at the site of the tumor. Then place cloths appropriate to that area on the traction table. And then circumcise it with a good, careful incision without leaving any cause for bleeding. Then let the blood flow out freely, do not remove it lightly. Then press on the area and wipe away all the thick blood with your hand or an appropriate instrument.
But if you encounter difficulty with thick blood from vein or artery, then cauterize that area until the flow of blood stops. Then treat it with other appropriate treatment until it heals.
Chapter LIV.
Of the treatment of dropsy
We have already mentioned, in the division, the types of dropsy of water and their symptoms for each type, as well as its treatment with medicines.
And the one that is cured with iron is only the species of dropsy alone, and it is not close to the species of tympanites nor to the species of hypocharesis, for this one is fatal.
And when you have treated this tympanitic dropsy with medicines and do not see any improvement in the patient's condition, then consider whether the patient has already achieved debility from another disease or if there is another kind of dropsy present, such as in cases of cough or stomach problems. Be careful then that you do not treat them with iron, for there is danger in this.
But if you find the patient to be strong and healthy, and there is no other disease present besides dropsy alone (not infancy or old age), then the method of operation for this case is as follows: elevate the patient between your hands, and have an assistant press the patient's abdomen with their hand, squeezing out the water from both sides towards the groin area. Then take a sharp needle (spatula) according to this form:
"It should be two parts long and sharp-pointed like a sword; however, it should be slightly shorter gradually, so that during the operation it does not go inside the intestine, and it may lash out."
"And consider whether the generation of hydrocele is from the intestines, because when cutting you should stay away from the navel by about three fingers' width to the right on the side."
"But if the generation of hydrocele is due to a disease of the liver, then your cut should be three fingers' width left of the navel."
"And if its cause is the spleen, then your cut should be on the left side."
"And it is necessary that your cut be on the side opposite to where you want to treat the illness, so that excess fluid does not accumulate at that location."
"And therefore pierce with the instrument all along the canal, and approximately enter that section, and lift your hand with the spatula between the canal and the spermatic cord, and you should strip away that; if it amounts to about a fingernail or less."
"And therefore pierce the spermatic cord until the spatula reaches its desired location, and that is the location of the water." "And then extract it, and insert an instrument which has this shape:" "... and it resembles a thin silver cannula. It is made of silver or iron or lion's hair, at the lower end of which there is a small hole, and on its sides there are three holes: two on one side and one on the other. And its tip is shaped like an inkwell feather, thus:
"At the outer end of him they placed an armillary sphere, for when the instrument reaches the water, then that immediately descends upon the instrument, thus evacuating water in about half quantity. For if you evacuate more than necessary at that hour, it could cause death due to excessive resolution of his animal spirits, or even bring him close to death."
"Evacuate that according to the quantity of his virtue and according to what you understand about the dispositions of his illness, the virtue of his pulse, and his temperament."
"And when you remove the instrument, retain the water that is, for it will soon be retained by the chain that retains the tube which is over the cistern. And I advise you to pierce him in this manner."
"And if you repeat the procedure on another day if the illness is tolerating it, then remove a small quantity of water, and do this for some days, but be careful not to leave too much water."
"But if you are afraid about the illness and remove a large quantity of water, then bury him in dry sand up to his chest, apply much sweat in bathing, and expose him to the sun for a long time. And treat him with drying medicines until he is healed."
"And cauterize the stomach and the liver near the extraction of water, as I have described above in what has been said before."
"Chapter L.V."
"Concerning the treatment of children born with unopened urinary passages."
"Sometimes, in some children who are born from their mother's womb, the opening of the head is not perforated (or it is very narrow or it does not have its opening)."
"It is therefore necessary to perform a circumcision with perforation as soon as possible after birth, according to this method:"
"Then pause for three days or four."
"And when it is time to urinate, remove the splint and let him urinate; then return it."
"But if you do not pause the lead, it is likely that the urine which falls on the opening will not close it."
"However, if the passage is too narrow, treat it with a lead splint as described above for several days until it is widened."
"However, in those cases where the passage is not at its opening, it should be led downwards. This happens because some children are born with the head of the penis at the end of the glans so that they cannot urinate downwards but must raise the penis with their hand upwards. This is not due to their nature and it causes great harm since the semen cannot reach the mother rectally, which is a serious illness."
"And the manner of performing this operation is as follows: have the patient lie on his back and then extend the head of the penis from him with your left hand using vigorous traction. Then incise the opening at the tip of the glans with a sharp blade, like cutting a feather, taking care not to cut any part of the skin deeply so that only the midpoint of the penis is opened and the passage falls into its proper location."
"And be careful when performing an operation for the flow of blood, as this happens often. Pause the bleeding with whatever you have at hand and treat the wound until it heals."
"Chapter LV."
"Iron deposit that occurs on the foreskin of the penis, characterized by hardness, blackness and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis."
"Many times this iron deposit occurs on the penis, accompanied by a swelling of flesh."
"And among these, one is malignant and another is benign."
"Benign: provided you grasp it with a fine hook and cut it off where it can be completely removed; then press gently on it with Egyptian cupping glass; afterwards apply the defattening ointment until healed."
"And if the deposit is malignant and dark in color, then you should apply cautery around its incision and its root."
"But if the deposit is on the foreskin of an uncircumcised penis, and part of it is inside the foreskin and another part is outside, then you should remove the inner portion once it has solidified; afterwards treat the outer portion separately, because when you treat them together with the foreskin, it may become trapped."
"And if these conditions occur in the genitals or the foreskin and are accompanied by darkness and corruption, then you should cut away everything that is already darkened and about to decay or has already decayed; afterwards apply a poultice of honey mixed with ground almonds, barley grains, and three kinds of herbs sieved."
"And then treat it with the other cure until it is healed."
"But if there is a flow of blood, then cauterize according to this method:"
"Because cautery has two purposes: to stop bleeding and to treat gangrene when it is corrupted."
"And if the glans penis is completely destroyed in one moment, then you should insert a lead cannula into the meatus of the foreskin so that urine may flow through it."
"In the adhesion of the foreskin to the glans penis (and this condition occurs only in those whose foreskin is intact, and circumcision is not required; but it can also occur due to inflammation or swelling) you should use a blunt spatula to gently separate them until the adhesion is dissolved and the glans penis is completely freed from all parts."
"And if it is difficult to separate them carefully, then you should use a scalpel to cut through the adhesion at the glans penis and foreskin, because sometimes the foreskin, being thin and delicate, may be perforated accidentally."
"And then separate the foreskin and glans penis with a fine, soft piece of cloth that has been moistened in warm water to prevent them from sticking together again."
"And then treat it with styptic wine until it is consolidated."
"Chapter Fifty-Seven."
"The purification of children and the treatment of what happens to them during circumcision."
Circumcision is not a cure for continuity like other diseases. However, since it is an operation and within our willpower, particularly in children, we should assign the best method and path that is least painful to achieve health.
It is said that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because they did not use it in their laws. However, we have acquired this knowledge through experience, which is why most skilled surgeons and barbers practice circumcision using clamps and torches; they also use lime plaster and scrape with a nail.
"I have already tried all these methods and found no better modification with forceps, using linen soaked in pitch for modification as with the nail, for many times it escapes the skin above because the foreskin has two tunics, one remains below, and it is very difficult to avoid another incision and certain pain." "The modification which is done by apothecaries and is called 'digital', used by barbers, does not ensure the incision of the extreme end of the male member because it often goes too far into the skin."
"However, in the operation using a nail, you may accidentally cut with iron and ruin your operation." "Moreover, the foreskin of a child is short by nature, many times it appears in such a manner that it does not require modification, and I have seen that."
"However, concerning the modification done with forceps and linen soaked in pitch, I have found experimentally that forceps provide a proportional incision because their sharpness above is equal to the sharpness below. Therefore, when you press your hand so proportionally on both sharp parts, you cut evenly according to one comparison at once; and there is compression of the pitch with a shape containing the foreskin completely without any error."
"And the first way of performing this operation is that you should keep the child awake as much as possible if he understands a little, and that you should only apply the pitch to his foreskin at once, and leave him like that for another day."
"And accordingly, make the child happy in every possible way according to your ability so that he may receive his intelligence." "And accordingly, keep the child between your arms prepared, and do not let him be frightened or see the forceps in your hand or below your chin so that he does not see those nor any other of the instruments."
"And accordingly, insert your hand between the child's thighs and blow on the foreskin, pulling it outward until its head appears, and promptly remove anything that has adhered to it due to dirt."
"This is the form of the forceps used for circumcision:"
"The outer edges of the forceps are not sharpened while the inner ones are sharp, so that the root of the nail is not exposed. The length of both sharp parts should be equal to the length of two fingers placed side by side."
"However, an error in circumcision occurs when you hastily cut off too much or part of the foreskin beyond the incision."
Therefore, you should extend it with your fingernail in front of the inflammation of that place and cut according to equality.
"And if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then extract it with forceps and cut it."
"But if three days have passed and there is still inflammation below the foreskin, then let it be until the inflammation has subsided naturally, carefully scrape off the scab, and cut according to what you have prepared."
"And guard yourself from cutting off the head of the foreskin, for that would be disastrous."
"And therefore treat him with what strengthens wounds and with the powders which we have recommended in the treatise on powders."
"If it is cut correctly according to measure and you follow the guidelines above, there will be nothing wrong with him."
"And also treat him with what we have said until he is healed."
Chapter LVII.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obesity or by stone or by blood clots, or by poverty or weakness, and those affected have similar treatments to what we have said about the methods of treatment in the division.
"And if it is not dissolved by what we have said and the cause of this trouble remains severe, then you must perform extraction using an instrument called a "syringe," which has the following shape: It should be made of silver and thinly hollowed like a feather quill with subtlety equal to half a palm's length, and it should have a thin canal in its head."
"The method of extracting urine through that is to take doubled fleece and tie it tightly at the outer edge of the wick or cotton; then insert the outer edges of the fleece into the opening behind the syringe, and cut with forceps any excess that may be there. Then insert the wick into the canal vigorously. Next, fill the syringe with egg whites beaten together with border and albumen."
"And make the patient sit on a chair, then embrocate his bladder and urethra with warm olive oil mixed with water."
"And then insert the syringe gently until it reaches the root of the urethra; then bend the urethra upwards at the navel area; then push the syringe inside that; then push it further until it reaches the bladder, and if it is not done in this order but meets with tortuosity, then use caution."
"And then slowly extend the fleece with the wick little by little because urine clings to the wick."
"And then remove that and treat it with urine. Use the syringe repeatedly until the bladder is emptied and the patient obtains relief."
Chapter LIX
On the quality of irrigation of the bladder using chamomile flowers and similar instruments that are suitable for this purpose.
When ulceration or inflammation or blood clots occur in the bladder, or there is a narrowing of the urethra and you wish to irrigate it with water and medications, then use an instrument called "chamomile flowers," which has this shape:
Its outer edge should be blunt and closed. And it has three openings on one side like this:
"In the beginning is a hollow place where this thing resides, called according to its quantity without addition. When any cause draws out moisture from it, let that be drawn out; and when it is expelled, with it let that be drawn out."
"Therefore, when you wish to expel moisture from the bladder, insert the tip of the reed into the moisture and draw out with it that which is expelled upward, for the moisture is drawn into the hollow of the reed."
"And so insert the tip of the reed into the urethra as we have described in the circle. And thus expel moisture with that which you expel, for that moisture quickly reaches the bladder and relieves it from its illness."
"This is the form of the subtle sieve through which the bladder is sieved, and this is its shape:"
"And it should be made of silver or lead, from which the top should resemble a small feather, and let the cane be hollow inside."
"And then take urine from the person whose bladder you wish to sieve, and place that moisture in it. Then tie that [the sieve] between two strong bands with doubled thread, and heat that moisture over the fire."
"Then insert the tip of the sieve into the urethra."
Approximately grasp your hand over the bladder with warmth descending within that patient, ensuring that that warmth has already reached the bladder.
If you are not sure about the bladder, then take a piece of sponge and make it into that circle; and pierce that one throughout its entirety; and then firmly press on those tracks until they revolve around; and also attach the circle so that it is attached to the outer skin, because you pause in that water which you wish for moistures, oils, and waters.
And then you attach that to the instrument and do with it as you did with the bladder, expressing from your hand until the warmth reaches the bladder.
Chapter LX
Of extracting stone(s).
We have already mentioned in the division of the species of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones generated in the kidneys and stones generated in the bladder, and their signs.
And we have said about stone that is operated on by hand, and sectioned.
And the stone properly generated in the bladder is that which remains in the bladder.
And I thus recount it with clear exposition and brevity.
Therefore it is said that stone generated in the bladder mainly affects children; and among its signs are that urine excreted from the bladder is like water in its subtlety, and appears sandy; and the discomfort feels like a worm's sting, often accompanied by pain, and sometimes it stands up straight; and with this comes forth the anus, especially in those cases.
And it would be easier to cure children of that condition if they have reached fourteen years of age; and difficult treatment for the elderly. But among young people, it is midway between those two.
And of that person for whom the stone is large and the cure would be easier to perform, but if it is small, it is contrary to that.
Therefore, when we come to the treatment of that condition, it is necessary at the beginning of it to relieve the discomfort with a cautery which extracts all the opening which is in its passage; for that opening sometimes hinders the expulsion of the stone through investigation of it.
And likewise let the discomfort be taken with its weight and be suspended and moved up and down so that the stone may descend to the neck of the bladder, or what is left of it sometimes.
And also let that cautery be placed between the thighs but well prepared, and its ends be close to the things of it, so that the whole bladder may be inclined downward towards its parts.
And also let that be inquired about and all of that be done foreward.
Therefore if you feel the stone in its space, then immediately cut with sectioning upon it
And if you do not reach it with your touch, then it is necessary that you anoint with oil your little finger of the left hand, if the discomfort is a child's, or the middle finger if it is a young person full-grown, and insert that into its anus. And inquire within whether the stone lies near your finger. And bring it out little by little towards the neck of the bladder
And also press upon it with your finger, and expel that outward through the place from which you made the section.
And command the assistant to press upon the bladder with his hand; and command another assistant with his right hand to stretch open the labia majora upwards, and with his other hand move back the cord which is below them, in preparation for the place where the section is made.
And also introduce spatula like this, of which this is its shape: And cut in it that which is between the anus and the labia majora, not in the middle place, approaching to the left side of the thing; and let the section be made upon that stone, and your finger be in the anus, and let the section be transverse, so that the section outside may be wide and inside narrow according to how much of the stone it is possible to extract, and not more, for if you press too hard with your finger which is in the anus, the stone will be pushed back through the section, and it will be forgotten without difficulty.
And know that among stones there are some which have an angle or margin, because the extraction of them is made difficult by this.
And concerning those things it is like this: if they resemble a grain and are round, their extraction is easy.
Therefore if that one has angles or margins, adjust in the crevice
And if it is not thus pushed back, then you must press upon it, or what stretches upon it decently, the extremity of which should be like a chisel with which you stretch upon the stone, and do not escape from it; or what introduces into it that subtle instrument of curved extremity.
But if you cannot press upon it, then widen the track a little; and if you see flow of blood, cut that open with vitriolated scissors.
But if the stone is more than one, then at the beginning you press your hand upon the mouth of the bladder, and also cut open upon it; and again press a little upon that; and similarly do if there are many more than two.
And if it is a very large stone, then ignorance is that you cut open upon it with a large section, for one of two causes happens to the patient: either he dies or he degenerates into continuous distillation of urine because the place is not entirely consolidated.
But let an assistant pull it out from within that which has been pushed back, or press in the fracture of it with forceps so as to extract it in pieces.
Therefore when you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with ointment of aloes and dragon's blood, and stitch it up. And lay upon that cloth dipped in oil and wine, or in oil of roses and washed water, so that the cauterized wound may be softened.
And also make the patient lie upon his back, and do not remove the ligature until the third day.
And when that has been untied, wash the place with water and much oil, and afterwards cure it with ointment of diachylon and ointment of diacasilicon until it is healed.
But if in the wound there occurs cauterized aposteme and corrosive, and of that kind as if the blood is congealed in the bladder, and because of it urine is forbidden (and this is known by the exit of blood with urine), then therefore introduce your finger into the wound and extract that blood; for if it remains it provokes corruption of the bladder and its putrefaction.
And also wash the wound with vinegar, water and salt, and with opposition to all kinds of corruption, with that which is convenient for its cure until it is healed.
And it is necessary during all the time of the cure that you keep both things warm and adjust the medicines which are applied upon the place.
And if the stone is small and is in the middle of the urethra and is stuck there, and urine is forbidden to pass out, then cure it with that which I recommended before you came to this section; for many have been cured by this method without needing a section; and now I will tell you what to do: take an awl of iron thus made:
Triangle-shaped piece of wood inserted.
Then carefully remove the catheter and tie it to the stone with a thread so that it does not return to the bladder.
Then insert the iron into the catheter, carefully pushing it until the tip of the probe reaches that stone. Rotate the probe gently with your hand in that stone bit by bit, and continue the perforation until it pierces through to the other side so that urine can flow freely.
Then press your hand on what remains of the stone at its exit point outside the catheter, since it is fractured and has been flushed away with urine. The illness is healed.
But if this treatment does not suit you for any reason that prevents it from being done, then remove the catheter and apply another one above the stone. Then cut through the stone in that catheter between two ligatures. Then extract it. "And then untie the ligature and cleanse the congealed blood, which occurs in the wound."
"And there is no need for ligature of the stone from the bladder, unless to prevent it from returning to the vessel. And another ligature above this one is necessary because when the stone near the entrance of the bladder is untied, the cord returns to its place and closes the wound."
"And for that reason it is necessary when you tie the stone above that you elevate the cord to the parts above or it will return and close the wound as we have said."
Chapter 61
"On the extraction of stones from women."
Stone in women's wombs is rarely produced.
However, if there is a stone found in any of them, its treatment is difficult and prohibited by many methods.
One of these is that the woman must be very careful while giving birth.
And the second is that you should not find a woman who is pregnant and then send her to the doctor when she is menstruating or has never been married.
The third one is that you should not operate on a woman who does not know this art, especially the operation with a stone (am ma).
And the fourth one is that the location of the incision for removing a stone from women's wombs is far away from the stone itself, so it requires careful cutting, and there is fear involved.
However, if necessity compels you to do this, then it is necessary for you to take a midwife who is very skilled and has little experience.
But if you are deprived of that, then seek out a wise and subtle physician, or present a skilled midwife experienced in the nature of women, or a woman who has learned this art from another.
Therefore, present that woman and command her to do everything you order regarding the examination at the beginning. This is so she can determine if the woman is a virgin, and if she is, she should insert her finger into the woman's vagina and feel for the stone.
Then, if she finds it, let her withdraw her finger, and then command her to make an incision over that area.
But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the woman's vulva and feel for the stone, as she places her left hand on the bladder, and compresses that area with good compression.
Then, if she finds it, gradually move her away from the opening of the bladder towards its sides with the strength of her virtue until the thing is accomplished according to reason.
And appropriately make the incision over that position of the opening of the vulva according to reason, whichever side it is on where the stone is located, and do not remove your finger from the stone until you have taken it out.
And let the incision be small at first; and then insert your knife into that section and if you feel the stone, then adjust the incision according to the size of the stone which she knows will be removed from there.
And know that stones are of many kinds: some are small and large, some are round and sharp, some are long and round, and some have ramifications.
So you know how many species there are according to what you indicate about what you want.
And if you see blood flowing, adjust the area with vinegar dissolved in three parts water and let it sit for an hour until the bleeding stops, and then return to your operation until the stone is removed.
And have ready with you the instruments which are mentioned in the extraction of stones in men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
And if you see bleeding and know that the expulsion of blood is from the area that has been incised, then pause and sprinkle powder over that area and press it with a dry cloth and strict compression, do not repeat this; leave the stone and do not extract it, for otherwise the woman will die. And then dress the wound.
Then when the sharpness of the bleeding has ceased some days later and the area is healed, then return to your operation until the stone is removed.
Chapter LXII.
Of incision on incarcerated hernia.
Hernia occurs when there's an accumulation of moisture in the white tissue, which is located along the groin of the genitals containing the bowel.
Sometimes it occurs within the abdominal wall itself, which is naturally prepared for this purpose in the region of the bowel opening. This is the inguinal canal between the white tissue we mentioned earlier, and it's nothing but a hernia.
"The occurrence of this hernia is due to weakness that affects the groin area, causing the accumulation of matter there, and sometimes it occurs due to blows received on the groin."
"And this humidity has many colors, for its color is declining towards citrus or sanguineous red, or purple, or it is blackish-white, or it is watery and pale, and this is the most common."
"And the signs by which it is known where this accumulation of water is located are these: for if it is in the white cyphac, then the aposteme is somewhat elongated in length like an egg shape, and the groin appears, because the humidity contains that of all parts."
"And if the humidity is in its own connective tissue, then the aposteme is round like an egg and it appears as another egg."
"And if the humidity is between the cord of the groin and the white cyphac, then there is no swelling."
"And when you desire knowledge of the color of the humor, then observe the color of the humor in the aposteme with careful attention, of which the form is preceded; and according to what appears in the tracks of the entrails, judge what lies beneath."
"Therefore, when we come to the treatment of this with iron, then it is necessary to order the patient to be bled if possible, and let him lie on his back."
"And let him be supported on his back upon some cause a little above, and pause until the drugs have taken effect."
"And let you sit on the left side of him, and command the minister to stand at his right side; who shall extend his rod to one of two fingers' breadth from the joint of the knees and the division of the buttocks."
"And let him take a broad spathula and divide the knee-joint in its length, near to the patella."
"And let the section be made according to the direction of the joint equally distant from the line that ought to divide the skin of the knees until it reach the white tendon comprehending."
"And cut it, and observe, and take care that thou dost not cut him; and thy cutting shall be done with a party so gently suspended that it is the most subtle and careful cutting possible according to the quantity that thou art able."
"And let him pierce the tendon full of water with a broad perforation, and draw out all the water."
"And let him separate the two lips of the section with forceps and extend the tendon at its upper ends without touching the joint of the knees comprehending; and cut the tendon in that manner which is to thy ability." "And cut it with its totality or in pieces, and especially the thinner side thereof; for if thou dost not carefully scrutinize the incision of him, it is not certain that the water will not return."
"But if the water proceeds from that part outside of his joint at the time of thy operation; then when thou hast completed the section of the tendon, return into him again and properly join together the two lips of the joint of the knees with suture, and let him be dressed as usual until he is healed."
"And if thou findest the water corrupted by some other disease; then it behoveth thee to ligature the vessels which are near the suspensory ligament and draw out the water, and let him be dressed with that which we have said."
"But if the water be gathered into two parts thereof, then know thou that there are two hernias. Therefore cut that part even as thou hast done in the other; and if it seem to thee to be one operation, then do it."
"And then thou shall wipe away the blood and enter into the sections with wool dipped in oil or rose oil; and afterwards put on other wool which thou hast dipped in wine and oil and spread it over both knees and the navel of the belly; and put upon that doubled cloths and powders, and let them be bound together with a bandage according to this manner:"
"And let there be taken two cloths and filled with carded wool in this manner; and let the extremities thereof be closed with cotton or wet wool, and let them be bound together by a bandage about the breeches of the breeches, and one extremity take hold of the buttocks within the two and the other extremity take hold of the part of the perineum, and two extremities on both sides of the thighs and two others upon the ancles, and all straitness shall be adjusted in the breeches of the breeches."
"And sometimes this hernia is healed artificially by cautery instead of section with iron; and if thou take a cautery knife and cut the suspensory ligament of the knees therewith, then it shall be ignited according to that which we have recommended until the white tendon containing the water appear; and then thou shalt take cautery after this manner:" "And it is like the letter gamma."
"And then burn through that tendon with it until all the moisture is driven out."
"And then stretch the tendon with forceps and scrape it with forceps and scrape it with a subtle cautery that is burning; and cut through it as much as thou canst until thou hast removed all of it; and beware lest the water touch the fire."
"And know that this operation is safer and farther from flux of blood, and better than an operation with section."
"But if it happen to thee that after section or in time of cautery there be any aposteme or flux of blood, then thou shalt cure whatsoever may have happened unto him with such care as is fitting according to what hath been said."
"But if the disease be painful and he doth not hope for a second operation because of its horror, then thou shalt perform cautery as I have recommended it; and that is when thou art certain, by those things which we have said concerning signs, that this hernia containeth water."
"Then thou shalt make the patient lie upon some elevated cushion; and then thou shalt prick the apostume in that part thereof which is lowest with a broad lance, and continue the pricking according to the length of the body."
"And let the opening be wide enough to allow all the water to escape."
"And then put cotton thereupon and bind it up and leave it alone, that the remnant of the water may run off." "And then dress him until the wound be healed."
"But if there be any obstruction to the escape of the water at that time thou shalt cut through it: and this is done only when the white skin in the opening of the wound maketh opposition and hindereth the issuing forth of the water, then thou shalt put into the wound a trocar or instrument wherewith the water may be drawn out of hydrocele, the form of which is described above; or thou shalt adjust to the opening of the wound a little plug."
"And know that the water will return again, and it is gathered together in about six months or thereabouts; and when it is so gathered together, then let it be opened again after the same manner, for the patient shall thereby pass his days."
**Chapter LXIII.**
Of section upon a fatty hernia and the cure thereof.
Know that in the section upon this hernia there is danger of losing it altogether or doing harm to the patient; therefore it seemeth better unto me to dismiss it and let him be saved by that means.
And I remember the operation in this case and the kinds of apostemes."
Therefore I say that apostemes are natural to those whose spermatic cords are compounded and this is done by many causes: either by acute sharp pain, which is poured forth unto the testicles, or by contusion."
"And the colour of the aposteme shall be according to the colour of the body and it is not accompanied with pain; and this is a grievous aposteme."
And a very light apostema is that which is lapidated, its colour being dark, and it is not felt by the patient."
And sometimes this happeneth through the stopping up of the arteries and the inflammation thereof so that it is presently perceived; or through inflammation of the veins."
But that which happeneth by inflammation of the arteries is known by the dispersion of the aposteme when thou takest hold thereof with thy fingers; and it needeth not to be touched."
But that which happeneth by inflammation of the vein is not dispersed thereby, however thou mayest press it with thy fingers.
And it is possible that upon this kind there may be made section and upon other flesh; and it is thus: thou shalt incise the spermatic cord and about the anus thou shalt stretch up the skin thereof and draw forth the white ciphac and deliver the suspensory ligament of the vessels, and bind them up, and having done so thou shalt cut off the suspensory ligament itself, that thou mayest entirely deliver it from all parts of the anus.
Therefore if the egg is already solidified in those flesh wounds, then you should extract the egg and replace it with that.
And if there is adhesion within some cause of the hip joint, or between that which is between the thighs, then you should remove all that adhesion and replace it with a rounded incision.
But if there is flesh born in the place of the adhesion which is behind, then you should insert all that which is of it, and extract the egg as we have said.
Therefore when your operation is complete, then fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and wine, and take care of it with another dressing until it heals.
Chapter LXIV
Of the treatment of a hernia that is of wind.
Wind (vit) is an aposteme enclosed by some wrapping similar to a bud with softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult exercise and walking over the sick part.
And in the treatment of this condition, fear is what preceded its recollection.
"But how shall we call this operation according to what was done first?"
And I say that you should make the patient lie on an elevated chair; and immediately grab the spermatic cord at the scrotum; and then tie the ligament of the crus of the penis with your fingers using needles dipped in boiling water; and have another assistant help you, extending it with great force.
And then incise with a sharp scalpel for a transverse section on the right side of the vessels where they are exposed.
And then strip off all fat from each party as we told you earlier in the extraction of the achilles tendon, which is located on the temples.
And then insert into those a needle with double thread and tie it at the first of the places where blood was seen, and tie it again at the last one. And then incise that in the middle place for a right section along the length of the body, and extract what has accumulated from the fetid and corrupted humors.
And then heal the wound with the cure for other wounds where you want healthy flesh to be generated, because if the vessels that nourish one or two testicles are not cauterized, it would be harmful.
But if blood flows through all the vessels, then it is necessary to extract the testicles or to tie them with the vessels, because by this section of the vessels, they are deprived of all nutrition, and they should be cauterized, or else they would not benefit from that.
Chapter 65
Of the cure of intestinal hernia
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a breach that happens in the abdominal wall stretched over the abdomen by the rings of the navel, through which some intestines may protrude.
And this breach occurs either in the abdominal wall itself or due to an exit of its contents, and these two types occur for many causes: either by percussion, or by falls, or by labor pains, or by lifting something heavy, or by sneezing.
And the sign of that is when it happens little by little over time, not suddenly, and it appears as an aposteme enclosed within the prenum because the abdominal wall compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it is when it happens by a section of the abdominal wall, because at the beginning there occurs sudden violent pain; and it appears as a diverse aposteme apparent from the navel area apparent, and this is due to protrusion of the intestine, whose body remains outside of the abdominal cavity.
And sometimes the intestine remains adhered with the tissue, and this type of intestinal hernia is called "zirbal."
And sometimes it occurs with windiness, and sometimes the intestine is torn, and in this case it becomes retained, causing great danger to the illness. And sometimes it causes bad pain, especially when it is pressed.
And in the treatment of these types of this disease with iron, there is fear because one must avoid cauterization at that point.
And the manner of operating on this is to command the patient to reduce the intestine with their own hand into the concave part if they obey its return, and then it should be covered with a cloth between your hands, elevating its contents.
And then tie the navel string which surrounds the navel of the testicles on top, and cut all the navel string longwise. And then put two hooks into both lips of the section according to what you need to open the section with them.
And if, according to your ability, it is possible that some part of it has adhered there.
And then remove that skin which is near the navel string, until the white tough abdominal wall from each side is discovered.
Then insert your finger into that which surrounds the testicle, between the white abdominal wall which is near the navel string and behind the intestine, and remove any adhesion that may be there.
And then pull the navel string with your hand towards outside, and extend the white abdominal wall upwards with your left hand, elevate the intestine with the abdominal wall at the section; and command the assistant to extend the intestine upwards, and you dissolve the adhesion behind with complete solvent.
And carefully check with your fingers that there is no cause of the intestine being wrapped around the white tough abdominal wall. But if you find any cause, then reduce it back into the abdomen immediately.
And then make an incision in the area near the navel string, through which blood and pus can flow out, as we have recommended earlier.
And then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound and put a dressing on it. And apply the suture that we have recommended (and sometimes cauterize the white abdominal wall near the incision, because many times this occurs), leaving the knot hanging loose so that it can fall off by itself
But if the cauterization is delayed, then hot water should be poured over it, and a dressing put on it so that it falls off as we have said.
And then treat the wound with the other treatments for wounds until it is healed.
Chapter LXVI
About Hernia Ventosa
In this type of hernia, none have been seen that have been cured with iron.
And the first ones said that it is done in the same way as we have recommended for hernia with wind, which is to tie the vessels near the section on top of it with gentleness; and then dry the middle part around the inflammation with what can absorb it, until the vessels fall off.
And treat the wound according to what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII
About Dislocation in Joints
Sometimes there is rupture in the joints as we have said, and the location becomes prominent.
And do not give any cause of the intestines to the horse doctor; and if you do, it is little; and the return will be in all hours.
But if the time is prolonged with this, there will be an adjustable fissure in the abdominal wall through which the intestine can prolapse into the abdomen; and this occurs due to the extension of the abdominal wall in the joints as we have said, which causes the abdominal wall to become soft and the location becomes inflamed and prominent.
And the cure for it is with cauterization, as has been preceded by its description.
"Sometimes it is cured with iron in this manner: when the patient lies on their back between your hands, then dry the area of the ruptured abscesses with heat along its width according to the amount said."
"And then press the white cilice that is under the neck so that it is uncovered."
"And then take the rod and place it on the prominent part of the cilice, and press it against the front of the abdomen."
"And then cut both prominent points above the end of the rod on the cilice, and join them together with stitching."
"And then remove the end of the rod, and do not insert it into the cilice entirely, nor extend the wound, nor cause any other such damage as you know about in the treatment of intestinal hernia."
"And then cure it with the treatment of ulcers, and when you cut the veins, cleanse that area and restore the ulcer so that it is consolidated; because the cilice contracts and the prominence of rupture is not adjusted."
"And cauterization is better at this location, because it is closer to health."
"Chapter LXVIII."
"Of the softening of the cord of the testicles."
"Very often the cord of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh that is between it is softened, and it is obvious to look at."
"Therefore, it is necessary for anyone who wants to treat this that he makes the patient lie on his back, and cuts all of the softened cord over the natural cord; and then joins both lips with stitching."
"And if you wish, cut at the beginning the superfluity of the softened cord with three or four stitches and firm stitching."
"And then cut between the stitches; and then treat it with the treatment of other ulcers until it is healed and the veins fall."
"Chapter LXIX."
"Of castration."
"Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but out of duty I remember it to you in this book; and it is not necessary to remember it except for two reasons: the first is so that it may be known by someone who is knowledgeable about medicine when he is asked about this, that he knows how to treat him to whom it happens; and the second reason is because we often have need of castration of other beasts for our profits for those, like mules, oxen, goats, pigs, and similar animals."
"And therefore I say that castration is done in two ways: either by tearing or by cutting through sectioning."
"But in that which is done by tearing, the way of the operation is that we make the beast lie down in cold water until its genitals are softened and relaxed and hang." "And then take them with your hand before they are dissolved and do not appear from their touch."
"But in castration done by cutting and sectioning, you should hold the beast and press its cord of testicles with your left hand."
"And then tie the suspender, and cut over each one with a section until two testicles come out."
"And then cut those that you have torn off." "And do not leave on those of the scrotum any cause, but only the thin skin which is over the vessels."
"And this way of castration is better which is done by tearing, for tearing leaves no cause of the testicles so that the beast desires copulation."
"And then treat the wound until it is healed."
"Chapter LXX."
"Of the treatment of hermaphrodism."
"Hermaphrodism in men is of two kinds: one is when there appears between the space in the cord of testicles, in which there is a figure like a vulva in which it pees."
"And sometimes urine comes from that opening which is in the cord of testicles."
"But in women it is one kind: and it is that the vulva of the woman on the pubis appears like two testicles of a man somewhat diminished at the opening of the foreskin, like the penis of a man and two testicles."
"And its treatment is of three kinds: two of men and one kind for women." "And it is necessary that you cut those joined flesh until the flow of that stops, and then treat them with the treatment of other wounds."
"And in the second kind of men from which urine comes that is in the cord of testicles, there is neither treatment nor operation for it."
"Chapter LXXI."
"Of lentigo and flesh prominent caused by women."
"Lentigo is fortunately attached to natural causes, and it is stretched out and made with carelessness; and sometimes in some women it becomes enlarged as in men and spreads to copulation."
"Therefore you should hold the surplus of lentigo with your hand or with an ointment and cut it."
"And do not end in cutting, especially on the head of the razor, for fear that bleeding may occur."
"And then treat it with treatment of wounds until it is healed."
"But flesh born is flesh that grows in the horror of the mother until it fills that place, and fortunately it exits at the openings of the foreskin according to its appearance like coal (and for this reason some people first called it “tail sickness”); therefore we should cut it as we cut lentigo, and treat it until it is healed."
"Chapter LXXII."
Of the treatment of arthritis
Arthritis is when the joint of the female is not perforated or the fracture is small. And it is either natural or accidental.
Accidental happens due to a previous illness, and the latter is caused by flesh not fitting properly or by thin or thick skin.
And it occurs either in the front of the womb or on the ribs, or on the upper part of the uterus, or on the lower part, and it hinders coitus, pregnancy, and childbirth, and it especially hinders menstruation.
And the diagnosis of this is made by examining the vulva, if the contraction is visible, then it is diagnosed; but if not visible, then examine that area with your hands or a mirror.
But if the contraction is due to thin skin and is diagnosed in both labia minora, then you should avoid coitus and disrupt that.
And it also appears on the outer lips of the vulva, so pause your fingers at both ends to indicate where they meet.
"The woman should be placed on her back, with her thighs extended, and then forcibly open both labia so that the hymen may be broken and the virginity opened."
"And then take wool soaked in oil and place it on that location, and keep pressing it there for a day so that the wound does not harden."
"But if the hymen is thick and tough, then you should cut it with a sharp instrument or a myrtle leaf tip."
"But if the virginity is torn by force, then suspend her by one ankle and cut it open."
"And among the remedies that stop bleeding without biting are aloe, dragon's blood, and nettle juice mixed with albumen of an egg."
"And then insert a wide lead tube in order to prevent the wound from closing lightly."
"And keep her there for a few days and apply warm water compresses."
"And then treat it with the other remedy for consolidation until it is healed."
"And sometimes it happens that others' private parts are too tight, and then you should cut according to this manner." "But if it is for a hard swelling, then do not cause any injury with iron in any manner."
"Chapter 73."
"On the treatment of hemorrhoids, anal prolapse, and red swelling that occurs in women's genitals."
"Hemorrhoids are caused by many veins in that area, from which blood continually flows; and when these hemorrhoids are old and hardened..."
"And as you have said in the division, the types of those [hemorrhoids] and their signs, say also which ones receive treatment and which ones do not."
"Therefore it is said that hemorrhoids and piles, when they are in the front of the anus and do not appear to the touch, at that time there should be no treatment with iron."
"But those which are in the opening of the anus and can be felt, those are the ones that are treated."
"And it is necessary that you put the woman in a warm bath and extend her anus with hot water or with rough cloths, and incise those with the razor."
"And also powder it on them with the blood flows of one of the incisive powders without biting it, such as cassia and similar to those."
"And also make her hold her breath for an hour, and then give her a hot water enema."
"And if the bleeding persists, then let her be seared in a decoction of sumac and of gallnuts of milestones and of oak-galls and of similar ones."
"And also take barley flour and mix it with honey and vinegar, and make a plaster with that over the back of her."
"And if the blood is cut off, it is good; but if not, let it adhere with two cupping glasses, and to the breasts without scarification."
"And also take wool and immerse it in the juice of coriander or in the juice of argol or in the juice of walnut with red wine, and let it adhere to the place; and also dress the place with ointment until it is healed."
"And dress it until it is healed."
"Chapter 74."
Of the Perforation of Accidental Hernia in the Groin
Many kinds of accidental apostumes happen in the groin, such as cancer and stone apostume and ulcerated and adherent and serpentine and bloody fistulas and raw places and tumors and other apostumes. "And I have already said these illnesses and the kinds of them and their signs and the cures for them in the division."
"And it is necessary that I say in this treatise about the cauterization of that which comes into the groin when it is of those apostumes that are healthy, and if you want to know in what manner the operation of it is done with iron."
Therefore, you must consider if the pain of the apostume at its beginning is sharp with percussion and inflammation and fever, and if it becomes reddened and if it feels hot upon it, then do not cut it open with perforation, but dress it with that which aids maturation until the sharpness of the accidents ceases.
And then you must make the woman lie upon a bolster that has two bolsters; and let her recline upon its back and adjust her feet to the place where it is farther from the belly, and let her thighs be expanded, and pause her arms far from her breasts, and tie each with linen cloth in an appropriate manner.
And then let the midwife follow from the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the groin is opened, the form of which will come in those causes that will be done appropriately.
And it is necessary that when you want to administer this instrument, you put it with the right hand on the mons pubis of the woman, and that only the point of the instrument enters into the groin and lets go the illness. But if the instrument is larger than the mons pubis of the woman, then you must put powders on the surface of the mons pubis so that the entrance of any instrument into the mons pubis is prohibited.
And it is necessary that you put the point that runs in the instrument on the left side farther up, and that the one who ministers holds the instrument and turns the point until the opening of the groin is opened.
And when the evacuation appears and is touched with the hand and is hot and moist, then it is necessary that you cut off its head with a broad-bladed knife.
And when the apostume is evacuated, then it is necessary that you put a compress soaked in rose oil or green oil with some astringent on the wound and put pressure on it on the section of the mons pubis.
And then cover the groin with clean wool dipped in water in which mallows have been boiled.
"And then it should be cared for properly over two days until it has healed."
"And sometimes the wound is washed with a mixture of water and honey to cleanse it; and sometimes it is washed with water in which iris root or long-rooted comfrey has been boiled."
"If the wound is deep in the flesh, it is prohibited to cure it with iron; they should use water as described earlier."
Chapter 75
"To teach midwives how to handle births that deviate from the normal shape."
"A midwife must recognize at the outset the figure of a woman's natural delivery by its signs. Thus when you see her pressing on the parts and desiring to smell the air, and upon this she is relieved by that which is over her from the birth, and hastens the expulsion of the infant, then know that this birth follows a natural figure, and it is the expulsion onto her own head, and the second one hangs suspended or pendant from the navel."
"Therefore, when you see those signs, it is necessary that the woman's belly be pressed so that the infant can easily descend and come out onto its head. When this happens, then the second one will follow and she will be cleansed of all impurities with good cleansing."
"But if the birth is not natural and blameworthy, it is because when the infant comes out on its feet or buttocks first, and the body comes out before the head of the child and its feet are out, or if the hand or foot comes out first, or if the head comes out sideways with the hand, then this is a figure that is not praise-worthy."
"It is necessary for a midwife to be wise and subtle in all those causes and guard against error and deception."
"And I will show you all the figures of birth, and what kind they are and how to interpret them."
"When the child comes out feet first due to an unnatural position, and it is stuck over the woman's hips causing her labor to be difficult, then let her sit or have someone hold her up. Let them wrap her in cloths dipped in warm water with fenugreek seeds and olive oil."
"And then the midwife should insert her hand between the woman's thighs and gently tear open that opening with a cloth soaked in olive oil or use her fingernail to scrape away any excess moisture." "And press on the woman's belly until the child comes out."
"But if it does not come out, then it is necessary to have the woman drink a decoction of mastic and fenugreek with cinnamon."
"And then order her to sit up and have her blow her nose with a cloth over it. Also put some incense in front of her mouth and nose for an hour, because the child will be born shortly."
"And if both hands of the fetus are stuck at the beginning, then you should gently pull them out one by one with ease." "But if it does not obey the intervention, then place the woman on a cushion and lift her feet up. Then strike the cushion hard on the ground, but make sure the woman does not fall down from the shock."
"And if the hands are not turned down and the fetus dies, then incise those hands and remove the membrane of the fetus or tie its body with cloth and pull it out gently because it will come out soon."
"When the child comes out feet first, then you should push those feet upwards and gently turn the child around. Also grease its body with olive oil and take one foot at a time and stretch it out little by little."
"But when it comes out into the hips, then command her to push and make her sneeze with incense because it will come out soon if God wills."
"And if it does not come out with what we have advised, then gently return the child and wait until it comes out naturally because it will come out soon with ease."
"And if it is prohibited with everything that we have advised, then take some gum arabic and dissolved myrrh. Grind them together well in a mortar and apply that mixture on the woman's vulva and the lower part of her belly." "And then make her drink hot water with barley groats to induce contractions."
"And sometimes when the openings of her womb are relaxed, then perform fumigation on her with myrtle and apply pressure on her." "And when you have fumigated her with myrtle for an hour, then make her sit on a cushion. Then make her sneeze and empty her mouth, lift her up, and press gently on the lower part of her belly because the child will come out shortly."
"Emergence of the fetus laterally, hanging from one of its arms:" "If it cannot be reduced by its arm, then lift the woman up and make her walk."
"And if she cannot walk, then make her lie on her back. Strike her hips vigorously and administer remedies that we have mentioned made from mucus."
"And if the childbirth has come, then make her sit on a cushion. Then study the reduction of its arm and grease the child according to nature. Make the woman sneeze and command her to push herself until it comes out."
"Emergence of the fetus on its back with arms spread wide, and its face towards its mother's back:" "The midwife should hold the child's hand and gradually turn it around to facilitate emergence."
"And when it comes out and is greased, then pause on its face what we have recommended of oil and mucus."
"And then command her to wipe it gently. Then make her sit on a cushion and lean towards the right side. Command her to squeeze herself until it comes out completely." "Emergence of the fetus prepared for sideways presentation:"
"If you see horrible things coming out of the mother in this manner, then consider and incise the second one with your nail until it is emptied of moisture."
"And if the fetus is suspended on its face and back, then incise the navel cord so that it is not retained and dies."
"And then push the fetus inside the openings until it comes out completely. Then make the woman squeeze herself several times and it will come out easily if God wills."
"Emergence of twins or multiple fetuses:" "You should know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four are born. But this is strange and rarely happens naturally."
"And count them one by one even if they are multiplied. Each has its own membrane, distinguished from the other in the navel cord of each. Sometimes they come out just like one fetus through natural emergence easily, but sometimes they come out through difficult emergence as we have recommended."
"If the childbirth is difficult or arrives before what we've mentioned about unnatural figures, then care for it as we have described."
"And if the midwife acts with skill and subtlety, and with patience, she should follow the figure according to what has been prepared by the engineer aiming for health."
"Remember that which is formed in the matrix from embryos and those which are aborted."
"Sometimes they are formed in the mother's womb one, two, three, four, five, six, seven, and even more than ten. And it has been observed that one woman aborted seven, and another bore all ten of them fully formed, which was caused by measurement according to the glorious sages."
"And also it is necessary that there be in the science of midwifery knowledge of how to behave according to each small formative semblance. Therefore pause until such a time as it may be necessary."
"Chapter 76."
"Of extracting the fetus when it is dead."
"When you care for a dead fetus as we have said in the division of medicine, and it has not yet been expelled, and you must use an operation with caution, first consider whether the woman is of sound constitution and does not suffer from any of the accidents by which she may be endangered."
"Then the woman should be placed on her left side with her head lower than her hips and her knees raised."
"And the attendant should take hold of both parts, or grasp it in his left hand to prevent the body from slipping out during extraction."
"And then you moisten the mouth of the womb with moist oil and a poultice made from mallow, fennel, and linseed."
"And then the midwife anoints her hand with those oils and poultices, and then enters her hand gently into the womb, and then seeks with her fingers in the place where the hooks are to be placed on the fetus."
"And the suitable place for this is: then consider if the fetus is prepared to be expelled headfirst. And then you place the hooks in its heels, or neck, or mouth, or palate, or beard, or furcula, or near its ribs, or below its hypochondria."
"But if the fetus is to be expelled feet-first, then place the hooks in its buttocks or between its ribs."
"And hold the hook with your right hand, and place its curve in that location between the fingers of your left hand. Then enter your hand gently and place the hook in one of those places which we have mentioned, until you reach the cause of the blockage."
"And then place and fix another hook in the same position as the first one, or a third one if necessary, so that there is equal traction and not just lengthening according to its rectitude."
"And thus it should be done in every extraction, so that the fetus is expelled as easily as it happens with the removal of a tooth."
"And in this matter, it is necessary that the extraction be softened; and if any part of it is retained, then the midwife should anoint her fingers with oil and gently insert them and revolve around that which is retained."
"Therefore if the fetus slips out suddenly, then the hooks should be changed to another place where they can be inserted more deeply. And do this until the entire fetus has slipped out."
"But if the hand slips out before the other and cannot be brought back by its contraction, then a cloth should be wrapped around it. And then extract that until everything is slipped out, and cut it off either at the junction of the hand or at the elbow."
"And likewise you must do with the other hand and both feet."
"But if the head of the fetus is large, or if contraction occurs during its expulsion, or if it becomes stuck in the pelvic cavity, then you should insert spatula spinosa between those bones and split open the head and extract the water, or use an instrument called "alundat" to remove it. The shape of this instrument will come with the shapes of the other instruments in the chapter which follows."
"And similarly you should do if the fetus has a large head by nature. And then cut it with an embalotum or extract its bones with alundat as we have mentioned, and then extract the bones with forceps."
"And if the head is expelled but is contracted at the nape of the neck, then it should be split open until the fluid in the pit is drained."
"But if there are no complications or obstruction to expulsion, then cut off its head as soon as it is possible for you."
"And if the lower part of the belly is inflamed or dropsical, then you should pierce it until the fluid which is in it is drained away."
"But if the fetus is lying on its buttocks, then its traction will be easier and its direction towards the mouth of the mother will also be easier."
"But if it is contracted at the belly and pit, then you should extract it with a cloth which you will have wrapped around your hand, and split open the belly and pit until that fluid is drained."
"But if the other members are obstructed and the head returns, then the midwife should insert her left hand; but if the mother's mouth is covered, she should insert her hand into the thorax of a goat and use that to surround the head, and draw it towards the mouth of the mother with those means, and then insert one hook or two hooks and draw out the fetus with them."
"And if the mother's mouth is contracted by a hard tumor which has occurred on it, then do not trouble yourself with it. Instead, administer an evacuation of fatty and thick causes." "And apply poultices; and follow the patient in waters that soften and moisten."
"And if the fetus is lying on its side, then if possible, turn it; and administer what has been said for a live fetus."
"And if that is not possible, then cut it in pieces and extract it."
"It is necessary that you do not leave any cause inside the secondine."
"And when you have completed all your operations, then administer what has been said about the cure for hard tumors which occur in the mother."
"And if bleeding occurs, then apply yourself to astringent waters and administer the other cure."
"And I have seen a woman whose belly contained a dead fetus, and who afterwards became pregnant again, and again had a dead fetus." "It happens that over a long period of time an inflammation occurs in the abdomen, which becomes swollen until it bursts open and begins to discharge pus."
"And I was called for its cure, and treated it for a long time, but the inflammation did not consolidate."
"Therefore I placed over it poultices of great attraction, and removed from it one bone, and then after several days removed another bone. And I was greatly amazed that there were bones in the belly, since there are none."
"And then I thought that they were the bones of the dead fetus."
"Therefore I opened the inflammation and extracted from it many bones, the woman remaining in her usual good condition, and she lived in such a manner for a long time, suffering only a little discharge of pus."
"I do not affirm that this is strange, since in this there is knowledge and aid for what the skilled physician administers with his hand for cure."
"Regarding the shapes of instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus."
"The shape of a vessel into which the mother's womb is opened:"
"This is the shape of the forceps in which the tongs are inserted, into which two vessels are inserted at both ends of the two branches." "And moreover this vessel should be more subtle in its restriction, and it should be made either of ivory or of boxwood."
"And let the width of each branch be two digits and a half, and its margin be one digit on both sides, and its length be one and a half palms; and in the middle place of the two branches there are two adjustments of that same piece of wood, which are already fixed, of which the length is about one palm and one digit more, and its width is about two digits or a little more."
"And these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the womb so that it can be opened with them when you turn the two prescribed vessels."
"Another form similar to this, but more subtle and lighter:"
"It should be made of ivory or boxwood according to the likeness of forceps." "But nevertheless at the end of it there are two additions like this, and the length of these additions is about one palm, and their width is two digits."
"And when you want to open the womb with them, then you should place the woman on her back and lift up her hips slightly so that it can be opened there." "And then open your hand with the instrument like you do with forceps, grasping according to the amount you want of the opening of the womb, so that the fetus can come out as you wish."
"The form of virtue which they called it in ancient times was: 'Virtus'."
"The form for pushing with which the fetus is pushed out:"
"The form of an anvil on which the large head is crushed:"
"And it is similar to forceps which has teeth at the end like this, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, with teeth like the teeth of a saw with which it cuts and crushes." "A small anvil form:"
"The form of a hook having a spine:"
"The form of a hook having two spines:"
"The form of a spatula having two extremities with which the head is severed:"
"The form of two wide spatulas:"
"However, all those instruments are practiced, and the more numerous and prepared the species of it are by the artisans, the easier is its operation and the better for people due to their quantity."
"And do not operate with those instruments, whatever they may be, without preparing them first, because the need for them is inexcusable."
"On the extraction of the secondina (afterbirth):"
When the second stage of labor is retained, then you must command the patient to hold their breath, and also make her sneeze with conditions, strengthen your hand over her mouth and nose, and if by this means it is expelled, well is it.
And if not, then you should take some water and pierce through the cloth a tube, place it in those herbs burned to make mouth wash for the mother, such as chamomile and rue and fennel and camomile and Arabic cumin and cinnamon bark and wormwood. All these herbs or some of them should be immersed in water in the bowl, and place that on the fire.
"Then insert a reed cannula into the mother's mouth, holding it in place so that vapor reaches the cavity of the womb."
"And then make her sneeze as we have said, and the second one will be expelled quickly."
"If however the second one is not expelled by this treatment, then command the midwife to submerge her left hand in sesame oil or in an emulsion of althea, and then insert it into the womb and search with it for the second one. And when she has found it, then take hold of it little by little, so that the mother does not suffer too much from the violent attraction." "It is necessary that they be changed to the right and left sides with ease."
"And if the mother's mouth is closed, we have already recommended treatment with sneezing and medication with olive oil with herbs."
"But if it is not expelled by all the means that we have recommended, then take care not to tire yourself out with repeated attempts at abstraction, but rather what comes out of her into the mother's mouth should be placed on the thing of the woman, and then crystallize it with gum and treacle; for this will cause it to disappear gradually and it will be dissolved and expelled."
"But when it disappears, there will be a bad smell in the head and stomach, and this indicates the illness; and then fumigations and appropriate remedies should be administered for that."
"But some of the Ancients already used fumigation with narcissus and dried figs."
"A form of instrument with which the woman is fumigated for retention of menstruation and of the secondine:"
It should be made of vein or of earth.
The narrow end should be placed in the cone and the wide end on the fire, and the smoke should be produced by placing burning coals from the fire onto it.
And keep adding more until that incense is consumed
Of treating an imperforate anus
Many children are born without a perforated anus, which is usually discovered during circumcision. Therefore, it is the midwife's responsibility to carefully perforate that anal opening with her finger; if not, she should use a sharp probe, taking care not to injure the rectum
Then place some of that wool soaked in wine and oil on it; and also rub some ointment inside until it is clean
But if you fear that it may be obstructed, then place a catheter in the anus for several days, and remove it when the child wants to defecate
And if there is an obstruction of the anus due to a consolidation or abscess; then it is necessary for that consolidation to be incised and also treated with what has been said about treatment using honey and pitch.
Of treating fistulas that remain after childbirth
Fistulas that occur during childbirth are often large and thick, which can happen close to the anus or in the space between two buttocks.
And if it is one or more fistulas
Then, when that swelling is old and full of moist pus or thin pus, sometimes there are also penetrating branches from these fistulas.
And these penetrating branches are recognized by what is expressed from them through their opening and also through windiness; sometimes they cause pain upon expression, and very often worms come out of them
And sometimes from those fistulas there are penetrating branches that go into the bladder and into the urethra; and these penetrating branches also go into the junction of the vulva and into the opening of the vagina.
And this is how a penetrating fistula into the anus can be recognized as not being penetrant: when you insert your finger into the anus, and subtly introduce a probe made of reed or iron into the fistula where there is no tortuosity.
But if there is tortuosity in that one, then insert a subtle probe made of lead or horsehair into it until you feel the probe or the hair on your finger.
And if you do not feel that one at all and there is no cause of expression, either worms or windiness as we have said, then you will know that it is not penetrating, and thus you should proceed to the treatment.
And when the fistula is penetrating into the bladder or into the urethra, then the sign of this is the emission of urine from that place and the prevention of it until that location has been consolidated in medicine.
But if it is penetrating into the junction of the vulva or into the bone and causing pain in the area, then the sign of this is that a probe can be inserted there without tortuosity in the bone, and there is pain around the opening; also, pus is always present there; and that medication is ineffective and not consolidated with any ointment.
And in all those penetrating fistulas there is no cure except that of cutting and cauterizing with the help of skilled surgeons about whom we are confident.
But in those that are not penetrating and are not old, healing with iron is expected according to what I will recommend to you, and this has already been proved.
And the pain is usually between your thighs, especially on the right side and elevates the cheeks of the buttocks inward, with the vulva inclined toward its belly; and gently introduce a probe made of lead or reed into it until you know where the probe passes.
And if that pain is felt around the anus, then it is necessary for you to insert your finger into the anus.
And if you feel the probe already penetrating as it is inserted, other than what you feel between your finger and that syphon or flesh, then certainly you know that this one is penetrating; and therefore do not operate on it because there is no cure for it, as we have said.
But some people say that sometimes they are cured in men.
And the treatment by which improvement is hoped for in this one is that you ignite a subtle cautery according to the width of the fistula, as it has been said before, and introduce that burning into the fistula until it reaches around the anus; and then repeat this twice or three times until you know that all those flesh that were joined together have been burnt like the feathers of a bird.
And then dress that with compresses wrapped in wool until all those flesh have healed; and then treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh. And if it is healed, well then; but if not, then it will never be healed by any other treatment at any time.
And if the probe enters but does not penetrate into the anus which is in the buttocks and between that and the probe which is veiled with skin or syphon, and if it deviates from its course at the surface of the buttock, then cut off the buttock from the beginning of the fistula and you will see how the buttock has been severed by the probe, and let it be opened up until the section reaches the place where the end of the probe arrives; and through that opening you will free and cauterize.
And then clean those flesh that were burnt like the feathers of a bird, without leaving any residue behind.
But if there is a flow of blood that comes between you and your operation when you insert those flesh, then the best thing to do is cauterize it with fire or with an acute medicine because cauterizing with fire has two good habits: it joins together those joined flesh and removes the blood by drying out its humidity.
And then dress it with compresses wrapped in wool or in finely chopped cabbage until that place becomes hard; and then treat the wound with medicines that generate and consolidate firm flesh.
And these medicines have astringency and drying properties; when they are restored, it is already healed and there is no fear of recurrence.
But if the fistula has already penetrated into the opening of the anus and is elongated from its surface on the body, then insert your finger into the anus and explore with it.
And therefore if you feel the probe and between you and it there is skin or flesh that is close to penetration, then it is not advisable to operate on it but rather to follow a path of trust and hope.
And therefore administer in this way one of three methods: either cauterize it as we have said; or dry it out until you can succeed in entering the concavity of it so that you may remove its contents and then treat it as I have advised; but do not proceed with cutting because you will wound the lappet containing the rectum, which would cause an injury to the intestines without their consent. And then dress it with water as we have said for a strong person will be healed soon. Or else lengthen that skin and remove its pus by drying it out until near the anus, as we have said, either with a probe or with another instrument with a sharp point, and clean those flesh that are in the section where you can do so by cauterization; and then strive to restore all the wound with cutting, and if the opening above is not consolidated, and the fistula remains open at the partition of the anus, it will cause pain. "Now the fistula is finished in this manner: when you insert the probe into the fistula, it should enter on the side of the buttock near the surface of the body and along the margin of the anus, then take a probe with a perforated end, like a needle for preparing hearts."
"And insert it into that field while winding around its four sides or around them, and then insert the probe with the thread into the fistula until you reach its concavity."
"But if you are penetrating near the margin of the anus from behind, then pull out the thread from that track in such a way that you insert your little finger into the anus. Then remove the end of the thread and tie both ends together, stretching each one separately, and leave it like this for one or two days. And when you see that the thread has become embedded in the flesh, cut it there where those tissues have been incised which are between the two ends of the thread."
"And then cure the wound until it is consolidated and healed."
"But if the opening of the fistula does not penetrate on its own, then make it penetrate in any way you have prepared, but gently so as not to wound the skin. And then apply that until it is healed."
"The shape of the spatula used to probe the fistula should be sharp at its curvature and not sharp on its other end, so that you do not wound what is not necessary, as happens sometimes."
"Regarding the suturing of hemorrhoids in which blood flows from the incision of those [hemorrhoids]:"
"Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: either they appear between the buttocks resembling charcoal, or they seem like a mass of fat." "And those are small and large, from which blood flows continuously or intermittently, they are many in number, or outside the anus at its extremities."
"But those that are outside the anus are caused by lack of moisture in the intestines, from which citrine water or a little blood mixed with mucus flows continuously, and they vary in color according to the skin."
"And the treatment for that which is inside the rectum is to order the patient to bend over and press while evacuating until the rectum expels and the hemorrhoids appear before you." "Then you take hold with your fingers or whatever you have at hand, and carefully cut those veins with a scalpel."
"But if the fingers are not held in those veins due to dryness and softening of those veins, then take them with rough cloth or with cotton or with a woolen flannel, squeeze those veins with your fingers, and carefully cut those veins and sprinkle some powdered myrrh on that incision so that they may be cauterized instead of being burned; or else cauterize them as it is stated in the chapter on cauterization." "And then treat those veins with another cure until they are healed."
"And if the anus does not yield to evacuation, then you will crust the patient with crushed bran in which there is a little bite, and wash it with that water which is in the rectum so that it may yield gently when the patient presses."
"But if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is slight, and you should take those veins with your finger or with a needle and cut them, and then treat them with water as mentioned earlier until they are healed."
"And when you have made an incision, you must administer stitches to them in this manner: take a thread and wrap it around the needle and then insert that into the vein on one side of the incision, and make the needle pierce through the vein of the other side, and wrap both ends of the thread around the needle on the other side of the incision, width-wise. Then pull the hemorrhoid tightly with a knot, and cut the excess thread, and remove the needle."
"And do this to all of them, and leave one alone without tying it up so that the excess blood may flow out from that."
"And then apply over the anus a cloth dipped in rose oil or cerote, and place it over the rectum and tell the patient to remain quiet." "And then leave that one alone until it is dried up, and when it is healed, treat those veins with an ointment or with another cure until they are completely healed."
"And when those are not helped by that medicine, then you should remove them with the point of a spatula or with your nail, so that they may become wet and remove the pus above them which prevents their healing; and promptly clean those that have healed."
"Then you should remove them with a strong scraping, the first time until blood comes out and they are scraped raw; and promptly clean those that have healed."
"Know that leprosy, which is the key, does not appear as a round spot according to the color of the skin like the head of a nail, and it appears throughout the body but more so on the parts away from the feet and hands, and therefore it causes pain there."
"And then it must be incised where it is in the area of the key [i.e., the center], and held with forceps or a hook, and eradicated from its root; and promptly clean that."
"And if you wish to cauterize the second one that follows in its chapter [i.e., the next verse]."
"But a verruca is a small, rough, fleshy, round elevation on the surface of the body, and many are seen in most children."
"The treatment for it [a verruca] is to stretch it out and incise it, or scrape it with a file or pumice stone until it bleeds." "And if you wish, cauterize it [a verruca] with fire or with an acute medicine, as we have said."
"But a follicle is a small, smooth or thick-walled elevation on the surface of the body, occurring especially in the face, and when it is touched it feels like an ant bite, and they are found throughout the body."
"The treatment for it [a follicle] is to take a quill of an ostrich or a swan feather, and hold it firmly, and place it on the follicle so that its circle covers the parts around it; and promptly rotate your hand with the quill so as to incise what is in the area of the follicle, and press down on the skin, and eradicate the follicle from its root."
"And if you wish, do this with a probe made of brass or iron according to this method:"
"The tip of the probe should be drawn out finely and bluntly (i.e., not perforated), covered with something so that its edge is smoothened and its rotation facilitated."
"And if you wish to cauterize the follicle, do so according to what was mentioned earlier in the chapter on cautery regarding anthills."
"On the form of instruments used for giving cautery."
"Sometimes cautery is performed with silver or lead or molten brass or iron; and sometimes it is done with those instruments that are small or large according to what is suitable, for the one used in treating young children should be small; and those whose tips are curved or spoon-shaped, their cauteries should be small."
"The form of a large cautery and how it is done:"
"The head of the probe should be wide according to this manner, and it should be at that distance where the bag is tied, just as was said."
"And the bottom end of it [the cautery probe] below, which is inserted into the anus, should be blunt (i.e., not hollow) and pointed finely; and on one side of it there are two holes, and on the other side one hole, and the width of the holes should be according to the thickness of the rays, with those that are thicker having smaller holes."
"And the bag in which medicines made from bladder or lambskin are placed should be about a span [approximately 9 inches] long."
"And it should be pierced with many holes, just as it rotates; and the space between the holes should be equal to the thickness of a finger."
"And promptly insert strong, fresh bile through those holes, or pour it around them; and fit the bag with that [bile]; and when you have placed it on the cautery, press it tightly onto the head of the cautery between two points with firm pressure, and then cauterize with that each hole: But the quality of cauterizing with that is such that you should fill the bag with the medicine, which has been heated according to the amount of tolerance of the patient; and be careful that it is not too hot nor too cold."
"And then the patient should lie on their back, raise their hips up, and place below them either a cushion upon which men usually sit or a blanket; and promptly grease the tip of the cautery with oil or egg albumen or fenugreek mucilage or something similar; and promptly insert it into the anus easily, and then the assistant should take the bag and squeeze it twice or three times forcefully until all that is in the cautery has been expelled from the bowel; and then remove the cautery and the patient should lower their hips to the bed."
"And if the medicine forces him to evacuation, let him retain it as much as possible; and if he sleeps with that during the whole night, it is better for his recovery."
"But if you cauterize him in cases of diarrhea and fluid evacuation from the intestines, then repeat the cautery until it is healed."
"And if there are hemorrhoids or bleeding fistulas in the anus, then the cautery should be very fine and pointed, like those used for children."
"On the treatment of plague:"
"I have already said in the division of the treatment of plague what was suitable for this book, and I now say the treatment of those [cases] with me and with medicines according to their fulfillment."
"Therefore, I say that plague is differentiated according to the manner in which it occurs and according to the site where it attacks."
"And the causes why plague often occurs are such as blows from a stone, or incision with a razor or knife, or piercing with a lance, or with a club, or with an arrow, or similar causes."
"But the plague that occurs in the locations of the body is such as plague that falls on the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the belly, or the thigh, and similar to those of the limbs."
"And I am recounting the treatment of certain plague for which this reasoning and rule applies to other plagues."
"I will begin with simple head wounds, since the discussion of compound ones will come at the beginning of Chapter Three."
"So I say that when a simple head wound occurs and is not a fracture, then consider: if it is from a blow with a stone or something similar, and the chain [of events] has already begun and it is a large wound and you fear an aposteme may occur later, then immediately perform cephalic phlebotomy on him and do not delay it; and remove as much blood from him according to his strength if there is no other cause prohibiting phlebotomy, especially if the blood that has issued from the wound is little."
"And the phlebotomy should be on the opposite side of the wound. And protect the patient from vomiting, drinking, and coarse foods."
"But if you prohibit any food due to the minutiae [of his condition], then let him be diminished in his diet and not approach meat or wine."
"Place pressure on the wound, if an ulcer appears cauterize it using oil that is often used or wine in which it is sealed."
"However, if you are sure of the ulcer, then place pressure on the wound with its own blood and air until it has ceased to change in appearance, as I will recommend later."
"And if the air has already changed thereupon, then press on the wound until it is healed."
"But if the wound is large or is from an incision and does not close by itself, then join those edges with stitches according to what I recommend concerning the stitching of wounds."
"But if the wound has already exposed bone and sinew, and there is no tension but only a slight suspension, then cut away that flesh and properly cleanse the wound with medicines, and restore the flesh in place of the cord. Command the patient to be fed on foods that are coarse: heads and entrails and flesh similar to theirs until they are recovered."
"And if you find putridness in the cord and it does not adhere to the bone, then cut away all that corruption and cast it out, and then cleanse it."
"But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which blood flows abundantly and cannot be stopped by medicines, then inquire about the artery. If you find that it is not cut, then cut it with a scalpel, or ligature it; but if what has been said does not help, then cauterize until the bleeding stops."
"And if these wounds are simple and small, then their cause is slight. Therefore, powder them with this powder, so that they may be consolidated before the air changes them."
"And the manner of making this powder is as follows: take one part oil of sesame, two parts dragon's blood, three parts gum arabic. Grind all this together and sift it, and fill the wound with it, and bind it with a good bandage until it adheres to it and coagulates with the blood."
"And then strengthen it from above with powders and leave it alone. Do not remove the bandage while it is like this until it has adhered, because removing the medicine would prevent its healing."
"And sometimes cauterization alone suffices when oil of sesame and dragon's blood are not available."
"And this same operation is performed in large wounds when it is necessary to close them and they are tightened, especially fresh wounds with their blood, which the air has not yet altered."
"But if the air has altered them, especially in summer time, then this powder is not intended for that purpose. But treat those wounds with what has been said, thus: apply to them these ointments made from pitch or apply flour of barley mixed with water and honey until corruption ceases; and then treat them with other remedies until they are healed."
"But if a fracture of the bone occurs in the wound and it is small, then treat it with this ointment."
"And I will speak about the treatment of fractures of the head in another book."
Of the plague of the neck.
But if the plague occurs in the neck, there is no difference in treatment, and it is similar to the simple plague of the head.
But if the nerve or artery of the neck is cut, then if it's a nerve, it should not be sewn up but rather avoided by cauterization with something that causes intense heat, such as vinegar and sulfur, which are like vitriol and resemble those that burn nerves. And it is not paused over the plague of any cause of fire, because the substance of nerves is fiery and its continuation is with the brain, which is the seat of all members.
And if it is cured with light medicines, such as washing with sweet water, sometimes infused in rose oil or not, and turpentine when washed with sweet water, and other soft stones according to this method, and moist heat.
But if the plague is large, then a suture should be administered or the lips of it should be tied up, and afterwards it should be cured with powders until it is healed.
But if the plague has depth or occurs in its lowest part being purulent, then it should be perforated in the most depressed place.
But if an artery has already been cut in the plague and bleeding is occurring, then separate or dry it out, or ligate it, or cauterize it if necessary.
But if the spinal cord has already been cut from top to bottom and the veins of the neck are saved, then adjust the lips of the wound with stitches over the spine of the neck and do not touch it; then bind it evenly and reduce it to its natural shape, and later strengthen it with suitable traction, and leave it for some days; and afterwards cure it with medicines that have astringent and stimulating properties until it is healed.
But if the bone is already exposed in the wound, then strike it with a hammer, and remove all fragments of bone that you can; but anything that cannot be removed, leave it until the wound becomes purulent, and separate it and relieve its inflammation.
And if the wound is fresh, then sprinkle powder on it which has been recommended to you. But if there is already a fistula in the wound, then cure it with that remedy which will be remembered later on in its proper chapter.
If it is a wound made by a lance or knife and sometimes its depth is great, then consider more whether the lung issues from the wound when the patient exhales; for then you will know that the wound is mortal.
And if it is not deep and the wound is fresh with its own blood, then you should sprinkle powder on it first of all and not press it so that the blood is not retained in its depth and returns to the heart and aggravates the illness, but rather use an absorbent dressing and change it twice a day.
And if the dressing is not at hand, then close the wound with a wad of wool or anything else so that it does not suck up moisture; and make sure that the patient sleeps on the side where the wound is located so that what is inside it flows out.
But if after three days or more there has been no spasm or trembling of the heart nor constriction of the throat and other conditions are good, then you will know that the wound is safe. And then cure it with warm compresses and other remedies until it heals.
But if the healing of it is delayed and at all times is open, then you will know that a fistula has already formed. Cure it therefore according to its proper chapter.
And if the wound is made by a splash or knife and is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then cure it with that which is preceded by stitching, if it is large, or with powder, if it is small.
But if the bone has already been exposed and some fragments have already grown into it, then turn the wound and carefully extract those fragments if they are separate. But if they are not separate, then leave them until the wound becomes purulent, for the extraction of them will be easier.
And concerning other accidental wounds in the other members, the remedy in curing them is the same as that which we have spoken of.
Of the plagues of the belly
The condition that occurs in the belly can be great, small, or medium.
And small ruptures are difficult to repair by other means, and their reduction is more difficult unless you quickly intervene in their location because they tend to open and swell up so that entering them becomes difficult.
And therefore the best rupture is medium-sized, because in that case it is not difficult to reduce the intestine, just as it is difficult in both of the aforementioned species.
And know that there are four ways to suture the belly, but two of these sutures are common and convenient for suturing other wounds on the body.
And the other two sutures are proper to certain wounds, but they are more appropriate for suturing the belly.
I will explain each one with its exposition and explanation.
Therefore it is said that when the herniation is small and some cause of the intestine comes forth through that, and it is difficult to reduce it, then this is in one of two manners: either due to the smallness of the rupture as we have said, or when the intestine has come inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
Therefore when this is so, then you should gently wash that area with a sponge or cloth moistened in tepid water alone, or with hot water containing cinnamon, cyperus, and spice, and wrap the inflamed intestine within it until the inflammation has been resolved.
And sometimes you should do this with water that has astringent properties, as it is better than plain water alone in resolving the inflammation.
Therefore when you see that the inflammation has been resolved, then you should moisten the intestine with water in which is cooked marsh mallows and mallows, for through this it is alleviated from within little by little.
But if the inflammation has not been relieved with this treatment, then you should carefully cut open the herniation a little with an instrument having sharp edges for cutting emorroides.
And the first treatment is better when it can be applied without causing sectioning, and it should not become necessary to cut open because of need or deficiency.
Of the instrument used for cutting, here is its shape:
"One part of the cake is sharp-edged, another not sharp-edged, and its tip is subtle, but it should not be too pointed like a spatha; rather, it may be somewhat blunt."
"And therefore when the wound is enlarged and goes out of the bowel, then it is necessary that its reduction be according to the shape of its nature, in its proper place, if possible thereupon, for it is better so."
"But when the disruption is extensive and is in the lower part of the belly, then you should make the patient lie on their back and place their thighs high up as much as their head; but if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you should raise their head and legs higher than their sides."
"And likewise if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then always direct your intention and consideration there so that the part where the wound is may be higher than the other."
"And likewise you should do this in both large wounds and medium-sized wounds."
"And in small wounds, prepare what is necessary and see that the one who ministers is between your hands, and let him hold the disruption entirely with his hand and adjust its lips, and then cover it from that to this so that there may be no other cause of suture."
"And this is the common manner of suturing: one should take a needle and thread according to the size of the wound; then lay the needle on the end of the disruption from the distal phalanx of the index finger and insert it once through both ends of the thread, without putting any knot in them. Then bring together both ends of the thread through the inside of the wound, making four rows."
"And then tie with a double knot around the needle, sometimes tying both ends together at once, and then bring together both lips and the wound by neat approximation; then place the thickness of the finger and insert another needle in that same place, and again tie it with thread like the first one was tied. Do not stop doing this until all contraction of the wound is complete."
"And let the needles be medium-sized between thickness and thinness, for thin needles cut the flesh too easily, and thick ones are difficult to insert into the thread; therefore they should be medium-sized in both thickness and thinness."
"And it is not necessary for the needle to be inserted very deeply into both ends of the thread, so that the flesh may not be cut easily and the wound may heal before its consolidation."
"And do not prolong suturing unnecessarily, so that the wound is not hindered from healing."
"And cut off the ends of the needles so that they do not cause injury when one sleeps. Then sprinkle powdered myrtle on the sutures, letting the ends of the needles remain within it until you know that the wound is healed."
"And this kind of suturing with needles is most convenient for small wounds, since they can be closed with one needle or two or even three."
"But the second manner of suturing is common: one should minister with four rows of sutures, that is both ends of the thread and both ends of the needle, at once, using a needle around which is wound thread of medium thickness."
"And then, when the needle has passed through these four ends, reduce it from that same opening where you began, so that the thread may draw back on itself and thus make a suture like a seam of cloth."
"And pause between each suture the thickness of one's little finger."
"This is how men sew."
"And with this kind of suturing, I sewed a wound that had occurred in the belly of a man who had been cut with a knife. The disruption was more than a palm's length and issued from the bowels around two palms near the middle of the gut. It was torn apart in the middle of the member. And then I reduced it after twenty-four hours."
"And the wound was consolidated in the space of fifteen days or so, and he was cured and healed. And afterwards he lived many years, and was conversant with his duties."
"And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed. And it was by miracle that he was cured, for I did not cure him with ointment, since there was no ointment appropriate for that place nor any medicine; but I put cotton on the wound twice a day and washed it assiduously with water of honey until it was healed."
"But I will describe two kinds of suturing proper according to the narrative of the Word."
"And this is how you begin with the suturing of the thread, inserting the needle from without into within."
"And then, when the needle has entered the thread and through the flesh according to its length and throughout the body, leave the end of the needle in that part where you inserted it. And make the needle penetrate into the other end from within outwards in the other extremity of the member."
"And then, when you have made it penetrate once, make it penetrate again in the same extremity of the member from without within. And leave the end of the needle that is on this side, and make the needle penetrate into the other extremity from within outwards."
"And then make your penetration with that, by which you cause it to penetrate into the needle in the extremity of the member that is on the inside where everything has penetrated."
"And then begin from this side and carry it out with the end that is on the other side, which is of the needle. And withdraw the needle from the thread that has penetrated, and reduce it into that same thread and cover over the end of the needle that is on the other side with this extremity of the member. And withdraw it from the thread that is on its part."
"And do this once and again, and do it again once more until you have sewn up all that is without according to the example given."
"The sum of this manner of suturing is that you sew with a purse-string suture with which you sew the skin, so that you sew the needle once from the side of the extremity of the thread and leave it again until you have completed it."
"But the second kind of proper suturing which Guy de Chauliac describes explicitly and recommends is this: that you sew it in semilunar fashion, as some physicians do, so that they attach each part to its corresponding part according to nature. And they apply the extremity of one side to the other extremity of the other side, and this is done as I have recommended."
"Therefore you should leave the needle in the extremity of the member near the outside, and make it penetrate from without within on that side, and leave both extremities of the needle. And then turn the needle around and make it penetrate again from without within in both extremities of the needle."
"And then turn those loops around and make each loop penetrate from within outwards into the other side in both extremities of the member, except for those on the opposite side."
"And this manner of suturing is better than common light suturing, and it is called 'running' suture."
"Behold, this is the speech of Gaul."
"Moreover, they said to him that the suture of the abdomen is corrected with two needles, so that you shall insert a thread into each one and begin with needle insertion according to your skill, making it penetrate within the other side according to the suture of those whose hearts are joined together."
"And know that when rupture occurs in the middle of the abdomen, then the suture there is more difficult than in other places of the abdomen."
"The judgment of medical treatment for plague is judged by other plagues."
"And this is why when you succeed in curing plague recently with its own blood before the air alters it, and reduce the boil and close it properly, then pause over that healing powder."
"And if the air has already altered the plague, then pause over that one among those present who make tough and strong pegs, and let them be hardened in pitch and looked at, and cure it thus as is the curing of other plagues until it is healed."
"But if you are not present with medicines, then pause immediately, for it begins to emit pus, and gradually worsens day by day, thus as you have taught us, until it is healed, because you do not need other treatments in many dispositions when the plague is simple."
"But if you fear that the plague may communicate with injury to the main limbs, then it is necessary for you to immerse lion's wool in olive oil of good quality or in rose oil, and apply it around the places between the angles and joints."
"And if there is pain or putrefaction in its boil because many times this happens, then cauterize it with black treacle wine and even more so if the corruption has come into the boil and is not easily penetrating within its concavity."
"And know that those which are in large boils are of lighter healing than those which are in small boils."
"And it is difficult to heal that boil which is called "gegunu" because it does not receive healing from plague that settles in it at all; and this is due to the great multitude of veins that are in it and its large size, and its subtle body, and its proximity to the nature of nerves."
"But if what proceeds from the plague is tissue and you obtain it fresh, then reduce it according to your discretion with which you reduce swollen boils."
"But if it has passed some time and it is now green or black, then you should strengthen it with a poultice of pitch over the place that is darkened by it, so that blood flows, because there are veins and arteries in the tissue."
"And furthermore, incise that thread-like matter and let the two extremities of the pitch drip from its exit so that the attraction of it may be relieved, you should remove the covering of the tissue and emit the pus of the plague."
"Reminder of the plague when it occurs in a boil."
"When rupture occurs in a boil and it is small, then it may be possible to restore it in some men, for instance when you see one who had been plagued in his belly with the blow of a lance and was the plague on the right side of the stomach, and the plague was old and fistulous, and he had been suffering from it with windiness."
"Then you should consider the cure of it even if it had not been fixed in its healing, but rather seek to subtilize that which was healed and the place is consolidated."
"Then you put that you saw the place already consolidated, time the misfortune that may happen upon it from an accident in his belly; and he did not experience any pain from that accidental malady and continued in his usual dispositions eating and drinking, and even entered into baths and was exercised in his sayings."
"And some experienced ones have said that when plague occurs in the boil and it is small, then it should be tied in this manner: you should take figs with large heads; and then adjust the two lips of the plague and place one of those figs which has its mouth open over the two lips of the plague. Then when it adheres and does not dissolve."
"And then place another fig near the first one, and do not cease doing this with figs one after another according to the quantity of all the plague."
"And then reduce it and close the plague; and those attached heads will remain in the boil's interior until the boil is healed, and no harm will happen to anyone."
"And it is also possible that the boil may be tied with subtle pitch which is made from the attached skin of a beast, because it is more in point; you should take the extremity of these skin threads, and let them be well skinned, and then tie the extremity of it with pitch of it, wrapped, and then insert that pitch into needles and sew it up with that boil, and reduce it at its disruption."
"And this manner of suturing with figs is only a way of trust and hope."
"But if the plague is large and extensive, especially if it is in one of the subtle veins, then it can only be subtilized, not completely healed."
"About the treatment of furuncle and fistulas."
"You should know that every plague and abscess when it opens up and becomes old, and is not consolidated and continually emits pus without being incised, then generally in any member it is called a fistulas and we call that ulcer an azukem."
"And truly a fistula is a nodule made of hard, white tissue without pain and with concavity just like the concavity of a bird's nest; therefore it is called that ulcerous wrinkle, that is to say, a nest."
"And in some men it is humid and emits pus; but soon the humidity is absorbed within a few hours." "And sometimes this humidity may be abundant, scarce, thick, or subtle."
"All those causes have been shown already, along with their signs and treatments using medicines in the division."
"And it is fitting that I make you know the treatment of fistulas which is done through surgical operation with a knife."
"And you should know that fistulas occur in all the members of the body; for some are those that pertain to large veins and arteries, or nerves, or bladder, or gut, or urinary bladder, or any of the ribs, or any of the spine's vertebrae, or any of the joints composed by composition such as hand and foot; and some are those that affect nearby main members and similar ones."
"And therefore these fistulas that are according to this manner are of the diseases of difficult healing, and do not receive cure, and occupation with those is trouble and ignorance."
"And if there is any fistula whose depth cannot be perceived by those places that are said here, and you hope and insist on its cure, and want to arrive at knowledge of it, then take a probe of iron or steel, and if the fistula goes straight, seek it with this."
"But if the fistula is tortuous, then investigate it with a probe of subtle lead, because lead with the lightness of its body is easily alleviated and curved due to its tortuosity."
"And if the fistula has no mouth or horrible opening, it will not be possible for you to indicate it with a probe."
"Therefore, clarify the opening by its openings, because the humidity with which you clarify that goes through the other openings and courses of theirs."
"And moreover inquire diligently, according to which manner it is possible for you to know if here there are bone or nerve, and whether the fistula is distant or near, or whether it is a fistula with no mouth opening and situated above all this with your utmost strength, with your investigation, with which you investigate the illness, and discover the cause of the pain by compression with the hand on the place, and similar to the signs and accidental causes in an abscess."
"And when you have stood on all those causes with true judgment, then come to the cure according to confidence: and it is that you consider whether it is an apparent fistula near or in a healthy place, distant from joints, nerves, arteries, veins, or any of the places which I have indicated to you."
"Now you dry out the fistula according to what is said above about its narration, and remove that which is in that filtration and of corrupt flesh, and that which is born in the opening of the flesh or thorn and similar, and cure that wound until it is healed."
"But if the fistula is of distant depth and goes through rectum, then it is necessary that you insert that into the preon as much as it will be possible for you, and moreover cleanse that from all its corrupt flesh; and moreover administer cataplasms wrapped in acrid medicines, and introduce those dressings into the concavity of the fistula which you have grasped with an iron probe."
"And do this several times until the acrid medicine burns away all that is rough in the concavity of the fistula due to corruption."
"And moreover restore it with ointments which generate healthy flesh until it is healed."
If it does not heal by this method, then cauterize according to what we have recommended.
If the cause of the fistula is bone and it must be certified, then you should inquire about this and dry it according to what we have recommended, unless there are any causes of veins, nerves or main members that should not be touched, as we have said.
But if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness present, then you should remove that flesh within which the corruption has spread entirely; and afterwards treat it with this ointment until it heals.
And if it does not heal and throws out again as before, then know that you have not reached the complete eradication of the corruption; and therefore open it up again carefully and seek out the cause of it and cleanse it with your last forceps, and afterwards restore it.
And thus if it heals, well and good; but if not, then know that the corruption is in the remote depths of the body, which has not been reached, and therefore there is nothing to be done except leave it alone.
And if the bone that is corrupted is small or can be removed, then you should remove it with delicate forceps suited to the purpose.
And if there are many bones affected, then carefully remove all of them, and leave behind none without a cause with your strength.
But if there are any obstacles caused by humidity, and there is no fear or error in their incision, then incise those ligaments or flesh if they are present, and deliver the bones.
But if there is no preparation to remove the bones at that time, then place over the wound a dressing that will promote healing of the wound and leave it in place around those bones of flesh and ligaments, and guard the dressing so that it does not become consolidated and so that the incision made during your operation is kept open.
Have ready, if you fear inflammation, a dressing soaked in olive oil, or soaked in Egyptian pitch, or in one of the green ointments, for when those ligaments have been softened and separated from the bones, their removal will be facilitated.
But if it is a large bone such as the thighbone or shinbone or similar, and only the surface of it is corrupted, then scrape away only that corruption with a chisel and rasp carefully until all the blackness and corruption has been removed, and then restore the dressing.
But if a large part of it is corrupted and the corruption has reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that and incise all around where the corruption has penetrated, and then treat it until it is consolidated.
And I recommend to you that which pertains to a man concerning his thigh, so that you place over it this example and assistant in your operation.
There was a young man about thirty years old to whom it happened that he had pain in his thigh, and the cause of it was from matter within the abdomen which had spread to the thigh, and it was a large abscess, and there was no external cause for it.
And so much time passed with that because of the error of doctors until the abscess was opened, and a great quantity of matter flowed out, and his cure was then delayed until the thigh became fistulized, and many openings were made in it which all gave way to purification and the humidity of the body.
And then after much consultation with many doctors for about two years, and they knew nothing but their art, I was called.
And when I saw the thigh of that man and the matter that flowed from those openings over a large area, I saw that his whole body was emaciated and his color was yellowish.
And then I inserted a probe into one of those openings and reached the bone with it.
And then I examined all the openings carefully and found that they extended from every part of the thigh.
And then I incised over one of those openings until I discovered a part of the bone, and I scraped away that corrupted matter which was earthy and rotting and discolored, and a part of the thigh had already been corrupted where it had penetrated into the muscle.
And then I closed up what I had discovered and prepared of the bone laid bare
And you should know that it was not in the bone but only in that corruption which I cut out and closed up, for there was already gangrene.
And then I applied a dressing with consolidating medicines for a long time, but it did not consolidate.
And then again I incised and laid bare the bone according to my first discovery, and I found continuous corruption with the bone.
And then again I closed up what appeared to me of that corruption, and even then the cure of him was not restored.
And then again I laid bare that bone a third time and ceased to incise it little by little particularly, and even then the cure of him was not restored until I incised around about a palm of it, and extracted that with its marrow, and then restored it with medicines, and it consolidated easily and healed.
And it was not necessary to repeat the operation and section of that bone except because of the disposition of his weakness and poverty of endurance and fear of death in him, for he had always been subject to syncope through excessive evacuation.
And therefore he was healed completely, and there is nothing in the place of bone or hard flesh; and his disposition in his body has been good and he has returned to his former vigor, and he has changed his habits and does not do anything contrary to his walking nor suffers any harm in any way.
But if the bone is prominent in place of the flesh and causes trouble, then you should cut it off in this manner: Take linen and strengthen that at the end of that prominent bone, and command someone to extend that on both sides; And then lay over that a thicker layer of wool than the first layer, and then bind that onto the flesh which is left near the bone, and extend the end of it so that you can draw the flesh away from its parts, and thus you uncover the flesh over the place where you wish to cut off.
And lay a board or table underneath the bone neatly, for when you do this the saw will not cut into the corrupt flesh.
And the sawing should be done little by little over the place of corruption, for if there is corruption in the concavity of the bone and does not appear externally to the touch, then it must be sawn again another time.
And if the bone is corrupted but not prominent, and one part is continuous with another, and the corruption is in the middle of it or in a part of it, then you should uncover the flesh from all parts entirely; And then lay wood underneath, and saw that first part where the corruption is until the sawing is continued to the other part.
And let the sawing be done according to the place of the corruption a little at a time, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, then cut that corrupted joint and saw off the bone where it continues with the other part.
But if the corruption is in the continuity of two joints, then it is not a fracture but an injury
And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; nevertheless you should search for the corruption however it appears to you, and cut that away, and cleanse it according to each disposition that is possible to you, and with every injury make sure to correct it so that it does not cause harm to any vein or nerve.
"Know the types of chisels and saws suitable for cutting these bones. They differ according to the situation of the bones, their preparation, thickness, subtlety, size, smallness, hardness, and rarity; therefore, you should prepare appropriate instruments for each operation."
"Know that this operation requires you to use such and such an instrument. When you have thorough knowledge and long experience in the methods of this art and are familiar with various diseases, then you will know what instruments are suitable for each disease."
"And at the end of this chapter, you should list the number and names of the instruments that you will use simply for your prohibition, which you will experience with others." "Serrat form"
"Other saw shape:"
"Form of another large saw"
"Shape of a rasp" "The head of this rasp should be in the shape of a starred key head, and its points should be shaped like asterisk points."
"It is not convenient except that with this [instrument] the heads of joints are rubbed together when they are corrupted or if the mouth is too wide."
"Shape of a smaller razor"
"Razor shape for cutting"
A suitable saw should be made with an arch above it, sharp-edged and pointed at its end. Shape of it
razor with concave shape
another razor with fine edge
Another razor with curved tip
Small razor resembling a stingray
Another, smaller form
Form of another incision tool; this one resembles a lance, with its tip serrated for use in many places at the joints of bones
A form resembling that used to bore through bones
And its tip is triangular and pointed.
It is made of Indian iron, resembling all the forms mentioned earlier for razors, incision tools, and saws
For bone cutting and sawing
The extremities may become paralyzed due to intrinsic or extrinsic causes. If you have treated the corruption with medications and the cure does not help, sometimes the corruption can spread to a member without any apparent cause. Therefore, it is necessary to incise that member where the corruption has occurred, so that the illness will subside by either death or removal of the corrupted part, which is preferable to losing the entire limb due to paralysis.
The sign of this condition is that the member becomes blackened where it has been burned or scorched by fire, or if there is a spreading darkness as if it were being consumed from within. In such cases, incision is necessary to cut through and relieve the affected area before it spreads throughout the entire body.
Similarly, if the cause of corruption is due to venomous bites from creatures such as scorpions, marine animals, vipers or similar.
And if the corruption or venomous bite is on the tip of a finger, then you should incise the finger and not allow the corruption to spread into the hand.
Similarly, if it affects the hand, then you should incise at the wrist and not allow the corruption to spread into the forearm.
And if it spreads further up the arm, then you should incision at the elbow joint.
And if the corruption passes beyond that point and goes around the elbow, then death is inevitable for that limb. No other treatment can cure it at this stage, as the quantity of virtue (life force) has been exhausted.
Similarly, when corruption spreads to a toe of the foot, you should incise it at one of its joints.
And if it reaches the heel of the foot, then you must amputate the entire foot. But if it progresses into the thigh, then you should incise the thigh at the hip joint.
If corruption has already reached the bone, then in it there is only decay, and to let the patient die.
To incise or sever the member, you should stretch the ligament at the point where you wish to cut, and stretch another ligament above it. The assistant will extend one ligament on both sides of the incision, and the minister another ligament over them. Then, separate the flesh that is between the two ligaments with a spatula, until the entire flesh is exposed; then proceed with the incision or severing.
It is necessary that drapes of lead be placed on all sides so that it does not touch the place where it is applied, and that the patient receives a proper dressing and cauterization.
But if blood flows while performing the operation, then you should cauterize the place carefully, or cover it with some powders that will stop the bleeding. Then return to your procedure until it is completed.
Then ligature the member plague-wise with ligament at its convenient location, and dress it until it is healed.
And you should recount to him what happened to a man on his foot: this very accident that you are relating happened to him, which is that he accidentally burned his foot with heat that was similar to the combustion of fire.
And that corruption first appeared in his toe before it spread throughout the whole foot.
Then that man prepared to apply pus because he knew that the cure would go to the member with great force of heat and pain, and he incised his foot at the joint, and it was healed by fire.
For a long time, that same corruption occurred in the finger of his left hand.
And then it came to me, and so I treated that swelling with what I applied on the hand of the medicines, particularly the purification of the body from it. But the swelling did not subside, and it began to go to another finger until it reached the hand.
And he asked me to incise his hand for it, but I did not want to do that hoping for the subsidence of that swelling, and more than anything fearing the death of his hand from incision, because the power of the disease was great.
And even though he left me, it was brought to my attention that that man prepared himself and incised his entire hand, and it healed.
And I have only recorded this narrative so that help may be provided for those who suffer from this illness, and so that its meaning may be understood by which it is designated and according to which it should be treated.
Of the treatment of sinews and the quality of cleansing with medicines (enema).
When an aposteme occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the aposteme is prolonged until it forms a collection of pus, and then it bursts and is perforated, and the pus is discharged from it, and the place remains void as if it were a vessel, and the skin that is above it appears like finely woven cloth, and there is no further corruption, and it does not impress on the bone or nerve or ligament, it is called a sinew, and it is not called a fistula.
But if the space is prolonged until corruption impresses on some member, then it is called a fistula and not sinew.
And its treatment is that you incise that skin entirely as it appears, and especially when it is finely woven and is like cloth, and make sure that it does not adhere to the place because of its corruption.
But if you hope that the skin will adhere and that that corruption has not yet reached its final conclusion, and there is putrefaction in the skin, then you treat it with an enema.
And if you consider the sinew, and if it is large, and the arm that appears has a foul odor, then you enema it with the Egyptian medicine which is of oil and sour wine and cinnamon bark finely ground, and they should be balanced in a vessel, and cooked over the fire until the medicine becomes thick like honey.
And then you take what is necessary from it and dissolve it with water and honey; and you enema the sinew with that, and strengthen its opening, and leave the medicine in it for the amount of two hours.
And then you remove it with a spatula, and do this for so many days until the sinew is purified and the corruption is removed.
And sometimes it is enema with water of ash when this medicine is not available to you; and if you take the ashes of vitals, and put them on the water, then you enema that with it until you are satisfied that the sinew is clean.
And if the disease does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ash, then you enema it with water and honey mixed together, to which some finely ground cinnamon is added, and you enema it also with wine and honey mixed together, for it is the property of honey to purify and wash, and wine makes the sinew adhere, especially when there is an excess of astringency and dryness in the wine.
And when you do this several times and you are satisfied that the sinew has been removed, then you enema it with something that makes flesh grow in it.
And if you take some fine diachylon and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine, or else you enema it with other medicines and ointments that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the opening of the sinew is narrow and cannot receive the tube of the enema, then you dilate it little by little with a small file, and pause in it with warm compresses wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is dilated.
And similarly, if the opening is wide, then you approximate its lips with suture and leave in it the amount that enters the enema without addition.
And if the opening of that from which the arm extends upwards is elevated to its parts above, then dry it in the pus near below where it enters so that the arm runs smoothly, for when the arm is confined within a sinew the flesh can be generated inside.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinew near the bone in the pus below as you wish, then pierce the member with preparation so that the arm runs out of it lightly according to what appears to you and without there being any cause retained in the arm.
"He who is above the armpit opening should constantly remove it so that what has gathered in the arm may flow out." "And so you may know if what flows from the arm is much or little, whether it is digested or undigested."
"And besides this, consider also the location of that sinus: if the patient feels pain there or not, and if it is an abscess."
"And when your treatment has lasted for some time in this manner, and you see that the matter which is thrown out over the armpit opening has already adhered, or at least shows signs of adherence, then on the third day, carefully remove it. But when you remove it, immediately change the cloth for another one and renew the dressing."
"But if from the sinus there extends a long distance of subtle virus, do not despair of its adhesion, for the healing will take place nonetheless. For this is what happens in some people where the generation of flesh in their wounds takes longer time, and also in those whose case is the opposite."
"And if from the sinus much digested blood issues for many days, then you know that the sinus does not adhere. But if there is delay in the adhesion of the sinus and this causes prolongation, then you should aim for dryness in your medications. And if the medications are humid by nature and virtue, they should be made dry like a fine ointment, when there is excessive addition of honey."
"And the last remedy which cures it is this: take a fine ointment and dissolve it in rose oil. Then mix well until its substance is evenly distributed, and apply it thus to that limb, using it."
"And it seems that in that action, when there is no blood flow, you should use fine ointment and honey which is thickened by cooking, using it; or take myrrh, aloe, and incense, crush them all together and powder them over the honey while it is on the fire. Then spread this on a cloth and place that over the sinus, spreading the thickened honey on top and then powdering the cloth."
"And sometimes it is administered with the long and slender roots of celery (which is celery) and barley flour and centaurea, using those simples or adjusted ones, crushed and sifted and powdered over the honey which has been mentioned; then use it."
"And if the sinus is prolonged and not healed by this treatment, then you know that corruption is in its interior. And therefore, make an investigation into the bones or other hard members or to the ligaments; then treat it with a fistulous cure, as mentioned above."
"On the treatment of panniculus carnosus and crushed nails, additional digit cuticle and section."
Wart is an aposteme that appears under the nail of the toe or foot finger, and it usually appears on others as well. When prolonged, its cure becomes more difficult; either it is a cauterized aposteme or corrupted, and it emits a dark liquid that corrodes the root of the nail, often corrupting the entire digit. Its corruption sometimes reaches the bone, causing a foul odor, and makes the tip of the toe blackened, with the color becoming darkened.
Therefore, when you have that which we have said in the division and it does not confirm your cure, then you should scrape with iron all the remaining superfluity of the nail and cauterize the wound immediately afterward, for cautery is very helpful in this case.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, but the edges of the nail begin to press on the flesh at the sides, causing itching and discomfort, then you should make a small incision at the corner of the nail that presses on the flesh, and lift up that edge and cut away that flesh easily. Then apply burn-cauterizing medicines over what remains of the flesh until all is removed; and immediately afterward treat it with healing ointments until it is healed.
But if the corruption has already reached the bone, then you should incise the bone at that point and extract it, for there is no time when such a bone can be healed once it is corrupted.
And if the corrosion and corruption go up into the digit, then you should incise it at one of its joints according to its memory, and immediately afterward treat it until it is healed.
But if the nail suffers impact or attrition and there is intense pain in that place, then you should first blister the wound. Then immediately afterward, dry the nail with a sharp spatula with a transverse section from top to bottom, but be careful not to let the section reach the flesh that is beneath the nail, for you will cause intense pain and produce excessive flesh growth at that location. Immediately afterward treat that place with something that relieves pain.
But a finger that is fixed, which is born in the case of some men, it may be entirely flesh and fat, or it may be joined to the bones, or it may be joined only by the nail.
And some of them are born at the root of the joint, or the birth is in one of the joints of these fingers. But that which is born in some joints of the finger is not painful, whereas that which is born in the joints is often painful.
And among those born fleshy, their section is easy, and so you should insert the scalpel there to its root.
But if one is born at the root of the juncture, the cure is difficult; therefore beware of cutting into it.
However, if one is born at the root of the nuts, you should insert at the beginning with a round incision through the bone, and immediately saw with one of those suitable saws for that purpose, and immediately cure it where it has been healed.
However, if consolidation occurs in these between their joined bones or by the nature of the person born that way, or by solidification of phlegm or burning of fire, or by similarity, then it is necessary to cut off that consolidation so that those may return to their natural form.
And again, pause between their membranes of the lungs in rose oil so that they are not easily consolidated, and separate them or place a thin sheet of lead between them if necessary according to what is needed.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in some of these with the palm, then cut off that consolidation according to how it is prepared and convenient for the figure of the member.
Of incision of veins, there are many kinds.
"Varicose veins are caused by thick, twisted veins filled with melancholic excess humors that appear in many parts of the body, and most commonly in the legs, especially among travelers, laborers, and porters."
"Then you should administer a purge of black bile several times with strong evacuation, and also bleed the patient from the basilic vein."
"But the treatment of varicose veins with iron is done in two ways: one is to incise and draw out that black blood, and the other way is to elevate the vein and extract all of it."
"The procedure is as follows: first, embed the beginning of the vein with cold water until the thick blood is dissolved and removed, which is waste from the vein. Then, tie the vein at its departure point above the affected area with a bandage, and then dry the vein in one or two or three places with a wide cut, and finally elevate the black blood with the tube from the far end of the vein upwards and downwards until as much blood as desired is removed and the wound heals."
"And then bandage it up, and tell him to abstain from foods that generate black bile."
"And repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is beneficial for the patient."
"But the elevation of varicose veins is done as follows: first, raise the affected vein if it is not too large, and then put it in warm water until it becomes reddened and the veins are dilated; or else have him exercise vigorously if you are not present at the bath, until his limb becomes warmed."
"And then cut the thread on the right side of the vein in the length or at the end of it where you should cut the knot, or below that if you want to tie the ankle."
"And then tie the thread with a needle and strip the vein from all sides until it appears on the surface of the skin, and it should be done with the patient lying down to avoid blackness."
"And then remove the thread and tie it again with a white thread that is strong."
"And then place therewith something elevated until it is raised up from the vein and suspended therewith by an embroidered linen cloth."
"And then make another cut near that cut after three days, and again strip the thread from above the vein until it appears."
"And then elevate it again and make another cut below that, and then remove the thread from both cuts."
"And do this until you have removed all of that from the highest or lowest cut of all cuts, so that it is completely removed; and then close up the wound."
"If you are not able to remove and elevate it, then insert a needle with strong thread doubled and tied, and remove it; or else put therewith something elevated until it is cast out." "And make sure that you do not cut the vein; for if it breaks, it will be difficult to elevate it again and will bring harm upon the patient through that wound."
"And when all has been removed, then place thereupon some wool moistened with rose oil and unguent, and heal it until it is healed."
"And if the vein is contracted without any tortuosity where it has been wrapped around and does not follow the straightness that we have described, then you must cut all the way along its tortuous parts and places of wrapping, and then suspend it with needles until you have elevated it all."
"And make sure that your cut does not touch the vein and does not damage it, for it will be difficult to elevate if it is damaged; be careful with this."
"Form of the incision where a vein is cut:"
It is not sharp like needles nor has it acute extremities so as not to harm the vein. It is of thick flexibility because if it were thin, it would injure the vein through its fineness; for it has surplus thickness as we have said.
Removal of a vein from the leg
This vein is generated in the calves of lands that are dry like those in Arabia and also those in India, which are hot and dry with little humidity and where there is neither grass nor herbs.
And moreover it is generated in other places of the body besides the calves
Its generation is one of putrefaction that rises from the thigh like venom inside the body's serpents, worms, crabs, and other worms generated between the thigh and the flesh.
The symptom of the advent of this condition is an inflammation in the calf with violent swelling. Around that place, there is blistering and around where it begins to appear, the vein seems like a plant shoot.
Then when the vein appears at its end, you should immediately wrap around it a piece of lead weighing one dragon (about 3.5 grams) within two dragons (about 7 grams). Tie this and leave the lead suspended from the calf.
"Whenever some fluid flows out from him to outer parts, wrap that in lead and tie it." "If it continues longer, then you should incise some of him and wrap the remainder; but do not insert that inside until it has come out completely, because if you insert it while still inside it will contract and go into the flesh, causing inflammation and putrefaction in the place, and bad ulceration."
"That is why it must be treated gradually and extracted little by little until completely outside of him, so that there remains nothing inside his body."
"And from this vein some men have extracted up to twenty palms of blood, and I have heard that one man has extracted as much as thirty palms."
"If it is incised at the time of treatment, then insert a tube into the track of it and pierce that with a long tube through the body until all of what is in the matter has been evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the place for some days with medicines; and afterwards cure it by the treatment of apostemes."
"And this vein sometimes has many branches, especially when it appears at the junction of the thigh or in the thigh, and comes to have many openings, from each of which a branch can be extracted."
"And then cure it as we have said in the division above, with whatever has been mentioned above."
"Regarding incision for worms generated under the skin, also known as 'bovine disease'."
"This illness is known in some lands as cow disease because many times it is found in oxen and rarely one that is born between the backbone and flesh, spreading throughout the body causing pain and discomfort, noticeable by its movement from member to member until it tears the backbone and comes out."
"The generation of this is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms, snakes, earthworms and ascariasis occur in the belly."
"And it is feared because when it goes into the body and reaches the head, and arrives at the brain, then it opens a large wound there and enters and destroys the brain, which happens many times."
"And therefore when you want to heal that one and remove this illness, then it is not done if not first the person's walking and appearance of the illness are felt by sensation, and then you must stretch out what is on top of it and what is below it with bandages and constriction, and carefully dry it over it and remove it."
"And if it is in the flesh and you do not remove it, then you must apply a cautery with fire over the place where it resides, and the greatest cause that is feared is corruption of the illness, with which it corrupts the place as we have said."
"And if you want that person to be freed from the head near the brain, then stretch a bandage over his forehead with strong constriction, and carefully dry it over it, and remove it; and it is necessary for the sick person to use medicines that evacuate putrid bad humors from their body, and they should guard themselves against foods that cause putrefaction."
"On cutting into the illness nafir."
"This illness is named in our land 'nafir', and it is a pain that comes to some limbs, and it is transferred from limb to limb."
"And you have already seen this as I will tell you." "I was called to a sick woman in a village, and uncovering her arm I saw a small inflammation on the vein of her elbow, which after an hour grew like this way it goes when it swells, but more gently than usual, as if it were living silver moving from place to place."
"And then the pain of that spot went away and gathered in the muscle, and remained there for about an hour."
Approximately correct the other body between which it reaches to the other arm.
And I recommend that you turn yourself completely around according to what I saw; and he was too amazed by the transformation of his body and the speed of member by member. And I had already seen something like this in my dreams according to that manner, however, I have heard many people say that it causes pain to be transformed from member to member. But I do not see this in the mirrors as with women.
And you do not think this to be so because the woman was of age, with dry skin and visible veins, and in this appearance she feels that windy transformation.
And it is necessary that it does not appear according to this back-bending in those who are delightful and have moist skin with hidden veins.
And when you want the cure of the skin, and the patient feels that pain, then it is not apparent on the mirror as we have said, then you stretch over that one and let go lightly and carefully over that one where that windy constriction has gone out, and cauterize the place.
But if you do not see it on your mirrors, then cure that with exercise of the body and with that which expels windiness, and cover those with foul-smelling pills and with pills of senna and similar things.
On the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diverse according to their species and the parts of the body in which they strike, for their diversity is that some have large points, small ones, concave ones, mute ones, solid ones; others have three angles, and those with tongues; and those that are star-shaped.
And the signs of death from a brain injury are when an arrow strikes it and passes through the bone, and issues from the cistern that is above the brain, for there occurs sudden vehemence, scotoma (darkening or loss of vision), vertigo (dizziness), heat in the eyes, inflammation and heat of the tongue, spasm and mixture of understanding, vomiting of bile, and a strong flow of speech is cut off and the voice destroyed. And there issues from the wound's location white humid matter like dust, and there are signs of the watery nature of the flesh.
If these signs appear to you then abstain from treating or removing the arrow, unless it is outside.
Know the signs of an arrow wound to the heart: it is near the left nipple, stuck in hard flesh and not soft; if the movement of the arrow resembles a pulse or breath, and there is black bloody sweat, chills in the extremities, faintness, and fainting, then know that death will soon follow without doubt.
And the signs when an arrow has pierced the lung are sputum of frothy blood from the wound, vessels near the neck appear collapsed, the patient's complexion changes, they breathe heavily or gasp for air.
And if the arrow strikes the pleura, which is located in the chest, there will be pain near the lower ribs, and it will cause great pain in the breath with sighing, and all the members and muscles are not moved.
And if the arrow strikes the stomach, then soon afterward there will be vomiting of undigested food.
And if the arrow strikes the belly and remains inside, it causes some wound or tear of the flesh or bowel that is broken, and there is little hope for recovery by removing the arrow.
And if the arrow strikes the bladder and urine is expelled outside, and processes from it some cause of inflammation outside, then know that there will be great pain on the wound, and that it is mortal.
But the other members such as the face, neck, shoulder-blades, arms and legs, spine, collarbone, ribs, and their like are saved according to the greater disposing when the arrow does not strike a vein or artery, nor is it poisoned.
And I recommend this to you that I have seen about these arrows, so that you may know from this about their treatment.
It happened that an arrow struck the tear duct of a man's eye near the root of his nose. I removed it from the other side and left behind a piece of its feather, and it healed without causing any harm to the eye.
And I removed another arrow from a Jew which had struck him in the corner of his eye, leaving behind the eyelid and also some of it was hidden. And only a small extremity remained attached to its shaft, which was a large arrow of the sharp arrows of the Turks with a lion head on which there were no feathers.
And the Jew healed and had no harm to his eye.
"One day, a man named Creslia was struck by an arrow in his thigh, which was Arab-made. It was embedded deep between two muscles and had pierced through to the other side; I carefully removed it with forceps and the man was healed."
"I removed another arrow from a man's stomach. I thought he was going to die because of it; however, after thirty days had passed and there were no signs of change in his condition, I decided to operate on the arrow, extracted it, and the man recovered without any further complications."
"I saw a man in whom an arrow had stuck in his back. The wound was festering and he had been suffering for three years already. Finally, the arrow came out on its own."
"I saw a woman who had an arrow stuck in her abdomen. The wound was infected but did not affect her overall health or any of her natural bodily functions."
"I saw another man who had an arrow stuck in his face. The wound was infected but the arrowhead had broken off and he felt no pain or discomfort from it."
"I removed an arrow from the nose of one of the king's men. The arrow had entered the middle of his nostril and had deviated slightly to the right. It was completely hidden inside his nasal cavity."
"I was called upon for the treatment [of this case] approximately three days after the arrow had entered him."
"Then I noticed the wound from the arrow was quite inflamed. Then I felt around gently with my fingers and did not find anything; however, he felt a puncture wound behind his right ear, so I suspected that this puncture was due to the tip of the arrow."
"Apply plaster to the area with a plaster that has attractive and digestive properties, ensuring that the area is cleaned so that I can see the arrow's location clearly, and then cut it."
"The wound did not suffer any significant accident where the arrow had pierced it; I continued applying plaster to it for many days, and no accident happened. The wound healed in the meantime, and after several weeks the patient felt the arrowhead inside his nose and recognized this to me."
"I then applied a corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it opened, and with tweezers I probed it, and carefully grasped the tip of the arrowhead, which adhered to the shaft."
"Then I carefully adjusted the application of the medicine to the wound until the tip of the arrowhead became clearly visible. It took me about four months to complete this process."
"Then when the wound had healed and expanded enough for me to insert tweezers into it, I grasped it tightly without causing pain. However, after several attempts, I realized that I needed to be more skillful and ingenious in order to extract it successfully. One day, using a technique involving forceps, I was able to grasp the arrowhead firmly and carefully remove it, as described at the end of this chapter."
"Some physicians judged that the cartilage of the nose could not be restored, but I was able to restore it and the wound healed completely, with no trace of illness remaining."
"And I tell you this story to give an example of how some arrowheads were extracted, which may serve as a guide and have meaning for what I have not mentioned, because the details of this art and its definitions are not understood by merely reading or understanding this book."
"And skilled artisans compare a little about much, and prefer what is present to what is absent. They also discover new operations and instruments by considering the causes of accidents that happen."
"And therefore I say that arrowheads are not expelled from the limbs in which they are embedded except by two methods: either by attraction of the place where it entered, or by the opposite direction of its trajectory."
"And those which are expelled by the place where they entered are either soft-tissue arrows that have been shot and forced outwards."
"And if you cannot achieve extraction at the time of examination, then leave it for a few days so that the flesh around it can soften and its attraction and expulsion become easier."
"And similarly, if an arrowhead is embedded in bone and extraction cannot be achieved, leave it for several days and then try again each day with attraction and movement, until it eventually comes out."
"And if you are still unable to achieve extraction after several days, then drill around the arrowhead in that bone with a subtle awl so that its path is widened, and then extract it."
"But if the arrowhead has become embedded in the flesh of the body and is hidden from view, then search for it with a probe, and if you find it, attract it using appropriate instruments."
"And if you cannot reach it due to the narrowness of the wound and the length of the probe, and there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein in its path, then widen the wound so that it becomes possible to extract the arrowhead."
"And if the arrowhead is held by ligaments or sinews, then cut through the flesh in which it is embedded using all your skill. Then devise a means of overcoming its hold, such as cutting through the ligaments or breaking the auricular bones and twisting them."
"And when you perform the extraction of an arrowhead in any location, use your hand with a twisting motion and forceps at all times to achieve its removal. Be very careful that the arrowhead is not broken during this process and that it can be extracted with great difficulty."
"If you cannot achieve extraction at the time of examination, then leave it for several days until the surrounding wounds have healed, and then attempt again when conditions are more favorable." "But if you encounter difficulty with bleeding, then administer the treatment which we discussed in its chapter on that subject."
"And be careful not to cut any vein, nerve, or cord. Use every possible means to extract the arrowhead gently and calmly with patience and steadfastness as I have recommended."
"And cause the arrowhead to contract according to the shape in which it was cast, so that the illness corresponds to its form. This is more helpful." "But if this is not possible, then use whatever means are available according to the shape of the arrowhead."
"However, if an arrowhead is extracted in the opposite direction from which it entered, or if there has already been some injury to the surrounding tissues, or if the end of the arrowhead has become swollen due to inflammation and swelling, then cut through that part. Make the section according to the amount held by the forceps, and extract it gently."
"But if it is retained in the bone, then twist the arrowhead in the opposite direction until it presses against the bone. Then widen its path and extract it."
"If not, leave it for several days and then attempt again when convenient."
"And if the shaft of the arrowhead is broken off inside it, push that part in with it."
"But if the shaft has fallen out and you wish to apply pressure, then insert a concave instrument into the wound until it enters the cavity of the arrowhead, and then push that in with it."
"But if the arrowhead is concave, then insert a strong instrument into it and push it in gently. For the arrowhead will be eased by that."
"And if the arrowhead is poisoned, then it is necessary to cut away all the flesh around the wound if possible. Then treat it with whatever is appropriate."
"And if the arrowhead has entered the bone, or the abdomen, or the bladder, or the side, and is close enough to touch it with your hand, and you are able to cut through it, then cut through it carefully avoiding any veins or nerves. Extract it and sew up the wound if necessary. Then treat it until it heals."
"The method of using forceps to extract arrowheads is as follows:"
"Their extremities are like bird's beaks that are made with saws when they grasp the arrow, so as not to let it go."
"And of these are made many kinds, large, small and medium-sized, according to the quantity of the size of the arrow and its thickness, and the width of the shaft and the tightness of it."
"like rain, so that the entrance of it into the arrow concave is eased and it is propelled with it."
"Of phlebotomy of veins."
"Of phlebotomy of the veins that are usually flebotomized are thirty, among which are sixteen in the head: two pulsating veins near the ears, called tragus veins; two veins in the temples; two veins in the lacrimal grooves of the eyes, called canthi veins; a vein prepared in the middle of the forehead; a vein at the tip of the nose; two jugular veins on the neck; two veins above the lip; and two veins on the left side of the tongue. These are the veins called algelic veins." "The veins that are flebotomized in the arms are five: of these one is cephalic, and it is on the wild side; the people call it 'the vein of the head'; and one is median basilic, and it is composed of one branch of the basilica and another branch of the cephalic; and it is called by the people 'vein of all the body'; and basilica is a vein that is placed on the domestic side, and it is called 'cubital', and it is called by the vulgar 'vena del ventre'; and funis of the arm, and it is placed above the elbow, and it is this one in which flebotomy is performed, and it is the one that appears above the pouch through manifest appearance; and salvatella, and it is the vein that is between the said auricular and the smallest finger, and there are two branches."
"And in the foot and leg there are three veins: one of these is on the left side of the curvature of the little finger of the wild side; and the second is sophena, and its location is on the back of the domestic side of the leg; and the sciatic vein, and its location is on the back of the wild side of the leg; and there are other veins similar to these in the leg."
"The benefits of flebotomizing the veins near the ears are ancient catarrhs, migraines, and headaches, and ulcers on the face, and old bad habits."
"And the quality of bleeding those is according to what you count for yourself: it should be done quickly at the time of illness, and the head of the sick person should be rubbed with a broad cloth with good friction in the occipital region where both veins are; then the sick person's neck should be strengthened with a bandage between which both veins appear near the ears in two points pressed to the head; and you will seek that with your thumb, and if you feel the pulse of those with your finger, here you should stop."
"Then you take the cutting lancet, and it is that which is inserted, and then you introduce it into the vein in the elbow until the flebotomy comes to the bone." "And then raise your hand with the vein and elbow upwards and cut the vein with an incising incision." "And let the length of the incision be the size of two fingers or around that, and make the blood flow out as much as you wish."
"And then strengthen with powder and leave it there until it is healed."
"And it has already been stated at the beginning of this book that those veins are cut and their cauterization is done."
"Of the two arterial veins that are in the temples, the benefit of flebotomy is for ancient migraines and bad humors, and persistent ophthalmia and sharp,effusive excesses of blood to the eyes."
"And the quality of flebotomizing those is according to what I recommend to you: make the sick person's neck straight with their mouth open until both veins appear at the touch by manifest appearance, and let the pulse of them be felt on your thumb; then you should stop."
"And then raise the elbow above the vein with your thumb's tip, and introduce the flebotomy lancet incisingly there, and raise the vein upwards; and cut it thus as you have done in the two other veins; and make the blood flow according to your necessity."
"And then untie the sick person's bandage, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then press on that with cotton and powder and strengthen it above with strong compression, and leave it there until it is healed."
"And the memorandum of them has already been preceded at the beginning of this book, and their incision and attraction."
"And therefore the benefit of flebotomizing the vein of the forehead is to flebotomize the cephalic one for old diseases of the face and ancient migraines, redness, and stinking ulcers."
"And the quality of flebotomizing it is according to what I recommend to you: it is that the sick person should strengthen their neck with a bandage until the vein appears, and then take the instrument called 'fossor', of which this is its shape:"
"Press the prominent point that is at the head of the fossor upon that vein and strike it with a pen or another cause in this manner, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you desire; then untie the sick person's perforation and strengthen it until it is healed."
"And sometimes it is opened with a wide flebotomy, but it is not necessary that the flebotomy have an acute extremity like the other flebotomies, rather its edge should be flat and cutting because if it were sharp it would break the bone in it when the flebotomy is subtle."
"But the benefit of both veins that are in the temples is for itching of the eyelids with redness and sebaceous matter in the eyes, and for diseases of the face."
"And the quality of flebotomizing is that the sick person should strengthen their neck with a bandage, and then flebotomize those veins, and you should stand above its head."
"And let the flebotomy be done across with a little length with a small flebotomy because in that place there is no flesh, and if the flebotomy were sharp it would break its edge."
"And then make the blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and press on those with cotton, and strengthen them for one night, then untie them."
"But the flebotomy of the vein of the nose is beneficial for acute fever and violent humor, and for diseases of the face and ancient migraines and redness that occur in the face, especially when it is ancient."
"And the quality of flebotomizing it is that the sick person should strengthen their neck and then have their nose held with your left hand, and take the subtle flebotomy long and place it in the middle of the head of the nose according to its straightness because the vein does not appear to the touch here, and because the blood begins to flow soon."
"It is necessary that you slowly withdraw your hand with the flebotomy and make the blood flow according to your need; then bind it for one night because that vein is easily restored."
"More importantly, the relief provided by bloodletting from both arms leads to constriction of the chest and onset of leprosy, as well as many illnesses, impurities, and malignant ulcerative infections like herpes."
"And the quality of bloodletting from these is that the illness should leave each one with its own color; and the artist is positioned on the patient's head, and the patient sits on a chair."
"And during bloodletting, the vein is opened slowly and carefully with a small incision; and during extraction of blood according to prescribed quantity or as needed, it should be done similarly for the other vein."
"And afterwards untie the bandage and stretch both veins with moderate tension to ensure that the patient does not faint, and leave him lying down until the wound is healed."
"And the benefit of bloodletting from the veins of Algiers is that it removes small abscesses and pustules of the mouth, corruption of the gums, malignant ulcers and fissures, as well as malignant ulcers located in the nose and around it."
"And the method of bloodletting from these veins is as follows: place the patient in front of you, and stretch his neck with a bandage. Then roll back his lips and observe both veins, one on the right side of the lip and the other on the left. The demonstration of each vein is by its darkness, and even more so because in the vicinity of these there are small black veins; then incise each according to the size."
"But if there is doubt and you do not know which one it is, then go for the incision of the largest one, and where there is obvious swelling."
"And make a similar cut on both veins that are on the lips above."
"Of the two veins that are on the left side of the tongue, the benefit is mainly from bloodletting of the cephalic vein for fainting spells in the throat, for disorders of the uvula, and for disorders of the mouth."
"And the method of bloodletting from these veins is as follows: follow the patient while facing the sun, raise his tongue, and observe on the left side of the tongue one vein on one side and another vein on the other side, each with a declining color towards darkness."
"And then perform bloodletting on each one; and beware that you do not exceed in bloodletting from these veins, for on the left side there are arteries."
"And the veins that are bloodletted in the elbow are those which are commonly practiced on all men, and bloodletting from them is done in two ways: either by placing a flebotomy cup with a mirror or olive oil of fine quality; or by cutting with a flebotomy scalpel, called 'alnessil', and this is the method:
"Hold the forceps thus as it is often done, and be careful to open the visible, swollen veins containing thick blood."
"This bloodletting is of lesser width and has a more subtle tip; it is used for bloodletting from fine veins that contain clear, citrus-colored blood."
"May God grant us success in bloodletting from the basilic vein, one of three veins that draws out the bad humors causing illnesses in the chest and the throat, as well as those that affect the feet and the belly."
"And it is important for the phlebotomist to be cautious when performing bloodletting at that location, as there is an artery nearby. If they err and pierce with the phlebotomy needle, they will wound the artery and cause bleeding. Therefore, one should not perform bloodletting there with a pointed phlebotomy needle, but rather use one that is blunt."
"And if the basilica is not apparent by manifest appearance, then you should leave that area and move to another, seeking some branch of it. You may perform bloodletting at the end of the arm where it is clearly visible, using a blunt-tipped phlebotomy needle as we have described."
"And if you wish to perform bloodletting at the elbow, then place yourself in front of the bend of the arm where you can feel the pulse. Press gently with your thumb and locate the vein using a concave section technique with a blunt-tipped phlebotomy needle as described previously. Be careful not to cause injury by piercing too deeply near the artery."
"When you press with strength on the ligament [the pulse], and there is swelling at the location where you pressed gently with your thumb, then that swelling indicates the presence of the artery. Therefore, avoid that area."
"If during bloodletting, the blood flows like a child's urine and is thin and watery, then know that it is arterial blood. At this point, lift your little finger from the wound for some time, and then remove it altogether. If the bleeding stops, as often happens, then press on the arm to staunch the flow and leave off."
"And beware of the wound from the needle's prick, for it may cause swelling and infection if you do not take care to avoid further injury by refraining from activities that might harm it for several days until it is healed."
"But if the bleeding does not stop and you realize that no medicine is present to help this condition, then know that you have pierced the artery. If it appears to you, the extremity will become contracted and the bleeding will cease. Take a piece of lint and apply it there until the bleeding stops, then take one handful of powdered frankincense and sprinkle it on the wound with strict compression using a bandage and lint for several days."
"Then if the bleeding has stopped, that is good. Otherwise, treat it with the remedy mentioned earlier in this chapter on stopping the flow of blood."
"And the cessation of bleeding from such wounds is difficult in many instances due to the small size of the wound and the possibility of pressure on the pulse of the arm."
"However, bloodletting from the dark vein is beneficial for drawing off blood from the upper part of the head and from the left side of the body because it consists of branches of the basilica vein and branches of the cephalic vein, as mentioned previously."
"And the bloodletting site should be chosen carefully during bloodletting from this vein because on its left side there is a nerve. Therefore, if it becomes injured in the phlebotomy puncture and touches the nerve, paralysis may occur and healing will be difficult. Sometimes this nerve appears at the surface, but often it is hidden and subtle and not visible. Thus, when performing bloodletting with an oblique section technique, pause for a moment before inserting the needle to avoid touching the nerve with your strength."
"And if the vein lies between two nerves, then open the vein in the longitudinal direction."
"The benefit of bloodletting from the cephalic vein is that it draws off blood from the head and relieves illnesses of the eyes."
"And specifically in this case, if you wish to perform bloodletting with an olive-shaped or myrtle-shaped needle, it is best suited for this vein because it is the safest of all veins as there are no arteries or nerves on its left side."
"However, sometimes an abscess forms in some people when bloodletting is not performed on the first percussion site, but rather elsewhere."
"The first thing you should know about bloodletting is that it should only be performed in the preservation of health and with hope of benefit and caution against illness. Bloodletting should be done on one of the veins located on the arm, namely the cephalic, dark, or basilica vein, and it should be performed at the beginning of spring after fasting in spring and autumn, and in winter before meals when signs ofpletion appear."
"And bloodletting should be performed on the third day or at least three hours after the start of the day's fast."
"However, bloodletting should be performed when it is deemed necessary and beneficial for the individual, whether it is done in the morning or evening, at any hour and at any time."
"And it should not be performed on children under the age of fourteen; women who are pregnant should not be bled except from the fourth to the seventh month; and elderly people over seventy years old should not be bled."
"And when someone wishes to undergo bloodletting for any reason whatsoever, it is advisable that they cleanse their bowels beforehand with a lion's-claw purgative, especially if there is much retained feces, so that the veins are not filled with superfluities during bloodletting from the intestines, which are purified, and do not harm the main members."
"And patients suffering from sacred disease and drunkenness should not undergo bloodletting until these conditions are removed. Nor should those afflicted with dropsy or any disease accompanied by vomiting be bled, nor when the abdomen is painful or distended. Bloodletting should also be avoided near the time of colic pain, vomiting, diarrhea, excessive sexual activity, hard labor, prolonged fasting or vigil, and any cause that weakens the body or spirit."
"And before bloodletting, it is important to consider the subtlety of the humors, especially if the blood is thick. This can be addressed through diet and drink, as well as medications if appropriate."
"And it is advisable to take a bath beforehand if there is no contraindication, or to exercise somewhat so that the blood may be subtilized."
"And pause bloodletting at the foot of the day, around the hour of terce (approximately 9 am), as we have said earlier."
"Protect the patient's foot from all manner of accidents that day, whether they be mental anguish, anger, fear, or bodily accidents like labor and unnecessary pain."
"And let the physician be present with those remedies used by men that are fragrant and scented, and have balms and similar things according to their possibilities."
"And follow the flebotomist on a couch that has been placed higher than the one on which he is to perform phlebotomy."
"And then he should draw out his arm and rub it with the hand of the flebotomist two or three times. Then he should quickly tie the bandage with a strap and wrap it around twice."
"And let the bandage be moderate in tightness, for if it is too loose, or too tight with excessiveness, it prohibits the flow of blood. Or if it is too slack, it hinders the course of the blood itself."
"And then when the bandage is in place, it is necessary for him who is to undergo phlebotomy to rub his hands together and warm them until the veins are inflated and can be felt."
"And then the phlebotomist should anoint his scalpel with a little of old oil properly. And then he should place his left index finger on that vein where he wishes to perform phlebotomy, allowing the vein to swell slightly so that percussion may determine which vein is suitable for bleeding, as those veins that resemble pulsating cords are not suitable for phlebotomy. Those veins that are full of windiness and contract when pressed are suitable for phlebotomy, and the phlebotomist should place his scalpel on them without opening the vein, and if he does open it, it should be narrow."
"And therefore it is necessary that the phlebotomist be firm and attentive in all these matters."
"And after the phlebotomy is finished, if the vein is emptied in one attempt, that is good. But if not, then it is necessary to repeat this process another time, leaving that place a little, or above it with haste, if the location is not inflamed."
"And if the location is inflamed or the illness worsens, then it is necessary to leave it for a day or two, and not to strain the ligature, because it would draw out an ulcerous inflammation, nor put it in water."
"And then repeat the phlebotomy if desired."
"And if the opening is small and blood flows subtly, and you fear that it will not come out in the desired quantity, then repeat the phlebotomy in that same spot according to rectitude and adjust the opening a little, and do this with haste before the location becomes inflamed, because many men become inflamed even with a small opening."
"But if that location is already inflamed, then do not repeat on it, because there is no cause for you to do so. And press on some part of the wound's edge with a piece of oil-soaked cloth, because this calms the heart of the blood." "And it is better in that location than other oils."
"And similarly, administer oil-soaked cloth in all phlebotomies where veins are opened with the prohibition of blood flow, and they do this with triaca althea and sagzene when pausing one of those on the location because blood is subtilized and stirred when it is thick."
"And if a large inflammation is generated in the location of phlebotomy, because many times this happens, especially to those who were not properly bled or whose vein opening was small, then it is necessary to cauterize, and press on the location with a sponge soaked in water and salt, a little scalded, and hold it there for an hour, because it will dissolve."
"And it is necessary to do this after the extraction of blood from that vein with completion of it or another vein."
"And if there remains in the location for a few days some blackness or greenness, do not worry about it. And if you wish, press on that location with some cause of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or some cause of mint juice or catmint juice or something similar to it."
"And many times apostemata and swellings happen after phlebotomy in the basilica [i.e., church]."
"And therefore press your hand on it, and if by chance you find softness under your compression, then that swelling is bad and harmful. And therefore be careful to press on it with some cause of what we have said, because much blood will flow from the artery."
"And make a plaster with that which has astringent qualities so that the location may endure, and then treat it with another treatment until it is healed."
"And it is necessary to extract blood from every man according to the quantity of his virtue and according to the color that appears above the blood."
"Because if the blood is black, then you should let it flow until it becomes red. And similarly, if you find it thick, then you should let it flow until it becomes subtilized. And similarly, if it is bitter, until its bitterness is mitigated."
"And it is necessary for those who are full and strong and have a need for blood extraction in one session that the phlebotomy of the vein be enlarged and the incision be wide."
"And in those who are weak, do the opposite of that, and it is necessary to extract blood from them in small sessions, and for the spot to be narrow."
"And the best that is administered in phlebotomy of veins is that it should be a transverse section, not a puncture."
"And this manner of phlebotomy is safe from blood flow and nerve incision, and it is more laudable and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude."
"And those to whom syncope is accustomed to occur during phlebotomy, and it is necessary for you to treat them before phlebotomy with a little bread infused in pomegranate wine or simple oxymel slightly scalded; and extract blood from them in three or four sessions."
"And if there is coldness of complexion, then take before phlebotomy bread infused in syrup of myrrh or in aromatic syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and similar ones, or in very fragrant aromatic syrup."
"And if syncope occurs during phlebotomy and it is caused by the extraction of much blood, then it is necessary to drink water of meat and very fragrant syrup. And use aromatics with aloe, and apply them on his forehead with that."
"And use the other causes that we have said in the division in the chapter of syncope by evacuation."
"And those who wish to evacuate their blood and dissolve it in the second session, it is necessary for them that phlebotomy be performed with moderate evacuation, and their virtue should be weak, so that they evacuate blood little by little, according to the quantity of their virtue in consecutive days."
"But those who wish to evacuate their blood and draw it again in the second session, and their body is strong, then do this approximately six or nine hours after the first phlebotomy."
"But those who wish to draw blood from their body in opposition to the part to which it declines, it is necessary for them that it be evacuated on the second day or the third."
"But that body in which there is little blood already scalded and it is acute and causes fever, it is necessary for him to draw blood from it in one session, and extract a large quantity of it, increasing the opening as much as possible before syncope occurs, because you will have kept all the conditions of phlebotomy; and that you place your hand over his pulse near the vein where the blood is drawn, so that death does not occur instead of syncope, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant and negligent."
"And it is not necessary to desire to untie the arms and evacuate blood at will, since once the orifice of the vein is closed, it becomes difficult to draw out the blood; therefore press under it with vehemence and extend it slightly bent, for this is too harmful."
"Have the patient lie down so that they can be flebotomized secondarily; or use this with the sharpness of the flebotome, which is coagulated blood in the orifice of the vein; or press upon it with a compress of tyrian aloe or saffron, and compress it gently until the blood flows out."
"And if the vein is inflamed, leave that one alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided."
"And if there is need to provoke bloodletting secondarily and it is not possible, then you can bleed that person on the other arm or another vein."
"And the vein called 'the rope of the arm' is bleeding in place of the humeral or the basilica veins when they are not apparent or hidden, because it is composed of those."
"And the quality of bleeding from the arm is that the patient puts their hand in cold water until the vein becomes visible and appears manifestly."
"And properly, it should be strengthened over that with a bandage with moderate tension; and properly, bloodletting is done according to the transverse line, not latitudinally nor according to length."
"And let the opening be wide and let your bloodletting be such that you bleed that person over the junction of the hand a little."
"And if the flow of blood is prohibited, then you should immerse your hand in cold water and let the blood run into the water until your need is fulfilled."
"But if you are in the days of summer, then you should excuse yourself from immersing your hand in cold water, because the body's circulation is slowed down by cold water in wintertime."
"And bloodletting from this vein is safer than from all other veins because there are neither pulsating veins nor nerves in it."
"And bloodletting from the wrist of the right hand corresponds to diseases of the liver."
"And the quality of bloodletting from there is that you should strengthen the hand with a bandage or with your hand, because after you have placed it in cold water until the vein becomes inflated and clearly visible; and properly, you should bleed transversely across it; and if it opens completely, do not worry about anything."
"And be sure that you do not leave your hand in the bloodletting because there are nerves exposed without flesh."
"And properly, immerse the hand in cold water and let the blood run into it because if you do not immerse that in cold water, the blood will coagulate at the opening of the vein and flow is prohibited."
"And when blood has been extracted according to the quantity needed, then you should place oil and salt over the vein so that it does not become accidentally coagulated; and similarly, you should do this for any wound."
"But the benefit of bloodletting from that of the left hand is that it corresponds to diseases of the spleen."
"And do similarly in bloodletting from there as you have done in the other one."
"And the benefit of bloodletting from the saphenous vein is for diseases that are in the lower parts of the body, such as diseases of the mother, and retention of menstruation, and for diseases of the joints, ulcers of the skin, and old wounds, and their similar diseases."
"And the quality of bloodletting from there is that the patient should immerse his foot in cold water and rub it until the veins appear well; then he should place a bandage over the junction of the foot and tie it with a rope; and the location of the vein that appears obvious is below the said foot, and from that many branches extend to the surface of the foot."
"And then bleed the largest branch or one near the ankle below its junction because it is better and safer."
"And if you bleed that on the surface of the foot, then beware of the nerves that are near it on the surface of the foot, and pause your bloodletting with whatever vein you are bleeding until it becomes transverse, as if you wanted to cut it."
"And let the bloodletting be sufficient."
"But if the emission of blood is prohibited, then immerse the foot in cold water and let the blood run into it until it has been evacuated."
"And if the bloodletter errs on his first attempt, then he should continue bleeding with the bloodletting tool until it is safe because the location is safe; and do not fear bloodlettion, but beware of nerves as we have said."
"And similarly do for the saphenous vein of the other foot accordingly."
"And as regards the sciatic vein, its location is below the ankle near the outer ankle bone of the lower leg."
"The benefit of bloodletting from it is for pain in the hip when it is due to retained blood."
"And the quality of bloodletting from it is that the patient should enter a bath and quickly rub his thigh from the side of the hip upwards above the ankle with a long thin bandage so that only the vein appears."
"And then when it appears, you should bleed that according to your skill and according to the transverse method, which is better; or cut that with a lancet or tie that with a ligature because its location is safe."
"And it is in many men much obscured. And if you find that one does not appear at all, then bleed some branch of it, and that is the one that appears on the back of the foot near the said little toe and the ring finger."
"And beware of nerves, and let run the blood to the quantity you want."
"And properly untie the bandage and place it over the location of the bloodletting cut and press the location gently because it is easily healed."
"On evacuation and on the qualities of using those (veins)."
"Evacuation occurs through cornuta, or erema, or vein."
"And evacuation is performed in two ways: one of them is with scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is evacuation without scarification."
"And this evacuation that is without scarification is performed in two ways, for it can be done with fire or without fire."
"And the evacuations that are administered with scarification and extraction of blood are fourteen locations in the body, among which one where evacuations are placed is the nose, and it is the last part of the head; and the middle location of it on both sides of the neck similarly; and evacuations from the chin near the jawbone below the mouth; and evacuations from both spatulas; and evacuations from Alohoester, which is over the end of the stomach; and evacuations from two small thighs, which are on both arms; and evacuations from two ankles; and evacuations from two thighs."
"And evacuation does not extract blood but from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and therefore it does not draw the virtue through those, just as bloodletting does not; nor is it necessary that evacuation be done with fire or without fire in any illness caused bypletion within which the entire body has been evacuated."
"But if evacuation is provoked by illness or continuously, administer it at any hour at the beginning of the month and at the end of it, and in the middle of it and at whatever time it may be."
And therefore whenever in some cases of those aforementioned, and especially if it is in the third or mid-month, we command vomiting to be done after the hours passed of two or three days.
And the advantage of vomiting from the stomach is that when it refers to gravity in the head and falls to the eyes, but it should be that this is proper evacuation of the whole body.
And this vomiting is in the place of trepanation of the cephalic area.
It is not right to use him who is of humid complexion, or in whom is catarrh, for it gives great harm.
Therefore it should not be used on those with weak thighs and on the heads of those suffering from humid illnesses.
But upon that it is immediately forgotten about him; and therefore you should command the assistant to pause his hand somewhat away from the cup at the beginning of suction, so as to avoid generating forgetfulness.
But suction with alkahest is in place of phlebotomy of the black vein and the basilica: and therefore it cures asthma, and the constriction of the lung and the cut of the instrument of the lung, and coughing, and fullness.
And it is necessary that the alkahest suction be somewhat repeated, for if it is paused early, it generates weakness in the body and stomach.
And suction with alhagdan cures accidental pains in the head and inflammation of the eyes, migraine, and prefrontal headache, and pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is in place of phlebotomy of the basilica.
And you should command the assistant not to press his hand at scarification so as not to wound the artery and cause a flow of blood.
And suction from the chin cures bad breath in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and the appearance of diseases that are in the mouth, and it is in place of phlebotomy of alihere that are on the two lips.
But suction that is done over the two spatulas cures catarrh, which is caused by fullness of heat.
And suction from between the two parted teeth of the cheeks cures the benefit of phlebotomy of three veins, namely the basilica, black and cephalic, for it attracts the blood from all those large veins that are in the flesh, and those small veins of other veins thicker within which the attraction reaches to the three veins.
And command the assistant not to proceed with scarification, for that place is denuded of flesh, and there are its nerves and arteries exposed.
And it is one suction with which is sucked over the buttocks and cures hemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers that are there.
And you should command the assistant that it be a large suction and that it be of brass, for that place requires strong sectioning; and strong are the subtle attractions that are drawn out by scarification with scarification.
But suction from the camber of the small finger diminishes by diminution manifestly, for it attracts blood from all over the body, and cures old pains of the loins and belly, and of the bladder; and it provokes menses, and cures dropsy and diarrhea; and it is in place of phlebotomy of two sophenes, alahorcoben, and two cavillas.
But great ones weaken the whole body and cause syncope in many men.
And of the suction of the armpits, the benefit is near to the benefit of the suction of two palms.
"The position of the cupping glasses should be placed at the beginning of the vein and followed by gentle suction, not prolonging the position but pausing lightly, retaining those that come comfortably, allowing the humors to gather at their location." "And do not cease to repeat this until you see the place redden and swell, and the color of blood appears."
"Then slowly scratch and repeat the suction little by little, carefully considering the disposition of the veins."
"For that man who has tender flesh and few pores, it is necessary that you scratch him once and not more, so that the place does not become ulcerated."
"And instruct the cupping glass operator to widen the scarification slightly and press a little, applying suction gently."
"If the blood becomes thickened, then it is necessary to scratch twice, because in the first instance the path for subtilization of the blood and its moisture is opened." "But in the second, the precise extraction of thick blood is achieved."
"And if the blood is much fetid, then there should be no scarification on the third attempt so that it achieves its conclusion."
"Finally, when we want to extract blood little by little or a little, one scarification suffices."
"And if we want to extract much blood, we should make many scarifications; but if we know that the blood is thick, then it is necessary to make scarifications with care."
"The term 'scarification' here refers only to the depth of the cut, not its length or width."
"And if the vein is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, then the places for the cupping glasses should be anointed with lenient, resolvent oils such as olive oil or violet oil, or oil of sweet almonds, or oil of cypress; but if it is wintertime, then narcissus oil, or lily oil, or camomile oil, or blood oil should be used for those resembling this."
"And if the superfituity is thick and phlegmatic, then the oil should be amaranthine, or balsamite oil, or aloe oil, or aneth oil, and those resembling them."
"But if the cupping glass is of wide pores and tender flesh, then it should be prohibited from oil, and the places for cupping near its approach should be washed with warm or hot water of solatrum, or cypress water, or Bordeaux water, and those resembling them."
"And for that person whose blood has great humidity, wash their cupping glasses with sour wine or myrtle and sumac water, and those resembling them."
"And for that person whose superfituities are thick, wash their cupping glasses with old wine or water of hyssop, which is marjoram, or decoction of aneth, or chamomile, and those resembling them."
"It is necessary that cupping be performed before bathing. It should be administered near the time of bathing for one or two hours, and it is necessary to sleep after cupping."
"What is it that makes it necessary for a person who is going to be cupped to regulate himself before cupping?"
"At the beginning, if the person performing cupping or phlebotomy is choleric and vents upon hot blood and inflammation, then they should take cooling causes such as sour mulberries, endives with vinegar and lettuce, secanabin, julep, and those resembling them."
"And pause from foods such as polets, roasted meats of birds, and dishes seasoned with vinegar and those resembling them."
"And for that person whose complexion is phlegmatic, they should take to drink iris syrup with honey or iris syrup of seeds and sumac, and mild aromatic wine between old and new; and it should be recommended that they use moderation in drinking and eating, and avoid foods such as polets, cannabis, pheasants, small birds, and doves."
"And it is necessary that on the day of cupping and phlebotomy, drinking should be greater than eating."
"And it is necessary to give some men tyriaca alpharac or muscatel wine, musc drug, or alcelet before cupping or phlebotomy, or during them, so that the principal members may be comforted and the blood subtilized; but they should not take that scald."
"But cupping that is not accompanied by scarification are those that are performed for the liver's sake, and on the spleen and gout, and on the navel, in the joints of the ankles, and the hollow of the knee, because these members do not tolerate scarification upon them."
"And it is not sought in those cases except for the attraction of blood from members, such as placing a cupping glass on the breast in a disease of bloody flux of the nose; and use is made of it so that phlegmatic cupping may be dissolved and removed from the member, such as placing it on the belly and navel; because that rarifies the member and scales it, and relieves pain by resolving cupping."
"And cupping is applied to the temples when it occurs in their congestion or fever, because by virtue of strong attraction it draws out oppression and expels fever from its place."
"And similarly it does when it is applied to the liver and spleen for their cupping in those enclosed."
"These cupping glasses are administered wet with suction alone; but some are administered with fire."
"And sometimes they are administered full of hot water in diseases of the spleen."
"And that is why the cupping glass may be filled and made larger, such as with hot water alone or water in which herbs suitable for that purpose have been cooked."
"The method of cupping administered with fire: the circumference of its opening should be about two fingers wide as we have formed it; and the quantity of the powder should be half a palmful; and it should be placed on the side, in the place that is in the circuit, at most half full; and the wick should be small according to the quantity that goes into it through a needle."
"It should be made of red wax or citron wax, thick margins, lion's fat, egg yolks, and clear honey, so that the member does not feel pain because of its position on it."
"And let there be in the middle of it a transverse wick of wax or iron, on which the candle with fire is placed."
"And this cupping glass should be much larger than that which we have recommended; and the small one smaller according to the diseases and the condition of the person who uses it."
"And the cupping glasses for children and those who are weak should be different from those used for young people and robust persons."
"The quality of placing this cupping glass with fire on the member is that you should light the wick with fire from a small candle of wax before a few logs of dry wood, and place it on the middle of the transverse wick in the middle of the cupping glass, so that the fire may be kindled around its edge without burning the skin of the patient."
"And then it should be applied to the member of the patient, and let there be on the wick that we have mentioned, until when you hold the cupping glasses and do not need to keep your finger over that wick, because the vapor has come out onto it, then the cupping glass will soon dissolve."
"And then extinguish the wick according to its manner, and repeat that if necessary."
"In a cupping procedure administered for the disease of pleurisy, with water in which there is neither transverse nor crosswise thread, and not administered unless filled with water, and placed upon the limb alone."
"The larger this cupping glass is, the better it is, because it can hold more water."
"Chapter 97."
"Bloodletting is not performed on small members where it is not possible to apply cupping glasses due to their small size, such as the toes and gums and similar ones; or on bare flesh, such as the fingertips and nose and their like."
"And it is better to use those that have found leeches in clean waters of rivers."
"And they should be placed day and night in clean river water until they are hungry, and there is no cause left in their bellies; and the body should be emptied at the beginning with phlebotomy and cupping; and the limb of the sick person should be rubbed until it becomes reddened; and they should be placed on top of it."
"And when they are full, they should be removed."
"If it is possible to suck out the spot with cupping, it is better to do so in healing."
"Otherwise, wash the spot with sour wine and also with plenty of water; and rub and squeeze it out."
"If the body of blood is prolonged by the biting of the leeches and it is necessary to dissolve them, then you should put a cloth soaked in hot water on top until the coagulation is absorbed."
"And if the blood is multiplied, then powdered vitriol trisulfate should be sprinkled on it, or dried gallstones and similar ones of styptic causes until the blood is coagulated; or the major part of cooked fava beans should be placed on top of the spot, and left until the beans stick to the spot, and the blood is coagulated."
"And if necessary, itching with leeches should be repeated, whenever possible changing them."
"If the use of leeches is prohibited by suspension, then rub the spot with fresh blood or stick a needle into it until some blood comes out; and also place them there, because those creatures are attracted as soon as they sense any blood."
"When you want them to let go, sprinkle some powdered aloe, salt or ash on them and they will soon detach."
"And thus begins the prologue of the third part: On Restoration." "This chapter is very necessary in the art of medicine, and it deals with the restoration of fractures and accidental dislocations of bones."
"Oh, son, know that many foolish doctors and laymen boast about this chapter who at no time regard the books of the Ancients nor read even a single letter from them."
"And because of this reason, the manner of the sciences in our land has become private; and you have not forgotten this in any way during your lifetime; and I have not added what follows, except for the length of reading the books of the Ancients and study on the understanding of them, among which I have extracted the science from them."
"And therefore I direct myself to experiment and study throughout the length of my life."
"And I have already described in this chapter all that contains my science and on which my experiment has passed; because here I have abbreviated it for you others and delivered it from the occupation of lengthening; and abbreviated it in the end of abbreviation; and shown it in the end of declaration; and formed in it many forms of instruments that were administered there, as is done by addition of declaration, as I have done in two preceding chapters."
"Chapter One."
"Summaries and collections from the consideration of fractures of bones, from which a preamble is necessary before we begin to remember the members broken and diverse in each." "Therefore it is necessary that I say in the prologue of this chapter the summaries of the sermon, and the chapters for the understanding of which in the beginning the artisans are forced and to stand on the truth of them; so it is you and those who are prompt who know or learn this noble art other than you."
"And therefore I say that when it happens to someone fracture or dislocation or torsion or crushing, it is necessary at the beginning that you choose either flebotomy or bleeding him, or sometimes both, if no prohibition prevents it, such as debility of virtue, or if he is a child, or old in decrepitude, or it is time of vehement heat or cold."
"And it is appropriate that he be content with his diet of fresh herbs and of the flesh of birds and crabs; and prohibit fats meats and filling foods and all food that fills the veins with blood, lest you are sure of a safe cauterization and if you do not fear effusion of matter in the member."
"And therefore return the sick to his first regimen with which he is accustomed."
"And therefore when the broken bone begins to be restored, it is necessary that the sick person be nourished with foods rich in nourishment and heavy and thick, in which there is viscosity, such as foods made from wheat cooked with water, rice, meat, intestines of oxen, fat, fresh fish, thick wine and similar ones; and with this regimen coagulation of fracture occurs more gently and better."
"And know that bones broken in the first youth or in the decrepit ones cannot be joined and consolidated according to their nature due to the dryness of the members thereof."
"But nonetheless nature adjusts and connects the broken bone of any part with some cause similar to glue in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens it until they are together conglutinated and joined together, until the end of fortitude and firmness comes, such as fire at the beginning, provided that no cause prevents it from its work."
"And for this reason it is necessary that you reduce the diet of the sick person to foods in which there is gravity and viscosity and thickness, such as we have said."
"And know that the species of fracture are diverse according to the diversity of the members, for a fracture of the bone of the leg is different from a fracture of the bone of the head; and a fracture of the bone of the foot is different from a fracture of the bone of the arm, and similarly all other members are diverse among themselves."
"And I come with memory of every species of fracture, explained in its own chapter, separate from the others."
"Great diversity within itself." "And the species of bone fracture are diversified within themselves; for an arched fracture occurs differently than what happens in its stars, and sometimes it occurs according to the length of the bone: these are the fractures of the satagia and stars and additional ones that do not proceed, such as those that occur in the pen when it is prepared to write, and there is a fracture with plague and disruption in the head, and there is a small fissure fracture."
"And for each species there is a proper treatment in its restoration according to what will come later, explained separately in their places."
"Great sign of bone fracture." "And for this reason bone fracture is known: its tortuosity and the prominence and roughness of it to the touch, and that you perceive it with your hand."
"And therefore when there is no apparent tortuosity nor is it done by your touch when you touch the bone with agitation and the sick person does not feel great pain, then there is no fracture here."
"It is possible that there may be tortuosity or a small fissure, therefore you should not move it with your hand nor compress it entirely; rather pause on it with the medicines of which mention will be made at that moment suitable to the place; and especially let it be tightened by subtle straitness."
"And know that when the place is arched and not split into two or anything else does not happen in its satagia, since all its parts are removed, then it is necessary for you to begin immediately its rectification with this, provided that an incautious apostema occurs there."
"And if an incautious apostema occurs there, then leave it alone for some days until the apostema ceases; and afterwards reduce it according to each manner that you can of elevation and treatment."
"And know that restoration and union of the bone is easier than that in which satagia occurs."
"And especially strengthen it according to what will come later its mention."
"But if satagia occurs in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken member from both parts, if it is the hand or the foot; or with your hand if the member is small; or with two cords or with one cord and your hand."
"And let your position be such that you stop the member in its natural figure while the parts of the broken member are extended, then it is necessary for you to persevere in returning those additional ones with treatment and according to each manner suitable in their places."
"And watch according to your ability that you do not cause harm to the sick person through your operation of them nor injury; and persevere according to your ability in applying one bone to its companion according to their best forms."
"And it is necessary for you to touch it appropriately at that time with your hand, and if sometimes some different cause occurs here, then rectify it and reduce it according to the quantity of your virtue."
"And avoid violent extension and compression, as many foolish physicians do who often cause an incautious apostema through their operation, or cause contraction in the member, as we have seen this happen many times due to their operation."
"The condition of the fracture of the limb is as follows: know that broken limbs are varied in their thinness, size, and shape."
"And of those that are small, such as the arm, the hand, and the foot, it is necessary for the dressing to be made with very fine cloth."
"But those that are large, such as the thigh or the leg, must be dressed with a hard, tough fabric, because a tight dressing connects the limb closely together on all sides with a strong bandage."
"And then, gradually and carefully, begin your bandaging from the location of that fracture with three or four layers according to what the limb deserves, using a moderate amount of linen; and firmly press it with your hand using the linen."
"And then go up to where the upper part of the fracture begins and make your bandage tighter there than you have made it elsewhere." "And then extend the dressing from the location of the fracture a little ways down and gradually loosen the bandage until you take up about half of its length."
"And then take another bandage and wind it around again over the location of the fracture with a dressing, and go back up along the dressings beyond the fracture; and your operation should be to tighten the dressing in its strapping and loosen that which we have mentioned above in the first dressing."
"And then pause between the layers of linen or cloth with which you have wrapped the fracture if it is bent; and if not, do not pause there for any reason."
"And then pause over the other bandage and then wrap these layers decently around it, so long as there is no inflammation or abscess cautery in that location. And afterwards pause over what sits on top of the abscess or swelling; let that be for some days; and then you can tighten the dressings."
"And let the splints be of mature cane that is well-formed; or they may be made of oak wood or palm branches; and let the width of each splint be according to this pattern and figure:"
"However, the splint that is placed over that fracture should be thicker and wider than the other splints, and its length according to how much the limb measures in magnitude and smallness. And then tighten the splints with another bandage according to your first strapping; and then lay them gently on top of each other as we have mentioned above concerning strapping, so that your strapping may be according to the location of the fracture, more so the closer it is to the fracture, and the further away from the fracture, the less tight it should be."
"And it is necessary that the threads be medium in thickness and fineness, and made of linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen some foolish people doing when they tie their threads with cords of twisted flax, this is a great error when the strapping becomes uneven."
"And also very fine threads are not suitable because you will not be able to strapping with them as you wish, and there should be at least the thickness of a finger between splint and splint."
"And if the patient feels pain at the ends of the splints near the strapping in the raw places, then pause over those with linen or wool wadding until that does not cause him injury."
"Sometimes a fracture is with plague and occurs disruption in the elbow, as I remember in that one mentioned in the chapter on peculiarities."
"And know that not every broken limb should be immediately splinted on the first day; for which reason is that when a limb is large, it is not necessary to pause over splints until about five or seven days have passed, according to your certainty of the advent of an abscess."
"And this is the way in which the ancient embalmers used splints to restore fractures, dislocations and deformities."
"Way of splinting commonly used for the restoration of fractures, convenient for many complexities and especially for women and children, because it does not allow heat or friction; and that you take powdered chalk, which is the marrow of flour that you must take from the movement of the millstone on the walls of the mill."
"And prepare it thus as is, except that you sieve it with egg white and apply the mixture neither too thick nor too thin."
"Another way of splinting for the restoration of fractures, dislocations and deformities: take asafetida, laudanum, acacia, enula, and millet flour which is rye ground with all things mixed together in equal amounts; mirra and aloins each five drachms; alochil twenty drachms; all are finely powdered and sieved and mixed with water of aloe or egg white if the condition of the patient is scabbed. And apply this plaster, for it is of good composition and restores lightly broken bones, and it is suitable for many people."
"Another way of splinting that suits fractures and deformities: take millet flour and white lead each ten drachms, mirra and aloins each five drachms, acacia six drachms, and dragon's blood twenty drachms."
"All are ground in a mortar with much trouble, sifted, and mixed with water or egg white to be administered."
"Way of splinting for joints and bones separated from their places, and also for pains that happen in those parts and for fissures and fractures: take clean wool and immerse it in vinegar and oil of cypress and apply it to the place."
"But in this plaster there is virtue of restoration, of drawing out an abscess, and expelling pains specifically."
"Another way to make a plaster that restores broken bones: take leaves of fig tree and leaves of wild poppy; count them all and make a plaster of them."
"Way of making a plaster briefly administered for the restoration of fractures of bone and when you want resolution of the remaining abscess: take powders of white lead, chamomile flowers, violet flowers, barley flour, all equal parts; grind them all and mix them with wine if the limb is not inflamed."
"But if it is inflamed, then prepare it with water of fresh coriander or water and apply it."
"Another way of making a plaster even stronger in resolution than the first one when there occurs a hard abscess during the restoration of the limb: take powders of white lead and its seeds, balm, millet flour, marjoram flowers, violet flowers, chamomile flowers, all equal parts cooked together; grind them all and mix them with water of willow or sweet water or wine, according to the quality of the limb and the rest of its color."
"But Hippocrates does not specify in his book that splints should be applied to the broken limb during its restoration, but rather wax made of wax and oil only for no other reason; and he recommends that it should be medium between thickness and subtlety."
"But in Galen it is seen that splints should be applied to the broken limb during its restoration and the causes for which there is drying with little heat are as follows: such as mirra, incense, and similar ones of those causes that we have recommended."
"Way of making a plaster that alleviates injury and pain: take myrrh, resin, human skin shavings or bird feathers, white lead, salt equal parts ground together; grind them and sift them and mix them to make a plaster."
If the amount by which the ligature should remain and then be untied is such that you consider whether pain or pressure has occurred nor the bone broken from its place, then do not untie too quickly. And if intense pain or pressure or inflammation occurs there, then you should cut it or untie it at that moment and apply the plaster to it.
Take linen cloth and sea sponge moistened in warm water, submerge it in tepid water, and with that wash the internal part until pressure and pain cease; then let the limb rest for an hour. Afterwards, apply poultice made of flaxseed submerged in vinegar and oil or rose oil, and lay it on it for a night so that you are sure of cauterizing the apostema and that the inflammation of the limb has subsided and its pain is relieved.
Then iterate that subtle ligature and apply a small plaster and not tighten too much with your first tightening, and subtly continue until it is healed.
And if at times the apostema and heat and pain and inflammation and all accidents are completely relieved, and you need plaster and ligature, then repeat that as you did at the beginning.
And if no cause of those mentioned occurs in the limb, then you should not untie it but let it remain for three or four days or five or seven; and sometimes all that is left is for twenty days according to what appears to you through the untying of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres and approaches coagulation of the flesh on that.
Then tighten the ligature more than your first tightening completely, and adjust it according to the thickness of the flesh of the sick person, according to what is remembered about it.
But if the place of the fracture dries and wastes more than it should, then know that nourishment is prohibited from coming to that area. Therefore, moisten that with warm water every time you untie it, and do this for all three days; and loosen the ligature a little, and through this operation the limb receives nourishment and is easily healed.
But what foolish restorers of the fracture of the limb do at another time when it is not restored at first, according to what is necessary, and is restored crookedly, is an error according to their operation, and great fear, and if that were rightly done the Ancients increased in their books and taught with that operated.
And I have not seen any of them do that, so it is more reasonable that they should not do it.
Chapter Second: Of fracture when it occurs in the head
The types of fractures are many, and their figures are diverse, and their causes are distinct. For some fractures are caused by the impact of a blow, which shatters all the bone inside the skull, leaving the bone behind, just as it happens in wood, and this species is called "crushed"; or the blow cuts through some part of the bone without entering the brain, only cutting into the flesh of it; and this species of fracture is called "complete removal".
The pain of these two fractures is either great or slight, and the cause of it is percussion with heavy force on bone.
This fracture may be penetrating and close to the muscle, or it may be on the bone's surface. The pain of these two fractures is either great or slight.
This fracture is hairline and thin like the finest thread of hair.
This fracture is made either by falling or by being struck on the bone. It causes some of the bone's lamellae to enter its interior, and it occurs in the concave location, as happens with sparrows when they are struck and their bones become split from within.
This commonly occurs in the bodies of moist bones, such as the heads of infants.
And so, all these types of fractures are like stars separated from each other. And I have spoken about all this in its proper place.
I know all these types of fracture through detection by touch, and through inquiry using probes and the smell of rotting flesh that is on them.
The capillary type fracture is recognized in this way: it appears as an opening on the bone, which can be wiped away. When it is felt with a probe, it looks black.
In the treatment of fractures, first consider the symptoms of the illness. Then, if you see signs that indicate pain that is obvious and manifest, such as vomiting due to cholera, extension, loss of consciousness, fainting spells, fever, sweating from the eyes and reddening of those areas, and similar accidents in the greater parts of the body, do not attempt to heal it until it is clear.
And if you see non-current accidents (i.e., symptoms that are not typical of fractures), then you can begin treating the fracture.
"The cause of this is that if it has come to you lately in the beginning as it was and it is now during the winter days, then it is necessary for you to study the bone before the day 14th according to all disposition."
"And if it is during the summer days, then you must remove the bone before the seventh day, having made sure that what remains of the bone is corrupted with the flesh, and that the accidents we have mentioned occur."
"And if the fracture has already reached the flesh covering the brain, and is in several small parts and crushed, then you must insert the compressed and crushed powder, according to what I will tell you."
"And if the head of the patient is affected by the disease, and you uncover it according to your custom and manner as much as possible following the figure of the disease, and that it be light upon the patient."
"And if it happens to you that you detect the bone with blood flowing or a hot boil, then you should pause with this, and it is appropriate that you prepare a place with cloths infused in wine and rose oil, and let the disease rest until the boil is sedated, and be sure of the flow of blood; and then begin in the circumcision of the bone and its ablation."
"And this is according to one of two operative methods."
"And the first method is that you insert the bone with a straight incision of this form:
And next, administer more of the incisors but broader than the second ones.
You must have several different incisors available, some of which are broader than others; some are shorter than others and should be very sharp at their tips, made of iron or steel.
And use them with ease in percussion to ensure you do not hit the head and hurt that person
And if the bone is strong and hard, you should then drill around it first before administering the chisels with the non-depth gauges
And they are not called thus but rather those which do not exceed the limit of the bone of the head at that point where it is near because at the chisel's rounded end or edge above it, there should be a margin on either side of the sharp point similar to an edge or small circle, which prevents being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
It is advisable that you take many of these gauges, each convenient for the thickness of each bone, so that for every skull present, the tip of the gauge should be sharp and its length and width should correspond to the thickness of that skull.
And this is the shape of three types of gauges:
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os: "Then proceed to cut with scissors between each track of the bone:"
"And be sure to take all precautions so that the scissors do not touch any part of the hip."
"And then when you have circumcised the bone and separated it from the hip if it is attached to it, take out that piece with care, scraping and polishing it on its roughness in order that it may be as thin and subtle as possible."
"And if any fragment of the little bones escapes and is lost, then promptly take it with the suitable tool."
"And the other way of operating is light and free from fear, which Guglielmo Guadagni describes with great praise; this is his method:
The lens-shaped incision is made first and no cause is inscribed. The acute incision is made in two directions ahead in length thus: so that the lens-shaped incision fits onto the hip joint with the sharp edge of the bone incident upon it.
You should percuss the incision edges of one section with a small hammer that incises all the bone easily as it is turned. And you should be sure of the paniculus [sic] so that no accident happens in any manner. Certainly, if the medicant was the most foolish of all men and the most ignorant of them; certainly, he was asleep.
If the panniculous causes any attachment to the bone in certain places, incise that of it with the extremity of the lenticular incision and detach that from it easily; for it is detached from it without harm or fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the panniculus, and that which is cut off or remains on the bone is its face, being rough and with subtle points, then it is necessary to scrape that roughness and eradicate those points with sharp razors prepared for the number, of diverse quantities so that you can administer them in all places where they are most convenient and straight according to how you have planned your operation upon that broken bone and the figure of it.
And it is necessary that you use in your razing of the bone at its beginning the widest razor that you have, and gradually use the narrower ones, and do not cease doing so continuously until you arrive to administer the thinnest and sharpest one of all.
But in each of the other small capillary fractures and subtle fractures, you should administer cure according to how you have planned for their rectification.
And it is cause that it should not be diminished among all those who have studied in this art. And this is what we have shown concerning the treatment of large fractures
And if the panniculus is torn when you eradicate the bone, then you should take cloth according to the quantity of the wound and immerse it in rose oil and place it upon the opening of the wound. Then take another folded or tripled cloth, immerse it in wine and rose oil, and place it upon the first cloth and do this as lightly as possible so that you do not press down on the flesh; then apply a thick bandage and do not bind it too tightly but only according to the quantity that the wound can take alone.
And leave it with this cure for one or two days until you are sure that there is no impending abscess. Then untie it and apply medications which promote dryness, such as linseed ointment, powdered frankincense and aloe, and similar powders.
And you should make these medications into powders which are finely powdered and applied dry upon the wound. Generally speaking, apply whatever medicine has the property of cleaning and not irritating.
And guard with your skill that the wound in your care is clean and not surging with moisture or any other impurity. Do not allow it to become virulent, for when it becomes attached to the panniculus of the brain, it corrupts it and causes illness, sometimes even a malignant one.
And it happens in the flesh of the head, especially when the bone has been freed and during the care of it, that blackness appears on its surface. And therefore consider at this time if you are suffering from any of the accidents which we have mentioned, for then you will know that they are incurable without doubt.
And if there is no blackness except from the medication which has been applied, and that medication causes this blackness, then you should take a portion of honey and three portions of rose oil, mix them together with a cloth, and place it upon the flesh. Then treat it according to the appropriate methods until it heals.
Chapter III
Concerning the restoration of the nose when it is crushed
Know that the nose is not broken except when both parts are crushed simultaneously and lifted up, or one of them is displaced. For there are two bones in it, with the cartilaginous part being unbroken; nothing happens to it except friction, distortion, and curvature.
But if one of the two parts of it is broken, then you should insert your little finger into its opening and reduce that fracture from within using your thumb and index finger from outside until the nose returns to its natural shape. And may you do this with ease, but be careful not to cause harm to the patient during your operation.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose and your finger cannot reach it, then use a probe with a small thickness at its end to reduce the fracture.
And if the fracture is in both parts, then follow this procedure accordingly.
Be careful to restore it on the first day after the fracture if possible; but if not, then you should wait until the seventh or eighth day until the swelling has subsided.
And then insert into the tip of the nose a wick made from linen cloth if the fracture is in one part, or two cotton swabs if it is in both parts, with their thickness being enough to fill the space within the nose.
Some ancient restorers say that the cotton swabs should be wrapped in wool and changed every day, but this is not visible to me. Instead, the wick should be soaked in egg white mixed with rose oil powder, and then left in place until the bone has set and the cartilage has hardened.
Sometimes, instead of cotton swabs, a pledget made from linen cloth is inserted into the nose, but this should only be done when there is no inflammation and when the fracture of the nose is not severe enough to prevent breathing.
This method is not necessary for you, so if you wish, do it this way, but if you prefer, use cotton swabs instead.
But if there is another swelling, apply to the nose cerote or cotton soaked in vinegar and rose oil, or use diacylion.
But if there is no swelling, then apply externally to the nose a mixture of sesame flour and powdered rose oil with egg white. Then cover it with a linen bandage and do not allow the patient to blow their nose for any reason.
But if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or are crushed together, then you should cut over them and extract those which need to be removed using appropriate instruments. Then close the incision and treat it with something that stimulates healing and promotes consolidation, along with suitable plasters.
And if there is an ulcer inside the nose, then you should treat it with cotton swabs and administer leaden tubes until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV
Concerning the restoration of the jaw when it is crushed
When the left jawbone is broken and the fracture does not involve an ulcer, first examine whether the fracture is only external, with the bone being broken into two parts and bent inward at its ends. If this is the case, then recognizing it will be easy.
And then, if the fracture is on the right side, insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth and press gently on the swelling of the fracture from inside with your other hand placed outside the bone. Do the same if the fracture is on the left jawbone, using your right index finger instead.
"If the fracture of the jawbone is already separated into two parts, then you must apply extension to both parts according to the straightness between them in order for it to be possible to bring them together."
"If it happens that some teeth are loose or displaced, then reinforce those which you expect will break with gold or silver wire or gutta-percha; and first apply a compress over the broken jawbone and another over the doubled cloth, and one over the large round pad properly made, or a rolled-up bandage along the length of the jawbone. Then tie it down above according to how you have prepared its binding and what seems appropriate, so that it is not destroyed."
"Command the patient to rest and be calm, and keep their diet soft and liquid."
"If you notice that the figure has already been altered in some way, then on the third day cut and remove it; and then correct what is already altered from it and apply plaster with powdered chalk, album of egg white, or semolina flour, since you will have removed the compress from it, and cover it with a soft linen dressing."
"And then when the plaster is attached and adjusted over it, and if the position of the bone is not altered, leave it alone until it is healed and the fracture has become strong; for many times this fracture becomes firm in three weeks."
"And if another time an abscess occurs, then administer what has been said many times in the treatment of it until it is healed and the abscess is removed."
"And if the fracture is with pus, then consider whether it is separated or connected; and if it is connected, then carefully remove those connections with what seems appropriate for their removal by means of the instruments."
"And if the opening of the pus is narrow, then widen it with a trocar according to your necessity."
"And then when you have removed those connections and if there is nothing remaining from them, then close the opening of the pus if it is large; but if not, then cover it with one of the plasters that seems appropriate for it and bind it until it is healed."
Capítulo V.
Chapter on restoring the clavicle when it is broken.
"Very often the collarbone breaks at its starting point in front of the muscle; this fracture occurs in one of three ways."
When it is broken, separated or separated into two parts without any displacement; and its restoration is easy;
"And during that operation, when the fracture is not yet set, have two assistants present: one to hold the crutch and follow the broken collarbone, and the other to extend the patient's neck towards that direction."
"And then bring together the ends of the fracture in such a way that it matches its original shape as closely as possible, ensuring there are no gaps or depressions."
"And if more extension is needed, then place a pad of cloth or wool behind the patient's chest and shoulder, whose size should correspond to your needs; extend and raise the collarbone using this pad and press it with your hand while bringing together the fracture as necessary."
"And if you cannot bring the end of the collarbone to its proper position outside, then have the patient lie on their back and place a rolled-up towel of appropriate size under the shoulder blade on the affected side."
"And the assistant presses on the shoulder blade at its upper edge until the collarbone is raised and returned to its proper position; then you can reduce the fracture and bring together the ends as needed."
"But if you feel spurs or projections from the collarbone that are sharp and painful, then you should cut over them and remove those projections with ease."
"And if it is retained within the bone, then you should make an incision into it using one of the incising instruments that you have brought with you for this purpose, since you had placed the collarbone on a wooden or iron instrument that serves as a splint; and this is the shape of such an instrument:"
"And it resembles a spoon with this concavity; and its width should be according to your needs, corresponding to the size of the bone or the depth of the incision."
"But its length should be as short as possible for the operation; it should have two ends, one of which is wide and the other narrow."
"But if the tear in the pleura that you have made when removing the spur from the bone is large and you are certain of an impending abscess, then you should approximate the two edges of the pleura with sutures."
"But if the tear is small or you suspect an impending abscess, then you should fill the pleura with dressings and powders according to the size of the pleural opening."
"And if an abscess occurs, then apply a dressing made of wine vinegar, rose oil, and wine, and place it over that [abscess]."
"And all of this is done so that the bandage does not slip off the broken bone; and therefore, you should check it each day to see if the wound has softened or if the bandage has slipped; and then you should adjust and tighten the bandage accordingly."
"And also have the patient sleep on his back with his elbow elevated slightly off to the side of him at night; so that this helps elevate the broken collarbone away from the chest or prevents the arm from being pressed against the neck."
"And do not remove the bandage unless it occurs in its proper place or there is an abscess, within twelve days."
"And also renew the plaster if you see any discharge from it; adjust the bandage and restore that [bone], and leave it until it is restored and the collarbone fracture has healed."
"And it becomes strong and comfortable in about twenty-eight days, although in some men it may take less time than that."
Chapter VI
About the healing of fractures of the shoulder.
The blade of the scapula is broken on its lateral side and not just its edge but also its margins.
"Therefore, when the spot is broken - and it is broken in the middle of him - and it is known only by touch, then according to what is the shape of the fracture you should prepare for him and reduce that according to its natural figure in every way that is possible for you."
"And then pause on the powder of ground aloe with albumen of egg and stop the bleeding; and then pause with doubled gauze poultice; and then pause on him with a subtle silvered table spoon according to the quantity of the whole spatula or a little more."
"If however the spoon has concavity in some of its places, then you should fill that concavity with stopple and then gently place the spoon according to equality."
"And then strengthen it above with a long humid bandage with proper constriction and with firmness of the spoon within that it not be removed from its place."
"And consider the dressing every day. And whenever it is softened, change it on another occasion and strengthen it and place the spoon if it has been removed from its place."
"And judge the illness upon his own face."
"And the spoon is restored in 20 days or at most 25."
"And when this number is completed, then you should dissolve the dressing, and know for certain that what has been accomplished belongs to those bones whose union is not feared nor their dissolution."
"And if you are proceeding from the location of the heavy bone and place your finger there, then you should incise over it, drain it, and do according to what we have said in the fracture of the clavicle of suction of abscess if it occurs here."
"Chapter VII."
"Of the restoration of a fracture of the foot."
"Sometimes, especially in the middle of labor, the woman's pelvis breaks and this often happens suddenly; but its extremities move more slowly that they are curved and shattered."
"And when the woman's pelvis breaks during childbirth, it tends to lean towards the inside and causes accidents such as intense pain, difficulty breathing, coughing, strong bleeding, and the cavity of the broken bone is evident to the touch."
"And the treatment of this is that the sick woman should be placed on her back, and a cushion should be placed between her thighs; and carefully press down on her muscles, adjust her spine with the support of two pillows, and take care in the operation according to all possible manner and what is convenient for her, until the figure of the bone returns to its proper place."
"And carefully place gauze and cotton on the plaster, and then place a subtle tablecloth of flax or calico on top, because you will wrap it in cloth; and carefully place that over the broken bone so that no harm comes to it; and wrap it around the back with bandages according to its shape several times, and tighten it with proper binding; and always check the bandage and when it becomes moist, tighten it."
"And if it is necessary to remove the bandage due to discomfort or pressure, pain, or an abscess that occurs in the area, then carefully cut and untie that and remove the plaster, and rectify what has happened there with a manner of treating it; and also reduce the plaster, sometimes on the face; and adjust the binding until it is healed."
"Chapter VIII."
"On the Treatment of Broken Ribs."
"You should know that fractures of the ribs only occur in large places where they are located on the back, and at the extremities of their ends towards the front, no great injury occurs to them except for those which are cartilaginous." "Understanding of him is not concealed from feeling through his interrogation with said devices."
"And the reduction was as good as possible with the devices according to the method available, ensuring that it is well set according to what was necessary. Then apply plaster and strengthen the broken bone with steel if needed."
"If the fracture of the ribs is displaced inward, then intense pain and sharp puncture occur, similar to that which happens to those who have cried. Because of this, when the bone pierces the pleura, difficulty in breathing, coughing, vomiting much blood occurs; and this is difficult to cure."
"And already the Ancients knew how to treat it with many ingenious methods."
"And they also said this: it is necessary to pause from eating foods that cause inflammation and wind, so that the belly may be inflated and extended, causing the fracture to be pushed outward."
"But we would not advise this for fear that it may easily cause an abscess to form if it has not already happened. And if it has already happened, then it will help with that."
"And some of them said that it is necessary to pause from windy foods and immediately suck with force. This seems reasonable, but however, it is feared that the wind may drive the excesses to the location due to weakness."
"And some of them said: it is necessary to cover the location with wool that has already been submerged in hot oil, and let powders be placed between the ribs until it is filled. Then wrap it according to its roundness; and immediately treat the illness with pleurisy medication."
"And if the illness causes violent pain that is not tolerated, and the bone pierces the pleura with sharp punctures, then fear about the illness arises. Therefore, it is necessary to open on the location, uncovering the broken rib, and immediately place above that instrument which preserves the cicatrix, the remembrance of which has been preceded, and to cut the bone with ease and remove it."
"And immediately join the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with stitching, and treat it with plasters until it is healed."
"And if an abscess happens inside, then immediately take and put powders made from roasted oil and place them on the location. And treat the illness with what is necessary for the internal abscess."
"And let him be propped up on pillows on the side on which he sleeps, until he is healed."
"Chapter nine."
"On the restoration of spinal fractures in the lumbar spine and neck."
Sometimes fracture occurs in the bones of the neck, and starts to move them apart, and similarly in the vertebrae of the back. If this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, consider that if often the muscles are already softened, stunned, deadened, and cannot move them, extend them, nor contract them. When you press them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and they do not feel pain there, then you know it is not healing. In such cases it is mortal.
If those (bones) move and are felt to be constrained with the said points, then you know that the neck of the bone is saved and the patient will recover with treatment.
If you see the spine of the neck resembling this (indicating) and want to know if it will heal or not, then consider its size.
Then if you see that it is already softened, it has happened to those as it happens in most cases, and especially when lying on its back, it becomes ventilated and evacuates without control, and sometimes it is suddenly raised on its back and wants to urinate but cannot. Then you know that it is mortal, and therefore do not attempt to treat it.
But if none of those things happen, the case is better and easier (to treat).
The treatment of it is to apply compresses soaked in hot water over the injured spine or grease made from onions and honey; apply it several times a day until the hard swelling is softened.
Then apply one of the comforting and soothing plasters over that with linen; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility, avoiding sleeping on the painful part until they are healed.
And if a fracture of the bone is suspected or any cause that has already separated from it occurs, then it must be immobilized on a splint and that bone must be kept at rest. And especially join the two lips of the wound with stitches if it is large; and also treat it with some ointment for wounds until it is healed.
But if the end of the bone is broken off and it is the hip joint, then you must insert the thumb of your left hand into the anus and grasp the broken bone with your other hand as much as possible according to the position. And apply plaster and bandage over it, if necessary, and also support it.
And if you suspect that the ribs are broken, then feel over that area and keep it at rest, and treat the wound with the treatment described earlier until it is healed.
Chapter X
On restoration of the ankle joint.
Broken bones of the wide hips are shattered, and if they shatter, then their fracture is only union in the extremities of those parts, aligned along length and inclined toward the inner sides; thus causing pain at the site and puncture wounds, with stiffness in the limb when fractured.
To restore it, you should place your hand over that part which is above the fracture, as shown by its figure.
If the fracture is only at the extremity of it, then you should reduce it according to what appears equal through equation, so that the part is assembled in its natural figure.
But if the fracture is in the long bone or one that already declines toward the inner sides, then you should make the patient lie on their belly so that you may prepare for the reduction of that fracture. And once you have reduced it, apply plaster to that part, and also place splints of wood or iron on either side, securing them with strapping so that there is no fear of puncture wounds from fracture or displacement of the splint.
And reduce the concavity with whatever it may be filled with so that it takes the strapping according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
But if gangrene occurs after cauterization, then cease the extension and reduction until the gangrene is sedated, then apply whatever is used to sedate it as previously mentioned. Then return to the reduction of the bone and secure it thus as necessary.
And if this happens in the bones of the foot or they are comminuted, then reduce them.
Chapter xi
Of the reduction of fractures of the jawbone.
The jawbone is that which is between the cheek and the head of the shoulder bone.
"And if it is broken, then its restoration is in one of two ways, the first of which you may take a piece of flat oakwood of this form:"
"When there are two extreme ends, tie them together and hang it from an elevated place."
"And then have the patient sit on a chair; and carefully place their broken arm on top of the wooden board, with the elbow at its midpoint."
"And then suspend from that some heavy weight, or let the servant extend it to its proper parts; and then let the physician reduce the fracture with his hands simultaneously, until the fracture returns to its proper position."
"And the other way is for the patient to sit upright and suspend their arm with a cloth sling; then command two assistants, one of whom holds above the fracture with both hands, and the other holds below it, each extending to its respective part."
"And if you wish the extension to be stronger, then place a splint on top of the fracture with linen and another one underneath it, and each assistant shall extend to their respective parts."
"And then if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, it is necessary that half of the linen be placed above the elbow and the other below the fracture near the joint."
"And similarly if the fracture is near the joint, then the linen should be placed on that location and also on that joint."
"And then apply it with ease and without difficulty, and as soon as it is applied according to what is necessary and in the correct manner, then bind it securely so that there may not be an accumulation of pus."
"But if there is an accumulation of pus, then wait seven days and remove the splint, and place over it clean linen soaked in warm water and rose oil until the pus has drained out, and then bind it again."
"And the way to bind it is to place plaster over the fracture, then wrap a cloth napkin over the plaster, and adjust the arm over that support, and place his hand covered over his own muscle."
"And then fold the cloth and bind it over the support of the arm so that the arm remains in place without any prohibited movement due to the broken bone."
"And then use splints."
"And then place over the fracture that splint which is the widest and strongest of all the others; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break with an addition of three fingers on either side."
"And then bind over the splints with the bandage which was mentioned at the beginning of this chapter."
"And ensure that your bandage is as tight as possible on the location of the fracture." "And when the fracture is long, make the bandage loose."
"And then if you find the situation of the splints and the bandage to be as we have said in the time when you restore the limb to its proper position, then you are finished."
"And if you suspect an accumulation of pus, then wait seven days and remove the bandage and splints as we have said."
"And then examine the linen on all sides for three days to ensure that there is no pressure or inflammation in any location, or that food does not reach the limb due to an excess of tightness; and therefore correct everything according to what we have said."
"But if you suspect some confusion that nothing will happen because of it, then do not loosen the bandage but rather wait three days or more."
"And let his sleep be on his back and let his hands be on his stomach."
"And place over the chest a bolster full of wool and examine at all times whether the limb is still in its proper position or if the bandage has become moist and loose; therefore correct everything with your own skill."
"And provide the patient's food according to the order which we have mentioned earlier, ensuring that at first the food is thin until he begins to recover; and then gradually make his food thicker."
"For the custom of the splint and the sling is that they should be bound for forty days, and then they should be loosened and a bath administered and treated with ointments which correct it."
"And if the fracture is laid bare and exposed, then do not loosen the bandage or splints for seven days or until two months have passed."
Chapter XII
"On the Restoration of Fractures of the Arm"
"The arm is composed of two bones called the two forearms. Of these one is small and that which supports the thumb, and the other is large and that which extends downwards from the little finger."
"And it often happens that only the large bone of the forearm is broken, or sometimes both together are fractured."
"And when the small bone of the forearm above is broken, then its restoration and healing will be easier."
"But when it is broken below, the fracture is bad and its healing is difficult."
"And the worst of all is when both bones are fractured together."
"Therefore if the bone which is broken is the small one above, it is advisable for the physician to restore it with gentle extension until it becomes straight."
"But if the large bone is that which is broken, then a stronger extension must be applied."
"And if both bones are fractured together, then you must apply traction with great force."
"And you must maintain the figure of the hand during its restoration and extension, with the hand extended on a pillow and the thumb uppermost among all the fingers, and the little finger lowest among them, and let the patient lie on a well-cushioned couch."
"And place a pillow before him at his height or towards his right side, so that the patient does not have to strain himself."
"Then let one attendant extend the arm from below with his hand or with a bandage and another attendant do likewise from above."
"And then let the physician straighten the bone until it reduces into its best possible position."
"If in the fracture of the bone you find any displacement, then use all your skill to reduce it back into its proper place."
"If during the reduction you find that there is separation at the elbow and it does not meet your expectations in the restoration of it, then proceed as we have described above."
"But if the fracture is associated with infection, I have already dealt with that in another chapter, and therefore take care of it accordingly."
"And if you encounter an accumulation of pus at the beginning of your restoration, then apply a cloth with cerate made from rose oil and white wax, and let it be equally between solidity and subtlety; and stretch the cloth over it with gentle tightness until the abscess is absorbed. Then remove the cerate and apply a plaster prepared from powdered frankincense with clay of hydrated lime, and then apply splints, ensuring that the splint placed over the fracture is broadest and strongest."
"And know that in the case of fractures of the arm there are usually many splints used, whether it is a fracture of one bone or both bones together."
"And then apply your bandage over the site of the fracture with great strength and force, and if you find that the extension is more prominent above or below the fracture, then apply a gentler bandage according to what was said at the beginning of this chapter."
"The cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and damp, not hard or rough. The adhesive with which it is strengthened should be medium between thin and thick, as we have recommended."
"Consider the limb and its ligaments after several days." "If it happens that some cause arises for which correction is necessary, thus prudently you should search for the cause in the member, and then cover the member with cold water until that swelling ceases."
"Leave the member alone so it can rest, and then gradually tighten it again."
"And if the swelling has been softened and the bone has been removed, then you shall correct everything with your own strength."
"And also consider whether the nourishment is prevented from reaching the member due to an excess of swelling. If so, then you should soften it a little and leave it alone for several days until the nourishment reaches it, and then strengthen it."
"But if the illness is not caused by any of those [conditions] that we have mentioned, then it should be released after approximately twenty days or so."
"And then the hand of the patient should be suspended by its own power of movement and agility, and that [the patient] should sleep on his back."
"And know that this fracture is healed in thirty days or thirty-two days, but often it is restored in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the disposition of the complexion and the dispositions of power."
Chapter XIII
On the restoration of fractures of the wrist and fingers.
"I know that in the pinch of the hand and in the joints of these fingers there is a fracture, but it does not happen to them without much rubbing."
"And when it happens that the hand has a fracture or rubbing, then the patient must lie down and let their head hang down, facing forward in an upright position, and place their hand on top of the extended one."
"Then the minister will extend the broken bones and the doctor will align them, ensuring they are properly aligned with good congruence."
"And then it is necessary to apply plasters and bandages, unless there happens to be a cauterized ulcer; and then place a compress on top according to the amount of space, and you have already wrapped that in linen cloth."
"But if the fracture is in the palm of the hand inside the belly area, then make it resemble a bandage shape, and command the patient to hold that with their palm closed; also wrap it with a long cloth."
"And let there be a compress of linen cloth elevated in such a way that the flesh is applied to the palm; and hold it according to what is necessary."
"But if the fracture is on the outside of the hand, then it is necessary to place a compress on top and another compress from the side of the palm in such a way that the hand is supported and straight; and also apply the splint, just as it is wrapped around the wrist between those said bands."
"And if there happens to be a fracture in one of the joints of the said fingers, then if it is the thumb, align it as necessary and hold it with the palm; and if you wish, place a small splint on top to elevate the fracture and prevent movement."
"But if the fracture is in one of the other said fingers, such as that of the middle joint, or the index finger, or the ring finger, then align it and tie it with the finger that is next to it; or they can all be tied together in continuation, which is better; or place a small splint on top, just like we said for the thumb."
"And consider, in your reduction and application, the disposition of cauterized ulcer and opposing sides - with your operation according to what is necessary when any cause arises from that, as it has been narrated."
"Chapter XIV."
Restoration of a bone fracture in the thigh.
The thighbone is often broken and is declared painful according to its position, which is anterior and superior posterior.
The patient's restoration is done thus: the bandage is stretched over the fracture and another bandage placed below it, and the patient is laid on their stomach facing downwards.
And furthermore, the priest extends all the bandages to his departure according to their quality when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
But if it is applied to the edge of the thighbone, then the bandage should be placed close to the knee at the departure of the penitent, so that its extension comes up from below, and the other bandage below the fracture.
And similarly if the fracture is applied to the knee, then let the bandage be placed close to it, and its extension should go from below.
And furthermore the physician equalizes the bone with both his hands within so that it reduces according to its natural similarity and the bone is joined together by good union; then plaster and strapping are necessary if otherwise a member aposteme occurs. But if there is an aposteme occurring then you leave it alone for some days until the aposteme becomes dry and then return to your treatment.
The strapping should be done thus: one should wrap a hard bandage around the fracture and fold it two or three times, removing any excess; then the limb should be wrapped with another bandage so that it reaches the ankle and thigh.
And place a long piece of linen between the thigh and the bandage near the knee on both sides; then bring the ends of the linen from above the parted area on both parts, and then wrap it around the bandage and thigh what is excess of the bandage.
Then place a splint on the thigh at that fracture thus, and then place another splint on the bone of the leg above it.
Then fill the spaces between the leg and thigh with soft cloths, so that the union is consolidated.
Then begin with a strong strapping of the middle over the location of the fracture with three or four wrappings, and as you move away from the location of the fracture, make your strapping weaker, lighter, and softer.
Then extend the two ends of the linen to both sides below until it reaches the ankle of the foot, and then strengthen both ends of the splints on the other side so that the bandage is not removed from its place.
Then leave the strapping on like this so that no corrosion of the member nor dry aposteme nor inflammation occurs nor anything like them; and if any cause of these occurs then take care of it immediately and correct what has happened at once, according to what we have said many times.
But if the bone has come through the flesh which covered it, then you should reduce it as much as possible; and if not, cover it with a poultice and remove it until it is healed according to what precedes the treatment.
And sometimes this fracture of the thigh is strengthened with splints like those used for adjusting the arms as we have said in the assistant and the arm.
However, in the healing of the thigh done thus, limping should not occur; and if it is healed alone without applying the other leg, then it is necessary that it limp all the time.
And know that the thigh is strengthened in forty days or a little more or less, and all this is according to the diversity of the complexities and other dispositions.
Chapter XV
Of the restoration of the fracture of the kneecap.
Know that fracture of the patella is rare, but bruising occurs to it very often.
But if fracture occurs to it, then it is only a split or crack in its parts, and this is with great pain or slight pain, and on top of all that there is swelling.
And the restoration of it is done thus: that which is broken of its parts should be reduced with those splints until it is approximated and joined according to what is possible by equity and facility and construction.
And then apply plaster and then place on top of it a round splint if necessary; and strengthen above with strapping as is appropriate.
And then consider all the dispositions which we have recommended in other fractures, such as dry aposteme and similar things so that it may be opposed to all accidents with what is appropriate for it until it is healed.
Chapter XVI
"For the restoration of a broken bone."
"Do you know that in the limb there are two bones of which one is thick and is named after the limb itself; and the other is thin and is called fibula?"
"And it happens that in some species of fracture what happens to the two bones of the arm also happens, and for this reason restoration of it is made just like restoration of the arm simultaneously, and its operation is one."
"If two bones are broken at once, the limb becomes completely shattered."
"And if only the thinner bone is broken, the limb becomes partially shattered in front."
"And if only the thicker bone is broken, then that one on its own is enough cause for it not being able to move."
"And appropriately administer extension and traction and fixation of the fragments according to that same principle."
"But beware, if the fracture of the limb is old with many attempts, then make the extension smaller and lighter, and alleviate it with your virtue."
"And in the limb there may be some cause for operation on the arm, and this is when you align the fragments and complete all your operation; then you will take pieces of wood from pine which are placed close to the causes which are placed in usual places, and they should be made evenly from palm branches; lighten those ones that have less thickness, and do not use any large ones, and their length should be according to the length of the limb, and from within outwards."
"And appropriately wrap each splint in two wrappings according to its length and place one on the proximal fragment of the limb on one side and the other on the other side, and they should be from within outwards towards the sole of the foot."
"And appropriately tie the two fragments in three places on both extremities and in the middle place, for with this structure the limb is prevented from bending at the right or left fracture site, and it remains in good position."
"And already having administered a splint of wood according to the length of the limb, place it there with the limb so that it maintains its position."
"And especially beware that you do this in fracture, and particularly when it is properly united."
"And appropriately consider the limb every day and study it with that purpose for final study, and you will guard it from inflammation, from swelling or from other similar causes; and when any cause of those occurs, then promptly attend to it with whatever is necessary until it is healed."
"Chapter XVII."
"Of the fracture of the heel bone, and of the bones of the foot."
"The heel bone does not often fracture completely; however, fractures of the bones of the foot do occur sometimes; and those of the toes rarely fracture, but rather they become displaced in their places."
"And if the bones of the foot receive fracture and sometimes those bones become elevated among themselves, then the patient should place his foot on the ground prepared thus while walking."
"And appropriately press one foot on what is elevated by those bones and appropriately press them down, compress them, and turn them back into their places."
"And appropriately apply plaster and bandage over it, and place a small table under the sole of the foot with two flat heads."
"And appropriately support that with the foot in downward traction, because you have wrapped it with bandages and other causes of which you have need."
"And when three or four days have passed, then untie the bandage, for you will find the bones turned back into their places, either united or compressed or reduced, and the operation in those is as known."
"But if some of these are compressed, then restore them and turn them back thus as I have taught you and explained to you in the restoration of the fingers." "And appropriately tie the compressed toe with string according to its length and place it thus somewhat elevated; and appropriately place under the foot this table which has been recommended to you, and support that with downward traction."
"But if what is compressed of the bones are two or three or more, then place over each toe a string tied according to its quantity wrapped in linen and support the table under the sole of the foot with one of the flat heads facing upwards so that it may have good retention."
"And it is convenient for you not to forget that you do not consider all the causes which have been mentioned to you regarding the other fractures of the accidents which we have spoken about, and attend promptly to each accident with what is necessary."
"Chapter XVIII."
Fracture of the bone of the woman's thigh and the bone of the hip joint and the bone of the man's penis.
When the thighbone of the woman is broken, immediately apply that plaster in its cavity, and then bend her knee slightly backwards, holding it there from behind.
And promptly the midwife will apply traction to the leg at the ankle, ensuring that it is aligned properly with the thighbone; and then the woman should be tilted slightly forward, so that everything is brought into line before the broken bone can return to its original position.
And also sprinkle powder on the bone; and when she wants to urinate, gently move the leg away and allow her to do so; and reduce it again and return it according to the manner in which you first placed it at the beginning; and then return to your original position.
And do this for seven days or about that time, for it is restored.
And if you wish, take a bladder of a sheep and stretch it over the traction device on the leg; then insert the entire bladder into the cavity of the bone, and blow air into the cannula with force until the bladder is inflated inside the bone, for this will help the fracture to return.
And then it should be filled with plaster and left like that for some days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the penis in a man or woman is broken, then apply the same treatment and reduction as we have recommended for the hip bone.
And what is correct is not concealed in these nearby fractures and those that are less difficult, especially for one who has some study and experience with this my book; for that fracture signifies to you the greater dispositions via direct reduction and fixation of it, and therefore understand well.
But in the fracture of the penis in a man, take a gourd of pumpkin, and put the penis into it; then wrap it with cloth wrappings, and let it be wrapped up, and leave it for three days or about that time until it is healed.
Chapter XIX
Of reduction of fractures of the bones when they are displaced.
It is convenient for one who suffers a fracture with displacement, especially if the bone is large such as the thighbone or the humerus, or similar to it, that you should perform trepanation immediately if the conditions of trepanation apply to you as we have mentioned above.
And if the displacement flows out with blood, then it is necessary for you to remove it in such a way that you powderize upon it three times broken, unless another cause presents itself.
And then begin to reduce the fracture on that same day, and do not delay this if there is no inflammation present.
But if inflammation is present, then wait to reduce it until the ninth day, until the inflammation has subsided, and do not approach it on the third or fourth day of all, for you will cause bad accidents.
But if the broken bone is prominent above the skin, then it is necessary for you to perform reduction and fixation of it with your hands with ease and little extension.
But if extension is not prepared for you and the equination of it with your hands is difficult, then reduce it with this instrument: which is made of iron, whose length is seven or eight digits and whose width is according to the amount of displacement; and therefore it is necessary for the physician to take three or four of these according to the quantity that is needed for this in the treatment of all kinds of fractures.
And let it be rounded and let there be little roughness on it so that it is not doubled by the pressure upon it during the operation.
And let its end be sharp, with edges at its ends; and let it be thicker at the top tending towards the thickness of the bone, and of moderate size within the parts.
And this is its shape:
And it is called in Greek "labyrinthus volatilis" meaning little winged palette.
For the acute end of it should be elevated above the prominent end of the bone so that it is supported.
And press it in such a way that the bone returns and becomes fixed with some equination.
And then strive to fix the ends of the fracture together, and if the end of the broken bone is thin, and does not receive the instrument well, then insert the end of that bone so that the instrument has power over it.
But if you cannot reduce the bone completely with what we have recommended, then incise it with one of the knives which we have mentioned; or saw it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
And then rasp that which remains on the bone and remove the small sharp edges.
And when the bone is reduced and the patient suddenly feels violent pain, know that the bone has not returned to its natural place. And then do this for you will greatly relieve the patient.
When your reduction of the bone is complete, then immerse a bandage in black stiptic wine, especially if it is summer, and do not apply cerote or any other ointment on the wound, for fear that putrefaction and corruption may occur.
And then administer bandages in the hour of your completion of the reduction of the bone, and leave the wound exposed so that you insert traction with forceps and use wrappings according to the quantity of the displacement.
And be careful that you do not stretch the wound with the fracture, for many times foolish physicians have done this and caused death or corrupting disease or great harm to their patients. So it is harmful. And if your splint is light, soft, and different from the splints of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or bad and you fear that some of the bad accidents which we have mentioned may occur there, and you feel pain in the place, then it is not necessary to apply bandages, but rather make a dressing of hard cloth in its place and stretch it with that.
And when about a day or two later the wound begins to form crusts, then remove the cloth which you had placed over it with wine, and then apply cataplasms, as is customary for us to do for wounds, such as terra firmata or similar ones.
And it is necessary for you to loose the bandages and examine the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and firm, and that the limb be prepared in such a way that putrefaction flows away from it towards its parts with ease.
If many days pass and the wound is not consolidated nor separated from it by a crust, then know that here are small bone fragments for which you should examine the wound with a probe. And of those fragments, remove and extract those that are separated; but those which are not separated and put pressure on the limb and cause pain, strive to incise them as much as is possible for you.
And if you notice swelling or inflammation in the wound, then it is an indication of corruption and putrefaction; therefore it is necessary for you to apply one of those with which we have said that the cure of this is preceded by a narration in its chapter.
And concerning that about which my speech is more important and you make your decision: when the large bone is crushed, emerge over the limb as the bones of the foot and hand and similar ones in the large limbs, and do not attempt to pull it out nor extract it because many times death has occurred through this; leave that alone until putrefaction occurs, for it will fall away by itself after about 20 or 30 days; and then treat the wound if you see fit, otherwise leave it alone.
"Chapter Twenty."
About the treatment of swelling that occurs at the site of some fracture.
Often this swelling occurs at the site of the healing of a fracture, especially if it is near joints, and it distorts the shape of the limb; therefore you should forbid the member from its usual movement.
Then consider whether the swelling is recent and apply those medicines which have astringent properties such as aloë, senna, myrrh, and acacia, and others like them. Take some of these, crush them up, mix them with stiptic wine, album of egg white, or vinegar, place that on the swelling wrapped in linen, and bind it firmly to the limb with a good bandage.
And let this be done for several days without removing the bandage; and afterwards remove it and apply another one until the swelling has disappeared. Or else place over it a plaster made of lead, because lead has the property of reducing all swellings in the limbs.
But if the swelling has already turned into bone and is causing pain, it will be necessary to remove it carefully, first cutting through the skin above it with a scalpel, then incising and scraping away the excess bone and flesh until it is removed. After this, stitch up the wound and treat it until it heals.
Capitulum XXI.
"Upon restoration of a fracture, if the limb remains delicate and does not heal as it should."
"When a bone fracture is restored, if the limb remains delicate and does not heal as it should, this may occur for several reasons: one of which is an abundance of fluid in the ligament that does not adhere according to what is necessary; or due to excess stiffness of the ligaments preventing proper nutrition from reaching the limb; or due to excessive rubbing; or due to unnecessary movement at the wrong time; or due to a lack of blood in the patient's body and weakness."
"And its treatment involves feeding the patient to strengthen their heart so that blood is multiplied within them; and administering baths; and applying gauze and happiness upon it."
"And similarly, pressure should be applied to the limb, so that the pressure draws nourishment towards it, or continuous rubbing with hot water, until nutrition returns to its natural form."
Chapter XXII
"Regarding the treatment of bones that are broken and heal crookedly, and how to operate on them in order to correct this."
"If a limb that has already healed becomes crooked and prominent at the site of the fracture and knot, causing deformity in the shape of the limb, but the limb is still capable of its natural operation, then you should not accept the claim of anyone who insists that the limb has been recently re-broken."
"But many foolish doctors and healers have done this in our land, and this operation is very reprehensible, leading to great fear, the sign of which is death."
"But if the limb is weak and knotted recently, then it should be rubbed with hot water containing herbs that soften, such as marshmallow root and rose petals, mallows, and similar ones; and a poultice of mollifying plaster should be applied to it, made from dill well-prepared; or honey made from marsh mallow root should be crushed and mixed with dough of wheat flour or oil of camphor, and then applied; or figs that are plump should be pressed and crushed with pigeon feathers, along with similar medicines called amermans consolidatio."
"And sometimes, with continuous gentle rubbing that is done with the most humid hands, and administering movement of the limb at all times in every hour, it can be dissolved."
"But if the crookedness has already hardened and turned into bone, and there is a need for surgical treatment with iron, then it is necessary to make an incision above the prominence of the bone and dissolve the continuity of the bone, and to excise what is superfluous in that place with subtle bone-cutters, and to facilitate mobility there with care and diligence."
"Chapter xxiii."
"On the matter of dislocation."
Joint dislocation is the displacement of some of the joints in its place, preventing it from moving, and causing distortion of the limb's figure. This results in great pain and injuries for the patient.
Therefore when a dislocation occurs, it is important to reduce it as soon as possible. Do not delay in reducing it, because if it is delayed, the joint becomes inflamed and swollen, making reduction of the dislocation difficult.
And at that time it is not necessary to move or stretch the patient during the inflammation phase, because many times this can cause spasms and intense pain.
But when this happens, it is necessary that you cover the patient's wound and allow the inflammation to subside. Then the limb should be wrapped with cold water and oil, and reduced gently.
And all members should be treated in such a way that they return to their original place as soon as possible.
"I have already arranged the chapters on dislocation according to what is stated about fractures."
"Chapter twenty-four."
"The treatment of dislocation of the jawbone."
"When both mandibles are dislocated, they are not reduced immediately. The dislocation of both occurs in one of two ways: either the condyles are removed from their sockets by slight movement and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated with sudden force, so that they become mollified at the junction of the articulation before any saliva is secreted by the patient and he cannot speak nor close his mouth, and his tongue remains wrapped in his palate."
"When the dislocation is slight, it often returns spontaneously with little effort on its own."
"But if the dislocation is complete and severe, it must be reduced gently without any delay."
"And then the minister must hold the patient's head, and insert his index finger into the socket of the dislocated jawbone inside the mouth on one side if the dislocation is on that part; or insert both fingers together if the dislocation is on both sides, while the other fingers remain outside to steady him. And he commands the patient to cease moving his jaws and relax them in each direction, and then he guides the mandible back into its socket and presses it in until it returns to its place."
"And if the reduction is difficult, especially if both mandibles are dislocated at once, it is advisable to administer evaporation with hot water and oil to facilitate easy reduction without delay."
"And then when the reduction is complete and the mouth is closed and not softened, it is advisable to apply powder of wax mixed with oil on linen cloth over it, and let it be made of wax and olive oil; and then bind it gently with soft bandages."
"And let the patient sleep on his back with his head supported between two pillows, so that he does not move his jaw to the right or left; and do not force him to eat anything until the pain has subsided and the jaws are healed. Then he may eat whatever he wishes."
"And let him be treated gently until the opening of the mouth is healed for eating and drinking and speaking. Until then he should avoid opening his mouth too wide."
"And if the reduction of both jaws is difficult when they are dislocated and do not return to their places, it often happens that fevers and continuous thirst occur, and a strong desire to vomit or purge. Therefore it is advisable to purge the stomach with calomel."
"And when you do this, know that it is harmful and many times the patient dies within nine days if such a thing happens to him."
"Chapter XXV."
"On reduction of dislocation of the clavicle and the extremity of the muscle."
The shoulder blade is not dislocated within the chest due to its connection with the ribs; sometimes it can be dislocated at the joint itself, which is discernible through touch.
To restore it, have the patient lie on their back and stretch out their arms. And press the spot with your palm firmly, as it will return to its place.
Then apply plaster and powder there and strengthen it.
But if the end of that which is connected to it [the shoulder blade] is not dislocated on its own, then it must be reduced and immobilized as we have said and according to your apparatus.
Then apply plaster, powder, and bandages there, and instruct the patient to maintain tranquility and rest until it is healed.
And with this same treatment, the detached end of the muscle is reduced as well.
Chapter XXVI
On the reduction of dislocation of the muscle.
"You know that muscles can be dislocated in three ways; one of them is when they are dislocated at the exit point from the nipple."
"The second way is when it [the muscle] is dislocated at its attachment point above the muscle, which is rare; and it is not dislocated at its posterior attachments by the shoulder blade or its anterior attachments by the nerves."
"Muscles are more often dislocated and exit outwards at their attachments near the nipple area, especially in those individuals with less flesh, where it can happen easily; but in those with a lot of flesh, it is harder to dislocate."
"And sometimes, due to a blow or fall, the muscle is trapped by a closed hematoma, and it becomes swollen."
"So you should speak about what you know regarding this matter, and later discuss its treatment."
"And the dislocation is recognized when it occurs at its attachments near the nipple; so that you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the normal one, since there are many differences between them. You find a concavity in the head of the muscle on its underside near the nipple, and in affected individuals they cannot reduce their hand to their ear or move it freely with any movement."
"If it [the muscle] is dislocated towards the foot or outwards and you then find a palpable lump, it will not be hidden."
"And easy reduction can be made for this dislocation when it is fresh and the patient is a child."
"The reduction of it is that the minister raises his hand from above on him; then place your thumb near his navel, and raise the joint with force to its proper place."
"If what we have said does not succeed, and it is from the beginning that the dislocation occurred, then after many days, sometimes it is necessary for the patient to be bathed in cold water and administered an ointment that softens and smooths them like if they were comfrey roots, fenugreek, and mallows in water."
"Then the patient should be placed on their back and place your thumb near his navel while waiting for it to be between levitation and tightening, then the doctor places their heel on the sphere and raises the head of the muscle with force, and pull the patient's hand so that it does not move from its position."
"And if you wish to reduce it in this manner: If you have a man present who is taller than the patient and stands on the same side as him, place his muscle near the navel of the patient and lift the navel upwards while the patient is suspended in the air. Another helper pulls the patient's hand away from their belly." "But if the patient is light, then it is necessary that another cause be suspended while doing this so that he does not fall down suddenly, for the dislocation returns quickly."
"And it is also reduced in this way: Place on the ground a pole whose head is rounded like a mortar pestle, neither thick nor thin. Then place the patient near the pole with a lion's skin spread out on top of the pole's head. The patient stands along the length of the pole and extends their arm to the other side. Then extend their body from the other side with force, for the joint returns to its place quickly."
"And if the reduction is difficult due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this treatment: Take a pole whose length is two spans, width four digits, and thickness is decreased at its navel in this way:"
"And place lion's skin on top of the rounded head of the pole to prevent it from slipping when placed against the patient."
"And then place it near the navel of the patient and extend their hand or arm over the pole until it reaches the desired position. Then tie the pole to the assistant's body, as well as the elbow and wrist of the hand."
"And then place the arm on a ladder step according to its width and extend the hand to the other side. Suspend the rest of the body on the other side because the joint enters quickly."
"And when the joint has entered according to any method you can manage, then place a lambskin pad near the navel of the patient. Then apply a plaster made from ground barley flour with sesame seeds and egg white over all the muscles that have been rotated upwards. Then wrap it with an appropriate bandage around the navel. The plaster should be wrapped in the bandage and the patient's hand should be tied to their neck and left like this for seven days without moving it."
"And it is necessary that the patient's diet be light during this time until the member is strengthened because it is easier for it to heal then."
"And then increase the patient's diet gradually over seven or nine days until they can move their limb. And when it is firm and not swollen anymore, then it is healed."
"But if the joint is dislocated many times due to humidity that occurs there or another cause, then it is necessary to administer a cautery with three incisions according to what was said earlier in the chapter on cauteries."
"But even if this is done and after seven days the bandage is removed but the joint is not firm and it cannot raise its arm upwards, then you should know that the nerves at the head of the muscle are injured or extended or softened. And you should realize that the joint will never be returned to its proper place."
"For dislocation of the elbow and kneecap or any other joint behind it, reduction is done with pressure and extension using hands until it returns to its place."
"And apply the other bandage there and treat it until it heals."
"And if heaviness and slowness of movement occur during the healing process, then the patient should use hot baths many times until that heaviness is relieved and it returns to its original nature."
"Chapter XXVII."
"On the treatment of dislocation of the hip joint."
"You should know that the hip joint is easily dislocated and also returns with difficulty. It can be dislocated in all directions but especially anteriorly or posteriorly. When the hip joint has been dislocated, you will not be deceived because it is apparent if it is placed near the surface of the thigh or touched according to any figure that may have been displaced. And when you reduce a dislocated hip by placing it in its socket, this is clearly evident because the joint is concave and cannot bend the leg or touch itself with its own muscle."
"And you should know that you must reduce the dislocation immediately before an abscess occurs because if an abscess occurs, reduction becomes difficult and often it cannot heal completely. And especially when it is dislocated posteriorly, for this is worse than all other kinds of dislocation and causes greater pain, and many times death ensues from it."
"For reduction of this hip dislocation, if it is possible to reduce it, place the patient's hand on two hands and extend their arm. Then place your hands on both sides of the hip joint with your palms facing down and press the joint back into its proper place using your palms."
"But if the dislocation is anteriorly, then it should be reduced in this way: bend the hand with your hand and strike the hip joint with the palm of your hand."
"But if the dislocation does not yield to reduction, then apply strong extension and force."
"And it is necessary for two assistants to extend the leg and hold it firmly in place during the reduction so that it does not move away from the extension."
"And then rotate the leg towards all parts because it is wrapped with a folded cloth or bandage on its hand."
"And when the physician touches the joint with his hand, he should anoint it with some oil so that this helps to lubricate the joint and make reduction easier. Then press the joint forcefully until it returns."
"And then after reducing it, apply a plaster containing styptic and absorbent white of egg over the hip joint. Then compress it with a descending bandage and suspend the leg from a collarbone sling for several days."
"And then when it is healed, you can remove the bandage. And if the joint has returned to its proper place, then leave it alone."
"If the joint does not strengthen, then repeat the plaster and bandage for several days until it becomes strong. Then remove them."
"But if it happens that the patient experiences great pain during the reduction of the joint and their condition is worsening, then apply moist compresses and gentle friction followed by pressure until they are relieved. Or place a poultice on the joint to draw out the inflammation. Then bind it and leave it alone for day and night." "Then take that one and put him in a bath; and when he is risen, then you shall rub the joint with gentle friction, and again repeat it upon that side once, twice, thrice." "I have entered the bath, until I am covered up."
"If you wish, pause upon that moist and smooth furrow with the edge and press upon it; do this several times until it is wet and ready for its disposition."
"Chapter XXVIII"
"Regarding the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder blade, which is located between the arm and the hand."
"Sometimes the hand is dislocated, and the reduction of dislocation in it is easy; but on the contrary, for other joints, however speed is required in reducing it at the time when it is dislocated, before swelling occurs or an abscess forms."
"And the reduction of dislocation in it is that you place the joint of the patient's hand on a table and the assistant extends the patient's hand; then the physician places his hand or palm over the prominence of the joint and pushes it until it returns to its proper place."
"But it is necessary to consider if the palm has already been turned towards the belly of the hand, at that time the patient places the back of their hand on a table with the extension and reduction; but if the dislocation precedes on the back of the hand, then the position of the hand should be intrinsically on the table so that the physician's hand can press against that prominence of the joint."
"And then if it returns quickly, that is good. But if not, then press upon the arm gently until the swelling subsides and leave him. And do not repeat this treatment for several days, because if you do, it will cause pain and you will not be able to effect reduction."
"But the joint moves according to its curvature. Do not tell the patient any cause, but that his hand is relaxed and he cannot move it for some reason. Then you will know that the nerves are compressed or severed; then do not engage in anything except cauterize around the opening of the wound with fire, and afterwards confer some cause."
"So when the joint has returned to its proper place, then apply over it the compress which we have recommended, and let it rest for a few days. Then remove it and exercise the hand."
"But if the motion of it is retained but some stiffness occurs in it, then apply to it cold water and friction several times until it is alleviated."
**Chapter xxix.**
**On the treatment of dislocation of the said joints.**
"Sometimes these joints are entirely dislocated."
"And when some of these digits are dislocated on the back of the palm or on the belly of it, then straighten the digit and reduce the dislocation with your hands until it returns."
"And likewise support the head of the digit, and suspend that above the part where it is dislocated, leaving it for two days."
"And likewise suspend that and extend it until it is completely reduced in its day."
"And if it does not reduce, bind that according to this method and do not cease loosening it during the day and exercising with motion, and bind it at night; and do this for several days until it is straightened."
"And do likewise if it is dislocated on the belly of the hand; and bind that to this part and perform your first operation until it is healed."
"And similarly do this when it is dislocated at other parts."
"Chapter XXX."
"Of the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back."
"When it happens that some of the vertebrae of the back or neck become completely dislocated and some are moved from their places, then there is no remedy for this condition because death soon follows."
"And this is indicated by the fact that the evacuation of waste occurs involuntarily and cannot be retained; many times some members such as legs or arms are paralyzed on one side or both, or one of them; or one vertebra has moved from its place because very often they have moved and very often their dislocation occurs in four directions."
"Therefore that is already dislocated towards the posterior parts and is called lumbago."
"But the treatment for it is that if lumbago occurs in childhood, then there is no remedy nor can it be healed completely."
"But as for that which occurs by accident or by percussion or similarly to those, the Ancients have already described the methods of treatment in long speeches, from which there is great profit; but I have abbreviated this because it would excuse me little from its length given my proximity to the intention of my exposition with which I have explained and formed this chapter from diverse instruments with which I will show it and explain it."
"And among those, only that one which occurs properly at the back can be healed, according to what I have counted."
"And it is that the patient should lie on his face with his belly close to the ground near a wall and extend his arms out to the side so that his hip does not rest on the bed."
"And have a straight stick placed near him, put into the ground at the end of his belly near his head, and another stick under his feet at the other end of his belly."
"And let one minister hold the stick so that it is not fixed in a hole; and let another minister hold the other according to this form."
"And wrap a cloth over the head of the patient and tie it tight with strings; extend one end of the string to the stick that is in front of his head and tie him to it; and stretch another string across his hips on both sides of him and attach it to the other stick that is in front of his feet."
"And then each minister should extend the string to the point of the stick and the two sticks and strings of their places in which they are placed should not be dislocated but rather not fixed as we have said."
"And the doctor should place his palms on the back with force so that it returns to its place, or if he places one table there, he should adjust his feet on the table so that it returns."
"But if it does not return by this method, then take a table whose width or length is about three braccia and dig in the wall near which we have said that the patient is lying a hole into which one end of the table fits." "And then place the top of the table on the back and the doctor should place his feet on the other end and stretch well so that the back is compressed and returns to its proper place."
"And if you wish, open with a twist using your hand; and it is that you lie on the ground in front of the patient's head at the end of his belly between two sticks, each one braccio long and placed between his head at the other end of his belly similarly two sticks; and let there be a hole made in each stick into which a cord is threaded and let each stick be firmly fixed to the ground so that it does not move."
"And put another round stick through the hole in which the cord is threaded and let it be turned in the two holes of the two sticks."
"And at one end of it there is a hole in which the stick is formed, one palm long with that which is turned; and the other two sticks are similar to this."
"And then stretch the strings that you have tightened on the hip of the patient to the hole that is in front of his head and the strings that you have stretched on his knees to the stick that is in front of his feet."
"And then over each hole there should be a minister who turns the hole with his hand and the doctor should press the back as we have said."
"And when the back has returned to its place and the location is pressed together, then you should put on a poultice with alum of wood ash and wool; and then place it over the poultice like a table whose width is about three digits or thereabouts, and whose length is as long as the location of the stiffness and on the point of the spine."
"And then let it be tied with the string that we have mentioned and let the patient be given subtle nourishment until he is healed."
"And if there is still some inflammation in the location at the end of the healing, then medications that moisten and cleanse should be administered with the application of the table for a long time, which we have recommended; and also a lead plate should be applied to that location."
"And sometimes inflammation occurs in the lower part of the spine and it is caused by that dislocation; and this bone is already inflamed so it should not be touched with this medicine because strong ointment will cause you to die."
Chapter LXXXI.
Of the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the hip and the joint of the thigh bone do not usually deviate except in dislocation alone, and it does not happen to them as it happens to other joints with small movement and concavity.
And the hip joint is dislocated in four ways: it can be dislocated inwardly or outwardly or anteriorly or posteriorly.
Most often it is dislocated inwardly and less often anteriorly or posteriorly.
The sign of hip dislocation inwardly is that when you put the sound leg together with the diseased one, it becomes longer and the thigh bone becomes more prominent than the healthy one; the patient cannot bend their knee towards their body and they have to lean on a stick, and there will be swelling at the point where the head of the femur has moved.
The sign of dislocation occurring outwardly is that its accidents are opposite to this one.
I suspect this sentence discusses symptoms of a dislocated shoulder. Here's my line-by-line guess:
"The sign of one who has suffered dislocation in the hip is that they cannot straighten their leg nor bend it without experiencing pain. The thigh appears shorter than usual, and the joint feels softened; the head of the hipbone seems deviated from its normal position."
"One reduction method for this dislocation is to consider whether the dislocation is old and chronic. If so, approach it accordingly. However, if reduction is not possible at that moment, do not proceed with surgery."
"If the dislocation is recent and belongs to one of the four main types, then you should aim to reposition the joint, extend the limb both inward and outward, move it to the right and left. With gentle force, it will return to its normal position without requiring further treatment."
"If it does not return to its normal position in this manner, then you should prepare a strong rope and extend the thigh bone from the part that is most displaced. You can do this by tying one end of the rope to the bone above the hip joint, or by using two ropes that are tied together over the bone. One assistant should pull the rope with both hands while another assistant extends the leg by placing their hand on the patient's foot and pushing it downwards. Finally, a third assistant should hold the distal end of the rope."
"And extend it either from the front to the angle of the hip bone, or from behind to the posterior edge of the iliac bone."
"And perform these extensions all at once while the patient is lying on their back with their hips elevated and knees dangling."
"This type of extension is common to all four types of dislocation."
"If the dislocation returns with what we have described, it will be good. But if not, then it is necessary to describe the specific treatment for each type of dislocation."
"In the case of reducing this type specifically, when the dislocation is inwards and to the back, the patient should be propped up on their left side. Then place your hands on either side of the hip joint where it meets the greater trochanter. Next, extend the leg by lifting the thigh bone from the angle of the hip to the upper edge of the acetabulum."
"And then another person should firmly grasp the thighs of the leg on the affected side and rotate the hip joint medially while extending it forcefully outwards so that it returns to its proper position."
"This type is the easiest to reduce, as the limb is easily returned to its proper position compared to other types."
"But if this type of reduction is not successful, then both feet should be lifted together using strong, lightweight supports placed under the soles and heels."
"And let each support be four finger-breadths in length, with the limb on the affected side extended about two finger-breadths more than the other."
"And then suspend the patient from a hoist by their head and keep them in this position while extending the limb on the ground to the length of two cubits."
"And then order a strong young man to grasp the head of the femur and suspend it while another young man pushes on the hip joint with great force so that the joint returns to its proper place quickly."
"But in the specific reduction when there is a dislocation outward, the patient should lie on their back according to what we have recommended earlier. Then press the limb of the affected side firmly onto the bed and on its foot."
"And then two poles should be placed one on the foot of the leg and one on its head. And another pole adjusted to the middle of the elbow should be placed there upon which wet cloths are wrapped so that the patient is not hurt by the pole being between their legs, for fear that the extension outward may be drawn too far."
"And then each assistant should extend at his own part and the physician with his hand shall guide the reduction according to the art."
"But when the dislocation is anterior, then the limb should be extended lightly. And according to this method, the physician places the palm of his right hand on the thighbone of the affected side and with his left hand he rotates that while extending it outward at the ankle."
"But when the dislocation is posterior, then the limb should not be extended outward and it should be elevated on the ground. And a hard support must be placed under it, just as it is necessary to place two supports for the elbow when its head is dislocated outward, according to what we have said about the reduction of that joint; and the patient lies on their face with the limbs extended accordingly."
"And compression must be applied using a board placed over the location where the joint is dislocated."
"So when the reduction is completed as it should be – and the sign that the joint has been reduced will not escape you, for it is that when you extend both thighs of the patient and when you move those joints and the patient extends their thigh without difficulty, then you know that the limb has returned to its proper place – then you should apply two splints and bind them firmly with bandages so that the joint does not move from either side. And the patient should remain at rest for three or four days."
"And then remove the bandages and splints and compare both thighs with each other."
"Then if those joints move freely, you will know that the dislocation has been firmly reduced, and then you may allow the patient to walk."
"But if you notice any signs of relaxation, then return and apply splints again and extend the limb according to your initial traction. Then allow it to rest for three days."
"And then remove the splints and allow the patient to walk gradually over several days until they are strengthened."
Chapter XXXII
Of the treatment of dislocation of the ankle joint.
The ankle joint is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outward, inward, or more commonly outward and backward. It is not dislocated anteriorly."
"And the sign of dislocation of the ankle joint is that when you tell the patient to place their thigh on the knee, they will not be able to do so because the ankle is dislocated."
"And the reduction of all types of dislocation of the ankle joint is as follows: make the patient sit down with their leg extended if possible. Then grasp their thigh with both hands and place your feet on either side of theirs. And then press the ankle with your palms, grasping it between your fingers. Hold it firmly while another assistant extends their foot until the ankle returns to its proper position."
"And the sign of successful reduction is that the patient can raise their thigh against the knee with ease without difficulty or pain."
"And then apply splints and bind the thigh to the knee. Then bind these together with a bandage for three or four days. And then remove them."
"And do not allow the patient to walk for several days until they are healed and strengthened."
If reduction of it by you is excused, then administer strong extension with bandages as mentioned in the preceding narration of hip joint treatment.
Capital XXXIII
About the treatment of ankle dislocation.
The ankle sometimes gets displaced by minor trauma, and sometimes it becomes dislocated upon completion of movement, and this dislocation occurs either on the interior or exterior aspects.
And the sign of ankle dislocation is that sometimes the ankle becomes swollen at the point where it has been dislocated.
However, the treatment for displacement of the ankle is easy reduction, and this should be done by extending it gently with the hands until it returns to its normal position.
But in the treatment of ankle dislocation upon completion of movement, you should make the patient lie down on their back and have them hold a strong and sturdy assistant by the back of their thigh at mid-calf level.
And then place your right hand on the superior aspect of the patient's foot and your left hand on the inferior aspect near the heel bone.
And then gently pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and twice with your left hand, and then extend it with your left hand; and push the heel bone downwards with your right hand without twisting.
Repeat this procedure two times as described above.
And then on the third attempt, push the heel bone downwards and you will feel it click into place at the ankle joint.
If the foot returns to its normal position in one or two attempts using this method, and if the foot appears swollen, then that is good. But if not, repeat the procedure until the ankle joint has returned to its normal position.
However, if you are unable to perform the reduction of the ankle using the method described above, then have the patient lie down on their back on the floor. Take a folded towel and place it under the heel bone to elevate it slightly, and then wrap another towel around the foot to prevent further injury to the patient.
And then the assistant holding the foot should have their hands firmly in place, and another assistant should extend the leg with their hands on the calf of the leg or on a linen cloth laid over the collarbone. And each assistant should extend against the other's resistance, keeping the towel between them so that the body of the patient is not pulled towards the side during extension.
And then the physician will reduce the dislocation with their hands, and another assistant should hold the healthy ankle joint at the outside to prevent it from moving back into place too easily.
And then once the dislocation has been reduced and the physician declares that the reduction is successful, immediately apply a plaster cast and reinforce it with splints. Then tie the foot in place using bandages.
Be careful or guard against compressing the nerves that lie behind the ankle joint, so that the bandage does not press too tightly and cause injury to them.
And then leave him for two or three days; and if the bandage becomes loose, reinforce it.
And then on the third or fourth day, remove the cast and prohibit the patient from walking for 40 days. However, if it is necessary for the patient to walk during this period, then there is a risk that the dislocation may recur and become worse without proper treatment.
And if an abscess forms at the site of injury, then you should administer treatment according to the instructions given earlier in this text regarding incisions and dressings, until it has healed.
Chapter XXXIV
Of the treatment of dislocation of the said feet.
The dislocation should be reduced with minimal extension without difficulty; it is easy to do.
But if the dislocation is in certain angles of the ankle joint, then have the patient lie on their back on the floor or table, with their leg extended as if walking.
And then you stand on the floor, and place your foot on top of where you see the prominence of the joints. And then press down with your foot using force until it returns to its normal position, and verify that it has been reduced and that there is no longer any prominence in that location.
And then place the back of the patient's foot on a table that can support the entire leg, with two ends. And then apply a plaster cast that is proper and firm for three days; then remove it and have the patient rest from walking for several days until it has healed properly.
Chapter XXXV
Of the different kinds of dislocation that can occur with a wound, fracture or both together.
When such an accident occurs and you attempt to treat it and restore the patient's health, very often death may follow.
Therefore, one should not presume to treat such cases unless they are skilled in the art, with long experience, compassionate and merciful, cautious but not overly timid or arrogant. And at the beginning of treatment, use medications that can heal cauterized wounds alone, and leave the patient's fate to divine judgment. Only attempt treatment when there is hope for recovery, alleviation of symptoms, and some chance of success. Therefore, make every effort to reduce the dislocation at the outset of the injury, before an abscess forms.
And then if the limb returns to its normal position as desired, apply treatment that will heal the wound and any associated abscess. Use dry dressings for the injury.
But if the dislocation occurs with a fracture and there is separation of the bones, then try to reduce the fragments and follow the procedures that have been mentioned earlier for simple injuries.
Guard and avoid internal injuries in the blood vessels according to your ability, as I have previously instructed. For this is better for you before your Creator, more lasting to your glory, and more beneficial to your true body during your lifetime. Thus ends the words of Al-Bukhtishu' perfectly, may God bless him. Amen.
