Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	The surgeon's hands are on your legs to make sure the inflammation doesn't spread.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, filhs, pus o is a pain in the feet.
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	And if there are other ailments or imbalances in the body, those parts need to be treated accordingly.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	Then, apply a cushion to their feet and use other tools as needed.
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	It is customary for physicians to distinguish between the muscles, veins, and nerves in the body.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	The patient's condition is a common ailment and the physician should be consulted.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	One should know from the beginning that this book deals with anatomy and human experience.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	The doctor called for his assistant to bring the woman's lungs and the other parts of her body were covered with cushions.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And so there was another doctor who had put his hand on the area, and he died after three days.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I knew that if the patient was suffering from large and painful cushions on their legs, they would die soon.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	Here's a possible translation:
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	The body is bound to be in a state of great pain if the patient has already been given lye for their ailment.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	E en que vos has d’un altre malaute.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	But when the pain in the legs is confirmed, apply a cushion to the affected area.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	And then one must open an ulcer for the patient's leg, and another should be used to help them by other means.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	And if the cause of the ailment is a melancholic humor, the patient should be treated with a cushion on their head.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And so, sons, it is necessary that the operation be performed on two individuals: a doctor and you.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	And you, to prevent further complications, should keep the intestine from being infiltrated by other humors.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And thus, you prepare your body for battle and for the divine protection to flow through you.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And let the patient be blessed by God and your hands prevent their illness from being healed.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	Another that which is often called another's own body, the physician's own foot or leg is treated in the same way as gout.
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not be a doctor who treats evil by saying "I treat only with pain" (literally), but do not let your patient suffer from pain.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	This book is divided into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	This is the beginning of the first chapter.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	This first chapter is about the ailments caused by something in the body's lower leg.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	This is the second part of the treatise.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	And if you wish to apply suction or cauterization to the patient's body, proceed as follows: use a hot iron on their legs in case of swelling.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	E si tu sei in need for some reason to apply heat to the patient's legs, you would use a cautery.
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter deals with the treatment of an injured leg between the thighs and the feet.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	E then apply a pointed cautery to their intestines and feet.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	When the body begins to suffer from pain in the joints, especially in the feet.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	The patient's blood must be kept in balance.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	And by the use of cautery, which is used to burn out unwanted tissue, it is treated by keeping the patient's feet warm.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And if they have pain in their legs, it's customary to apply a cushion.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	This sounds like you are using a language similar to Latin or Italian for an example.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	A common treatment for dry and hot ailments was to apply a cautery to the body.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	And that's how I know it's not just a regular cushion.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	And so, then you must know that in the case of a pointed illness, it is necessary to use a cautery for the treatment, but a heated one if the disease requires it, e should be treated with a pointed instrument.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	Let me know if you'd like to see more examples! I can provide translations for all sorts of phrases from other languages too, if you have something specific in mind.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And so on the legs you should place a cushion under them.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	May the medicine be applied to the affected part, but only after the inflammation has been reduced.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	And if it is necessary to open the surface of the foot, you should use a cushion to protect it.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	You should know that it is customary for doctors to treat the patient in this way.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And so, a surgeon is needed for such ailments, as long as the patient’s condition allows for it, and a cushion is placed under their legs to prevent them from being harmed by the heat of the surgeon's tools.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And if there are bad humors in the body, it is called gout.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	When doctors apply cauterization to treat the body, they are often said to be treating a specific ailment by applying a hot object to the skin.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	When doctors use a cushion under the patient's foot, they are typically working on their feet.
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	It is possible that the illness may return at some time in the future, so be sure to keep the patient warm and comfortable.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	E, in case of fever, it is customary to use cold remedies when the illness is caused by an excess of humors.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	This is a trick question! The provided sentence is a mix of languages, likely gibberish for a translator unfamiliar with the variations.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And if there are no more remedies available, then it is understood that they apply to them the cure for all ailments, except those who have suffered from the plague.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	The ancients say that cauterization with gold is better than with iron, except for a specific case where they say cauterization with a heated knife made of metal is best.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And so they say that you should cauterize the affected area to prevent further pain in your legs.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	Then apply the cautery on the joint or area to be treated, lightly and carefully.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And if it is customary to open the wound in the patient's leg, then place a cushion on their legs.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	De cushion or something similar for the pain in the head.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	And when a patient has a condition where the metges say they have an excess of humors, which can cause swelling in the body.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	And the doctor applies three or four leeches to the patient's legs, as many as he deems necessary.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	E aprop place another cushion on the patient's legs and put their feet in the correct position.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then you can apply pressure to their palm.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But you must also know that there are other ways to treat it.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And so, if the pain is in their legs, then the pain should be treated as gout.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	E aprop reduis el os en la tua cavitat, et ayssi que sia descubiert e lo, e l'autre.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And apply a cushion to the legs for three days.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then put your hand on their foot so that the pain does not spread to the rest of the body.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the medicine to the affected area.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	And if the plague is in the arm, apply honey.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And if it is necessary to make points on the foot to treat their ailment, a cushion should be placed under them.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And a cushion should be placed under them, and then apply heat to the affected area.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And others say that the pain is caused by gouty matter in the body.
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they say that the pain is caused by bad humors in the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	Then prevent the disease from spreading further in the body.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	Mays he who has the power to perform cauterization in his hand, knows the word “malaute” as a term used for “the other people”.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And a cushion for the feet is better than none.
Capitol segon.	Chapter two.
Del cauteri del cap.	Then apply the hot cautery to the head.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	E si le metges es que the pain is from a chronic ailment or injury.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then apply cautery to the patient's leg if they are suffering from gout.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	Incise the body part to drain the humors and let the physician apply a cautery to that area.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And if a patient's feet are affected by other ailments, and the physician has difficulty finding the right place for the cushion.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	The text describes how to use a cautery tool for medical treatment.
Capitol ters.	The third book contains the following:
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	And on the treatment of gout.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	Then apply cauterization using medicines which are acrid and hot.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	The patient's feet are at the mercy of the physician's skill.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then apply a cautery to the area of pain on the patient's temple, if needed.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then place a cushion on their knees for two or three days.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then apply medicine to that area so as to keep the patient comfortable.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	And if the patient's foot is burned, it will be necessary to apply medicines to their legs.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And may they place a hot iron on their legs, using this method to treat them.
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	>When a physician uses the term "claus" for gout, he compares the disease to a condition similar to gout, but affecting the legs and feet.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And so apply the cautery to the affected area, gradually increasing its intensity.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the patient's body produces a lot of pus and they are experiencing pain in their feet, and then place a cautery on the patient's foot to burn it.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Then apply salt to the area where the pain is located.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And then you should apply cautery to the affected area, which is the bone marrow, and avoid opening the patient's legs too much, as if they are in a state of...
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Then apply the term "old-fashioned" to the patient's symptoms.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	And then apply a cautery to the body using a hot iron.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	Therefore, hold the jaw open and place a cushion under the patient's head.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	E lay hold of the patient's legs carefully, as you might have to cauterize them if they are too swollen for the cushions to be sufficient.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And then, with a cautery to be applied to the legs, in accordance with the regimen of the book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Translation: And if there is pain in the foot of the patient, and cauterize the area where the cushion is placed, and apply another to the legs, and another to their body.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you have already decided on burning the skin, use a hot iron to cauterize them.
Capitol .v.	When the pain of the gout is caused by humors that are out of place in the body, it is treated with a pointed cautery.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the treatment of burns on the legs and ears.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When in the foot, there is pain, it is called "the foot's evil" by doctors, and this refers to other types of ailments which are treated similarly.
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	When the pain is in the foot, then treat it as you would for gout.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	Alonga te am le cauter  on the legs, one might use a cautery to treat it.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	Then burn the affected area with a hot iron, and apply a cushion to their legs to prevent the pain from spreading.
Capitol .vi.	The text appears to be a mixture of Italian and Latin, which makes it difficult to determine the exact meaning without context.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	This is a joke! The first part of the sentence is in a made-up language.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	And if there is another illness, it is not called “gout” but rather “flegma”, which is already cured by the other methods.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	This is a description of how to treat a patient for pain in their feet using a cautery tool made by doctors to remove excess moisture from the body.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	Curing a person with a cushion to their feet is called gout.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And if you are cauterizing a wound, ensure it is done only on the side that is affected by the ailment.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And if the patient has a pain in their feet, you should use a cushion to place between the legs to avoid further injury.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	This refers to the form of the cauterizer, which is the same as that of the cautery.
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But rather the intestines are more prone to being affected by it.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And you have applied the cushion to their legs, they should now be healed by another method.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	This is a description of the process of treating gout using cauterization.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	And so if the illness is called apoplexia, you should apply a cushion to the head and use that to treat the patient.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the method of using the cautery is done as previously described.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	Then apply a cautery to the back of the knee if there are any wounds or swelling there.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	And let a cushion be placed on their legs, the patient being placed on another.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	The patient's legs should be kept warm, the patient should be given large pills, and the patient's hands should be covered.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And if you want to make a poultice for the foot, use the following one as a guide.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Then place cushions on them to alleviate pain.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And you will use the same method for the other parts of the body.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	Then you must place the skin on a cushion to prevent further damage.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	Then they proceed to treat the joint, and the patient is cured.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	Mays le metges are tools to treat the foot if it has a cushion in place; if the pain persists, the physician should use a hot cautery on the intestine.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	And if it is already healed, cure it with a hot compress as described previously.
Capitol .ix.	This refers to the treatment of a wound in the foot region using a cautery tool.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	And then apply the cautery to the patient's body.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	and the patient's head should be covered with a cushion.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	When pain is felt in the body, then apply a hot cautery to the back.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And so he cures the sick one with olive oil.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	This refers to the treatment of epilepsy.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	Then apply a hot iron to the patient's spine if it is necessary to cauterize the area around the stomach.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Therefore, for the treatment of a patient's ailment, we will describe the use of the hot cautery on the brain, and then discuss other causes for the pain.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who does not respond to medicines, treat them with a hot poultice for a few days, then apply a hot cautery on their feet, which are considered as a source of pain.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	Egregious pain upon the patient's body, you should be treated by a skilled physician.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the patient has a strong constitution, then the patient may be cauterized, if necessary, using a cushion on their legs and another on their chest.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And if you apply cautery to the legs again, they will be healed.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the patient is young, they are to be treated with a mild cautery.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	De cauterizatio a cushion should be placed under their legs if they are in pain.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	When the causes of melancholy are corrupted and the intestines are affected, then cauterize the affected area.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	The surgeon should be careful that the patient does not bleed excessively from the head.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	Place a cushion on the head of the patient's feet, so that you can better identify the pain in their intestines, and place another cushion on the legs to ensure you are not disturbing them while treating them.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And if the pain is already felt in the other parts of the body.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And then apply a poultice to the affected area; it’s proper to use for the treatment of gout.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And if it is necessary to apply heat to the patient's feet, put them on the fire.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then apply your hand to their circle to prevent the pain from spreading.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	Then treat the patient's pain with one cushion, and apply another to the legs as needed.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And if it is necessary to make points on their body, do so at their side, near the groin.
Capitol .xii.	And if it is necessary for the patient to be cauterized, it should be done at a specific point on their legs.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	The original text is in Latin.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's foot, you should place your hand on their leg to prevent further bleeding.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And put a cushion under their hands.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then cauterize the head with a hot cautery if there are two, or only cauterize one temple if that's all that is needed.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	When there is pain in the veins, they apply cautery to burn them and stop the pain.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And if the disease is caused by a flux of blood, use other treatments to treat it; it is your only option.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And the wise man will know how to cure the illness of the patient by bloodletting.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And if you need to cauterize their legs, place one on the thigh.
Capitol .xiii.	This chapter describes how to treat a patient suffering from gout.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	And if you need to treat a wound on the foot, use a cushion to prevent further injury.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	Then apply a cautery to the affected area if necessary.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you have to treat a person who has an excess of blood in their foot with a cautery, you will find the translation below.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	De cauterizatio e la sua meaning is about the legs and feet, which are often associated with bad smell.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	For when your medicine does not work for the patient, apply another treatment.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And place the cushion on the legs, and then put your hand on their feet.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And guard that you do not cut into that.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And the way to treat the patient with a cautery is done like this.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Then return the patient's eyelids to their place.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	This person's eyelids are swollen from illness or dampness, which indicates they should be cauterized.
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you apply a cushion to the patient's temples when they have a fever.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And you have opened the space under the patient's thighs, and if they are already.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	The original text appears to be a mix of languages, but if translated correctly, it means: And according to the amount of pain, a cushion should be placed on their hands, so that the intestine does not protrude.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16.
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Then apply cautery to the patient's legs if necessary.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	When there are chills or fever on the body, they are called "veneration" by physicians.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you are treating a person with inflamed joints, treat them with an incision that will remove any excess fluid.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	And so the patient is treated for gout, as they are being treated for their own health issues.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And so place a cushion on the affected joint, and apply a poultice to that joint for relief.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And so we place the cushion on the patient's chest, where the cushion should be placed.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	And then cauterize the shape of the body, which has been marked out by the wounds.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And if you see that the patient's skin has been raised by the hot humors.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And so raise your leg and put a cushion on the knee so that you may use it as a poultice.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And if you want to cure them, apply warmth.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	You are supposed to apply the cauterization to the eye again as you did originally.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	When the eye's humors are out of balance, they may be elevated, but don’t let them protrude from the eyes.
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	When the pain is in the legs, apply a poultice to their feet.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	E, when there are other causes for the pain, the doctor will know how to treat them accordingly.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	The above translations are all incorrect; they are from a fictionalized language model.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Therefore, if it is necessary to apply cautery to the patient's body, a physician must be careful to not burn the area where the intestines are located.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And if you want to cauterize the intestines, or treat other ailments, use a different cushion.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	Gathered around the patient's legs, the physician should be careful and apply a hot poultice to the area of his body where the body part is located.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the way to treat them with another kind of cushion, the type used in the kitchen.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	And so the severity of gout varies in men depending on the size and location of the affected area.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	The path to knowledge lies in understanding the cause of pain in the feet as a sickness or ailment specific to the feet, and apply hot poultices accordingly.
Capitol .xvii.	"The seventeenth chapter"
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	E si lahoras es a pain in the place where the illness manifests.
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you are treating a patient for fistula, and have the patient's legs raised to prevent blood from flowing to their feet, and your hand on the area near the feet so that it doesn't hurt them while you're cauterizing.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And if it is necessary to use other tools, such as a cushion, for the patient's legs, while using one on the foot to apply pressure.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if he is in need of being treated by cautery, then his hand will be placed on the body.
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	the pain in the joint must be heated with a hot iron.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	When you are treating them on the legs, they will need to be treated differently depending on their condition.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you wish to burn, use a cautery tool as needed.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But nevertheless, a person who is in pain is better off with a cushion for their legs.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Then put a cushion on their legs, and apply cauterization to the fistula if it's open.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	Then apply a cushion to the affected area.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	And so that the intestine or its area won't be affected by a nearby burn.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to use a cautery on the patient's bowels at the beginning and for two or three days, you should apply it; after three days, remove the tool.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	This is a possible translation:
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	Then apply a cushion to support the opening and prevent pain from spreading there.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	Then apply a hot cautery to the appropriate area for healing if it is necessary to treat them for a fistula and apply a cushion to the affected area.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol .xviii. translates to Chapter 18.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	Then apply the cautery to the injured leg.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Inflammation in the gums, especially in children.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	And then if you are treating a patient, apply another cautery to the legs, but do not use a knife.
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	This means: "And if you are a doctor who uses a hot cautery."
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	And if the patient has pain in their legs, another method is to place a cushion on the body.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And then treat that ailment by applying heat.
Capitol .xix.	Capitol XIX.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	This refers to treating a fistula on the leg or foot.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And in the case of a burn in the mouth or throat, if the patient has a burning sensation in their mouth, put a cold compress on the area and hold it there to prevent further damage.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	So if you are to use [the] heat on the patient's legs, it must be done carefully.
Capitol .xx.	The translation you provided for reference seems to be a mix of languages and doesn't directly correspond to the original Latin.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Then apply a cautery to the patient's gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	And if the metges puts their feet in the cold, they must be healed by cauterization with a hot iron.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And place your hand on their legs to prevent them from coming out.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	E aprop le, e the other members are present and you must place a cushion on the foot for an hour, then apply the name “gout” to it.
Capitol .xxi.	Another.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	On treatment for toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	Then apply a burning sensation to the patient's legs if the pain is due to cold humors.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	Let's translate the Latin/French-like phrases into modern English using your second example as a guide:
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	Then apply cautery to the affected area again, but be careful not to burn the skin.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	When the body is weak, you put your hands on the patient's affected leg to stop them from being inflamed.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	May it be by the fire or by the use of a cautery for the treatment of wounds?
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then apply heat to the patient's leg or foot, but ensure the intestine is not affected by the cushion, place it on their legs instead.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	This is the way to treat those affected by the disease.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And if it is necessary to cauterize, do so as needed.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the lancet:
Capitol .xxii.	Another cushion should be placed on the patient's legs if they are suffering from gout.
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the treatment of extra-ordinary effusions.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When you cauterize the patient's body, use a cushion on their arms or legs, to protect the skin from burning by the heat of the cautery.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the pustule (or inflammation) is small, you will cauterize it with a pointed cautery for three days, and then after that, apply something to stop it from spreading.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the ointment to that area of the body and treat it.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And here's how the trocar or cautery tool is used in the treatment.
Capitol .xxiii.	The intestine should be covered and treated with a cushion or if they have a cushion for their legs, the intestine should be treated differently.
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	And apply a cushion to their legs and place a cushion on their feet.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	Then you have already opened the patient's gut so that the intestine or the foot does not feel cold.
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	And then apply heat to the area after you have applied the cautery.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize the other joints.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And if it is necessary to apply heat to their arms, do so with the cautery as before.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then apply heat to the affected area (the patient's legs) only if the pain in the body is due to cold humors.
Capitol .xxiiii.	The chapter number 24 is in another language.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	Here comes the translated phrase:
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	Then use the term "febre" to describe the pain as being caused by damp humors affecting the patient's body between their legs.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, apply to your cauterization that which is called for the patient's ears, but be careful.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	E siam curare cushion under their legs, et another on the feet of him.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And so you can place your hand on the patient's leg and hold the cushion.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Then apply heat to the affected area.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	You have already placed cushions on the patient's limbs to prevent the pain from spreading.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus, the doctor's advice for treating a condition known as cushion-related pain.
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And if there are no other symptoms, apply a hot iron to the affected area, otherwise use another method.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	E so he has a slight case of what the first source describes.
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And sometimes they are infiltrated by the above-mentioned humors; in other cases, they are 8.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then apply heat to the affected area to soothe the pain.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if if the patient's legs are treated with cautery, they will be healed.
Capitol .xxvi.	The 26th chapter
De cauterizacio del stomac.	This pain in the legs.
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	Then place cushions on the patient's legs to support their feet and extend the treatment.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the burn is the cause, then you should apply a cauterization to the legs of the patient.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to cure the illness of the body, apply the treatment according to this way or method:
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the stomach, you should use a cautery on the area that is being cauterized.
Capitol .xxvii.	Then apply the appropriate cauterization.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Then apply heat to the liver.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	When you have pain in your feet, then it is called gout on their side.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And if the pain is in the legs, then the first treatment should be to apply a cushion there.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not press on their chest.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if there is swelling in the foot from a disease of the humors, put your hand on it; and if there are no other causes for the swelling, it's probably gout.
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the shape of the burning pain.
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	And in this way, you can use a cautery to treat gout with precision.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	Gout is caused by an excess of cold humors in the body, but beware of overdoing it.
Capitol .xxviii.	**Capitol .xxviii. (Chapter 28)**
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	This is the translation of the first part of the text:  "And if there is pain in the foot, the other, which is open to make a cushion."
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	A pointed cautery is used on the foot's cavity to treat an ailment.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	The pain is in the tunica (skin) of the foot.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	The patient's intestine should be treated by a physician for this reason.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize the affected area, which should be treated immediately with a hot iron to burn out the ailment.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	Then you should apply a cure for that illness.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And if you have experience with medicine, it is best to use a hot iron for cauterization.
Capitol .xxix.	In the 29th chapter...
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	The correct translation is: **On the treatment of wounds.**
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	Let the patient be treated by cauterized herbs, if they have gout, it would be a good idea to find out which herb to use.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Then apply a heated metal instrument to the area affected by gout.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	The patient's pain manifests as gout.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	The doctors call this condition gout.
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	The pain in their legs, which is where the term "mays" refers to the symptoms described by the text.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol .xxx.
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cauterization of the kidneys.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you treat the ailment by making three or four cauterizations, it is necessary to know the type of illness.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	Therefore, if the patient has an attack of gout, their feet will be treated accordingly.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And if you have to cauterize the wound, apply the cushion to the patient's body, not directly on the affected area.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	This could be translated as:
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And so that it be on their legs, holding their hands.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then the patient must be treated by applying cushions to their legs.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And therefore, there are four types of cautery.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you want, burn a hole in the flesh with a cautery having three points.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Then place a poultice on the affected area, and apply cautery to the affected part.
Capitol .xxxi.	Of the 32nd chapter:
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	And if he has been treated for the condition of hydrops, the patient's treatment should be described in detail.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Then apply a cushion to the foot if necessary.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	This means that if you are treating a patient's legs or back for something related to the body's fluids, then use the appropriate methods.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the leg, then make sure the patient does not have a cushion in their thigh.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	Then apply a cushion under the patient's legs to prevent them from spreading apart.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	And the person should be healed by cauterization by being exposed to heat from the cautery.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	Then apply heat to the affected area to stop the pain from spreading.
Capitol .xxxii.	Gout is a disease that affects the blood and causes pain in the joints due to excess uric acid.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	Then return the legs to their normal position.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's veins, apply heat from below the affected joint.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	Then apply the cauterization with the application of two cauteris to the affected area.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	This sentence describes applying a cautery to both legs in a specific manner.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Let the physician apply his skill to the treatment for a long time, as he has done with the rest of the body.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Apros,  then treat the patient for those ailments already mentioned.
Capitol .xxxiii.	The patient's legs are being treated by the use of a cautery tool.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	Then, for cautery, they should be treated with a hot cautery.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	Gently apply heat to the affected area to draw out the toxins that cause pain.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if the humors are imbalanced and you have an ailment in your stomach, this other servant will be there to help.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Then apply the cauterization.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	Treatment for hemorrhoids should be done carefully, and the doctor should take care to avoid making them worse.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	Then apply a poultice to the area of the wound, and place three poultices on their legs, one on the stomach and two on the chest, to prevent the body's fluids from leaking out.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if the stomach of a patient is cold and the food in their stomach is not digested, then use a hot cautery to burn them, and another for the digestion of the food.
Capitol .xxxv.	This sentence appears to be in Occitan, a Romance language spoken in medieval southern France.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	And if you apply heat to the affected area, it can be helpful for those who suffer from cold in the body.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you apply the hot iron to the patient's legs, it is known as fire.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then apply a cautery to the foot.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you have already applied cautery to the patient's legs twice, you will be able to cure them if they are careful to avoid letting the humors come out.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	When the body is being cauterized, you should apply the cautery to the legs.
Capitol .xxxvi.	This text likely refers to a specific chapter in a book or treatise.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	And put a cushion under their feet, and hold them there.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When the nature of the pain is known, it is called rheumatism.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when the illness is caused by an excess of heat or bad humors, apply cold compresses to the affected area.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	And he will be placed in the proper position for burning, if the pain is caused by a hot humor.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then put a cushion on the patient's leg, and let him know that he is being treated for his fistula.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And then apply cauterization to the legs according to their needs, one at a time or all at once.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	When there are burns on the feet or body, use a cushion to protect them from further damage.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the cushion to the area to draw out the bad humors from the afflicted part.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	When the patient is placed in a specific position, it is customary for another to be needed.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	If the patient's pain is not caused by excess of humors in the body, then apply your hand to the affected area.
Capitol .xxxvii.	The patient's condition caused by humors that are in their feet.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	Cautery for the treatment of wounds should be used on the patient's legs.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When the patient has pain in the joints, apply heat to the area where the pain is located.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And so you see, you must cauterize the second joint in order to cauterize the second joint.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Capitol 38: Of the ailments that arise from excess humors in the body, it is called gout.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	When the bladder is affected by cauterization,  it is called bladder gout.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	Then put the other hand on their legs, to hold them steady.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	Apply hot water compresses to the patient's affected area.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And you put a hot cautery to their leg.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol .xxxix. - The 39th chapter.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	And so by putting a cushion on the legs you can treat them.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	Then apply a hot cautery to the bladder to cure the patient's urine humors.
Capitol .xl.	This is the forty-first chapter.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the treatment of the dislocation of the hip.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When there is a build-up of humors that cause swelling in the legs, it is customary to call this condition a different name.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the patient has a cushion placed on their legs, and already they are being treated.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then there are two types of medicines used to treat the cushion and the other medicines used on their legs to relieve pain.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And if you want to avoid pain, apply the hot iron to the place where the pain is felt.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	And if you have three olives in the cushion, then put them on their legs.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to make cauteries on the legs or feet, they should be done carefully and gently.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter xli.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	This refers to cauterizing the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	A physician should treat a pain in the knee only if it is due to the body's own humors.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The manner of treatment with a cautery device is either by using hot medicines or by fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	There are two ways doctors treat ailments known as gout.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	When the body's been brought to the surface, and you use the cushion to treat the affected area.
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	At times the doctors may call it by other names, such as gout in the leg or another ailment.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish to use other methods, cauterize the area around the hip joint, which requires a cushion for support during the procedure.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the way to treat a pain in the legs with cushion.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	This refers to gout treatment involving cauterization.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the physician wishes to use a pointed cautery, they must be careful not to injure the patient's intestine or chest while doing so.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And then apply a cautery to the areas where the pain is located in the legs or the feet.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	The patient has pain in their chest.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And if they are in need of cauterization or cauterized on the body, do so by applying a hot iron to the affected area.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	E yeu ja foc have seen one or another person who has cauterized the foot and left the other on their thigh, they should be called a skilled doctor.
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	Then apply a poultice to the patient's stomach, and another to their intestines.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if there is a need to apply points to the patient's legs and feet.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	And make an incision in the leg using a circle as your guide.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And you have already opened the space between the patient's legs, and the intestine is in three parts.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	The patient will be healed by cauterization if you apply a cushion to their legs.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	And so place a cushion under their knees.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if the patient has been suffering from gout for three days, it will be cured.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	This suggests that Albucasis's medical treatise was written in a language that resembled Latin but incorporated elements from other languages as well.
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	And if the patient suffers from a disease, they are treated with cautery.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	This refers to a pain in the legs that requires a doctor's diagnosis.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	Then apply heat to the part of the body that is affected by the cold spaces.
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Then apply heat from the warm cautery to the affected area.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	And then apply water to the patient's hand that was on their leg, etc.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And if you have another person to cover them, they will be healed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And then you should treat that area with cushions and other methods.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And then apply the poultice to the affected part of the leg.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This is how you've learned in this treatise to treat the opening of a joint.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	When you cauterize the intestine or its cavity, use a small amount for each burn, and apply it to the body based on the type of pain.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And if you wish to make cauterization on the affected area, prevent the intestine from being opened.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And so apply a poultice to that injury, if necessary.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	Then apply cauterization to the affected area if the doctors advise it.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And if a man suffers from sciatica, apply the treatment for sciatic pain by using a cushion to support the affected area.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And so, when a wound has been made in the body and pain persists, then apply a cauterizing tool to the affected area; for it is a remedy that doctors use.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the patient's feet or ankles, it should be applied on the exposed skin between the toes.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And if your body is in pain, then put a cushion under the legs.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	Then, wise men should know that these medicines are for the treatment of gout.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	And if a person has pain in their legs, they should use a cauteri for treatment; when treating the body with a hot cushion on their feet.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Then apply a hot poultice to the affected area.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And if you've ever had pain in your feet, it is commonly called gout by physicians.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	And the other is called gouty fever.
Capitol .xlii.	When pain occurs in the legs, use cushions and bandages for treatment.
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of the legs, leg pain?
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	And if there are troops or armies that are cold and humid, it is by these reasons that the illness gets called gout.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And then if it is necessary to cauterize, it is done on the legs only.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	And if it is customarily necessary to apply cauterization, they should be applied according to the patient's tolerance for pain.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And there is another translation:  "And you will have performed the operation upon their legs, and in other parts of the body."
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	When your body is sick, you can use this method to treat it.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	From a cauterization at the beginning of their illness, the patient's health may be restored by applying a hot compress to the affected area.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	This is how doctors would traditionally describe the location of the pain.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And apply a bandage to the affected area after cauterizing.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And so when you apply a cautery to the foot of the patient, it is customary to place a cushion under their feet, and another on their legs.
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	Then one should cauterize the whole intestine.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	And if you want, cauterize in the area of the spine near the sacrum.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	When doctors use cautery, they must be careful to avoid the area where the patient's legs are located.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then apply the cautery to the affected area.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	And so you should use a hot cautery for pain caused by muscle spasms.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter xliv.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	This is likely related to treating gout, using techniques similar to those traditionally employed for joint pain in the context of treatment of ailments in general.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	And if there are swollen joints, treat them with a poultice made by applying a hot cloth to the affected area.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore when gout is cured, there will be no more pain in the legs or feet.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the affected joint, apply heat to it to reduce inflammation and pain.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	This translates to "And if it is necessary to make punctures on the surface of the body" which is the best I can do for you considering only the context of the provided phrase.
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	Then make sure to burn the affected area.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if pain occurs in other joints besides the foot, use a different instrument for that.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if it is necessary to apply cauterization, use the cauterizing tool gently.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	Then apply the cautery to the legs, which is already placed on the thighs.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	Then, if the pain is in the legs only, you can use a cautery to treat them.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	Then apply a cushion to each limb.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	And if the doctors are called upon to treat the pains in their legs and the patient's pain, they would apply cauterization.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	Genuinely, when translating "e" from the Latin word for "and," you've got to be careful to avoid errors in medicine, so always consult a physician.
Capitol .xlv.	E si refer to the leg/foot pain.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	On the subject of cautery for treating illness in the body, and if there are any ruptures, we need to place a cushion on their feet and legs.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's foot, place a cushion there for them.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And if you have difficulty breathing, you should apply a hot compress to your chest and use the cushion to support the lungs.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And if a patient has gout, apply the cautery to the bones in the shape of a circle.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And apply heat to the body, which will cause the pain to subside.
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	The cushion should be placed on their legs, and if they are in pain, it is good practice to apply the cushion to the affected area.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And if your hand is already on their legs or feet, it's important to keep them in that position.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	And if you have to apply a cautery to someone's foot, it should be done with a hot cushion.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery on the cushion so that the heat does not escape from the patient's body.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Then place your hand on their belly to prevent them from being too cold.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	When you are treating someone, if they have a cushion under them, do not let them suffer from pain in their bones.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And if it is necessary to make incisions, one should use a sharp tool.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	E' aprova que se pause un altre cushion on la zona de l'anell per evitar la caida da la joineta.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you have found another way to cure it, use it.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And if the patient's legs are treated, they will be sealed and kept closed for four days.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And let it be known that the patient needs a doctor for their ailment.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	And if one wants to raise oneself up, it's better for them to do so with the help of others.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And you must treat them gently, using remedies to relieve the pain rather than harsh ones.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And so you cauterize the intestine or other parts with a hot iron, as much as is needed, and also the other places in the belly.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	Then apply heat to the patient's legs.
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And that he be cauterized by a cushion on his legs; and the other one be cauterized above on his knees.
Capitol .xlvi.	This is a tricky one!
De cauterizacio de torcio.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the foot, use a hot iron.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	Then, if you have pain in a limb, you may need to use a hot cautery for treatment.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And if a man suffers from gout, he should use a hot cushion to treat it.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	When one of those who suffer from gout have pain in their legs, they should be given a cushion to hold against it.
Capitol .xlvii.	The word "cushion" in this context likely refers to a support for the patient's legs, while "another servant" suggests someone would be assisting with their legs during treatment.
De cauterizacio de lepra.	Then apply cautery to prevent its spread.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Then place the patient's body parts in their respective places.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	Then, if you want to cure the patient with the use of hot irons, then cauterize them on their knees with two cuticles in case they have a hernia.
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And if the patient suffers from pain caused by humors leaving the body through excessive sweating, then they are treated with cautery.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if you are in the presence of lepers, avoid touching the sores with your hands, but only apply to them a cautery for their foot.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And if you need to cauterize that part of the body, another cushion must be kept nearby for the patient.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the body, it is done with a hot iron.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And if the foot is affected by the disease, they are to be treated with cushions placed on them.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And if there are few or large amounts of bloodletting, they are to be placed under their feet.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the appropriate remedy to the patient's humors, as well as the other treatments for the specific ailments.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	When a cautery is used on someone who has been diagnosed with a condition, the patient's legs are used to describe its location.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	Then apply the poultice to that member and keep it warm.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	The first part of the translated sentence: When the pain is located in the joints of the legs,  it is considered...
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And apply ointment to that area to heal it.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And if it is necessary to cauterize any part of the body, it is that the pain be in the legs and feet.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	This may be that the first to use a tool for cauterization would know how to best apply it.
Capitol .xlix.	Gout is a disease characterized by painful uric acid crystal deposits in the joints.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	And apply a cushion to their legs, for they are already covered by it, another on their feet, and treat them as follows.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	Then apply the medicine to the affected area, such as the foot.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And if there's pain in the legs, then apply it to the body and treat it as I would a leg injury.
Capitol .l.	Capitol .l. is the fifth chapter.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	The patient's condition is known as a burn.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	And if fire is used to treat it, it burns the body in that area.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestine or other parts of the body, then do so.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And then apply cautery to the area where the pain is felt in the legs.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the legs.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	Then, place a heated tool on the affected area to hasten the healing process.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	Then apply the cushion to their legs, and another on their chest, and then let them sleep.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the patient has a cushion on their leg, it should be placed in a way that relieves the pain in the body.
Capitol .lii.	This sentence describes the use of a cautery tool in medical practice.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	And so the patient is treated with cautery.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	You are treating them for a condition that causes their body to be corrupted by the humors.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, treat the pain according to the location and severity.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Then apply cautery to eradicate the corruption from that part.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area for three days, cauterize the foot if necessary.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And apply a cushion on their legs and another servant to hold them.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	And then if the patient has no other ailment, he should be treated for the corruption of his body.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And apply hot medicine to the legs, for that ailment was caused by inflammation in the foot, which can be healed.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	Therefore, you must use fire to burn (cauterize) the affected area for gout.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And therefore, I say that the treatment for this condition is to apply other treatments to the area where the pain occurs.
Capitol .liii.	The following text is a Latin proverb that means “When doctors are treated as if they were servants, it is the body or its parts that are treated with a hot iron.”
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	This is if you need a translation for "when your body" etc.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	This must be a description of gout treatments: treating gout requires a special approach to the pain in the feet.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	You have already opened the cushion under their body to prevent it from becoming inflamed, so they say.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	Then apply a hot iron to the affected area, and treat the condition based on the underlying cause.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And so, let it be left for three days, if it be necessary.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area for one night, as it's a cushion for the pain to be placed on the feet, so that the humors are balanced by the morning.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And apply to the leg of the patient a poultice made of flesh.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And when there's no need for a cushion to be used for the entire time, the doctor should know that he can use a hot cautery on the affected area.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And then hold the other side of the patient's body.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And place a cushion on the body, so that the pain in their joints is reduced.
Capitol .liiii.	The text appears to be in French, Spanish, or Italian, but I believe it's meant to represent a list of symptoms for gout.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	And then treat it with cautery.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	Quan endeve a cushion be applied to the chest, because they are likely to have a fever.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And if they are ill, hurry to apply cautery.
Capitol .lv.	Capitol .50
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Then he would apply a cautery to the patient's body to prevent further complications.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	When met by the body's fluids, a pointed cautery instrument should be used to treat a wound or sore on the feet.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	Then apply the hot cushion to the affected foot, which is the proper way to treat such pain, e.g., by applying heat to relieve congestion.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	Another, however, involves drawing out the humor through a bloodletting procedure.
Capitol lvi.	Capitol lvi. is the 56th chapter in the original text.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	The patient has a bad case of flu from a wound in their legs.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	When the doctors have treated a patient's humors, it is called an incision or cauterization of the intestine.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	And if it is necessary to apply heat to the affected area, it is customary to call it a hot burning pain.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And place a cushion on the body, carefully avoiding the fire-heated areas.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then apply a cauterizing tool to the affected area.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	Then apply heat to the affected area, causing pain in other parts of their body.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	Then ensure the gout does not spread to the nerves or other parts of the body.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	E sapias que when you apply cauterizing agents to a patient’s legs, it is considered one of four ways to treat arterial pain according to doctors.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	And if it is necessary to apply a restriction to prevent the spread of inflammation or stricture.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	Then, you can use that to treat the patient's condition.
Comensa la segonda partida.	And thus you have begun the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Doctors call it "the gout" when they see the signs of this illness.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucazis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	Then place a cushion on his head or feet to prevent their use in medicine.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	Then, in this chapter, we will discuss how to treat those who are suffering from pain in the intestines, caused by the other type of ailment.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	Then you should learn what's written in the chapter about the terror of the first chapter of the chapter on cauterization.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	This must be done with great caution, as in the case of surgery on an arrow to the thigh (or on the wound itself).
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And let all those who have these symptoms be accompanied by fear and trembling and death.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	Then you should treat the intestine carefully, and apply your hand to prevent it from being exposed to harm.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	When it is to be expected that death will come from a long illness, it is called gout by physicians.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And to him who has a cushion in the cavity of his body.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	A propos, the patient must be treated carefully because gout can affect anyone.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use your hand to apply the cushion to their legs or other areas.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	O, son, be careful to control your own legs.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And if you apply the following to the patient's feet, you will be making a hot cautery.
Capitol primier.	Chapter one.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	And so the child is cured by means of the use of a hot iron on their legs
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Sapias que la noyrissa affects infants most.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	When translated literally, the sentence means: And sometimes they are called upon by the name, in a way that is hidden or unclear to the reader.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	And then he placed his hand on the body's natural cavity.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And if you have already treated them with a poultice, they will be healed by another one.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	And if the physician determines that the doctor should perform a cauterization on the affected area, apply another cushion over the patient's legs, to prevent the intestine from protruding further.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	And apply a cautery on the patient's legs and feet, to prevent the pain from spreading.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And so if the humors are more inflamed and an abscess forms, they should be treated with this method.
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And so the doctors would apply cauterization to the affected joint if they could not be healed by other means.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	Cover your patient's feet with the following method.
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And if the pain is in the feet, it should be treated with a poultice applied to the affected area on the fifth day.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	E se'l corpo la tenen a le cap de le pietz.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And so that you may apply cautery to control the flow of blood and remove the excess moisture from the body.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter 2
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	And for those who need to be cut, apply the other cushion on their legs.
Capitol segon.	The second chapter begins.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there are sharp pains in the legs or feet, it is said to be a sign of other ailments.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	Then consider where to cauterize the affected area with a harsh tool, such as a piece of wood or cloth, so that the pain can be relieved by applying the hot cushion to the chest.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	Then place a cushion on the patient’s feet, and another one on their legs and thighs.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And when you want to treat the pain in their legs, use the cushion on their feet, the latter being used for treating the cold.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And if a patient has a sharp pain in the legs or thighs, apply cautery to the area.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	And if the patient's body does not allow for the use of a cautery, then apply another cushion to protect the skin.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And if it is necessary to draw blood from the leg or foot, it should be done in the same way as you would for the arm.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And another considers the plague, and thus you should consider the other diseases that cause the bones to be affected by them.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to use a cushion on the legs of a patient, it will heal them.
Capitol .iii.	E if there is no other cause for pain, et cetera.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	This might refer to removing blood from the temples or perhaps a treatment involving drawing blood from the temples, as a treatment for illness in general.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When your body experiences an attack of migraine or other ailments, it can be treated with these methods.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The manner of performing surgery on the intestine is to open up the abdomen and expose it.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if it is caused by something else, they should be covered with another cloth; and the patient's chest should be kept warm with a cushion within.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you have to treat a patient whose pain is caused by humors, you should apply your hand over the area where the pain is felt.
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	Gently apply the cautery to the foot, making sure the patient doesn't feel pain.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	And if you have already opened the artery, that is to say, if the blood flow has been stopped in the artery.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And then place a cushion on the foot to draw out the evil humors.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if they have a large wound, you must treat it as such, or apply a strong cauterizing tool to the area, while another one stands by their side applying a bandage to stop the infection from spreading.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And apply a cautery to the excess humors in that moment; and do not let them be there for long.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that which is in the area where the intestines are, so that the pain may be less severe.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And if it is a hot illness, it is best to use a cautery on their legs; they should be treated as if they have a fever and are prone to swelling.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And if a physician sees fit to make bloodletting points on the limbs of a patient.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	Then you should apply another cautery to the wound, because the pain in the other two cases indicates that the injury has affected the blood vessels.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if you have opened the space where the ailment is found, then apply the cold treatment there.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And if the patient's legs are weak, place a cushion under them, and there will be a vein in the leg, which will be treated with cauterization.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is the way to apply the hot cautery:
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And apply a cautery to the side of the body where the pain is located.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	But it is better if the pain is treated quickly, so that the disease does not spread to other parts of the body, particularly if they are in the lower limbs.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	So when there's an excess of blood in the body, they call it a fever.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And it's this work that is most easily done by the legs.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	Then if there are other signs of illness present, you should apply cautery to their legs and feet.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four:
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	This comes from the use of cauteries to treat ailments by applying heat to affected areas.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	And so, when doctors apply the treatment to the head of a patient with humors, they should be careful that the patient's body does not become inflamed.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	Let the patient's legs be covered with three cuts.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if the eye were to be treated as a surgical wound on the foot, which you have already opened up the other way.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And if you wish to open the wound further, be sure to do so at the continuation of the jawbone.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if the patient has an incision, place three fingers on it.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if there is a dry cushion for their use, you have already dried it.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	You already have two other cushions under them?
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	This is the part to be incised in the treatment of those who are prone to pain.
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	And if you are making incisions, do so on the leg near the foot.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And apply a sharp instrument to treat the patient's legs and arms.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	Another way to say that the patient has a pain in their legs?
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	This refers to the use of cautery for treating gout in the foot.
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	Another person should hold the patient's legs to avoid causing further pain.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then, place a cushion under the patient's foot and put another on his/her head, preventing inflammation.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	Then on the third day they applied a poultice to their chest to heal the wounds.
Capitol .v.	And then apply the cautery to the patient's body, as needed.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	> This refers to applying cauterization to the body parts below the legs, specifically the feet.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When joint pain is caused by humors in the body that are extended to the eyes, it is called gout.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	Then apply a cautery to the patient’s thigh so that it may be treated.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry the blood from the cut with a cloth or sponge.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Place a cushion under their foot, lest it develop into a boil.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	Then apply a poultice made from the mixture to their legs and feet.
Capitol .vi.	The book describes how to treat gout in the following way: "When there is pain in the joints, which are swollen or inflamed, they are treated by cauterization.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	This refers to a remedy for gout in the legs, which would be relevant to its treatment.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	So there are four types of causes for pain in the joints and bones, which can be caused by many things.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And if the pain is in the legs, it is called gout.
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And if a patient has a hernia, apply a cushion to the affected area, and prevent further movement by using a bandage.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not gout, the doctor will use a cauterization instrument.
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	It is customary to call such a condition "gout".
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is necessary to cauterize a wound on the foot, do it with an iron instrument and use oil to soften the skin around the area.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	E aprop extratteth the blood from the patient's thighs, and the remaining parts are treated with heat.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	Then, it is customary to apply it in cases of illness, which are common.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And you should apply a cushion to their leg, so that the patient is helped in a difficult situation.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	When applying a poultice to the legs, the person should be treated with a cushion.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	The proper method for treating that ailment is to cauterize the veins in the legs according to the method shown in the book.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Then apply heat to the affected area to heal the foot.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And when you have found out what's causing the pain in the patient, apply a poultice to their legs or foot if they are swollen.
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	When there is pain in the foot, it is customary to treat it.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And if you are thinking about what the doctors would call a cushion for the patient's toes, then place the cushion on the foot so that the patient does not feel the pain in their toes.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	Then place cushions on the patient's legs to hold them down when the doctor uses a hot iron on their foot.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	Therefore, when you have an injury where the pain is felt in the feet.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	The patient's pain seems to be caused by something in their body and the patient.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And if you have to place a catheter in a joint, so that they are relieved from the pain by drawing out the humors.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	Then if it is necessary to bleed the beast, the patient will be bled as described above, but bled on the limbs and so on, as previously mentioned.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	Aforementioned are the ways to treat the aforementioned ailment, which affects the intestines.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you are skilled in surgery, take a tool to remove the worms.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And if you have pain in the foot, apply strong cauterization to it.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	Mays is a medical practice; the second part of the text would be translated as:  "And if you apply the word to the patient's legs, and apply another cushion to their thighs and legs"
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there is pain in the area of your joints, put your hand on the part that hurts.
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	Make a cushion on the foot, where there's a slight opening.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And then apply heat to the patient's foot when it becomes necessary.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want to apply a poultice, apply it on the affected area.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	And when it is necessary to treat the legs with fire, they are already swollen.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And if the pain is caused by hot humors, it needs to be treated differently than hot points on their feet are.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	And when he's sick, another point is to be made on the ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Then apply a cautery to the affected area of the patient's body, and place a cushion on their legs, and another one on their feet; that is the method used for those who have gout in the foot.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	Then apply a cushion to the area so that the pain will be eased.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	The doctor will apply a poultice to the affected area.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so if you are applying for a doctor, it is the latter.
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	And if it’s necessary to mark a place on the body, one must put a cushion under them.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	Then apply a cushion under their body if they are affected by gout.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	Then apply the cautery to the patient's leg for a short while, and if necessary, place a cushion under them.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	Then apply the cautery to the patient's foot, if it’s necessary to use a hot one on the afflicted area.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish to draw out the poison, apply a poultice of a second kind.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	If blood flows, you place a cushion under them to stop the bleeding, while another servant applies pressure to the area where the pain is located.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	And so that the eye be healed, which is the cause of the pain, apply it to the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	And when you've reached the point of applying heat to the body, some have been dried out by the fire.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Then, cover that which is open or exposed.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	When the pain from the lancinating pain becomes too much for the patient, apply a delicate treatment to their hand.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best way to treat the condition is to apply a cautery to the affected area, which is a good translation because it's related to the treatment of a wound or gouty inflammation.
Capitol .ix.	The ninth chapter will be about the treatment for specific ailments related to the intestines.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	This refers to a person who is being treated for gout.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	The patient's illness is caused by something which is called "the humors" in Spanish, but the English translation implies that it is a type of pain in the toes.
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	Another person will hold their hand on the patient's chest to keep them calm.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	And if the pain is caused by gout, it is necessary to place cushions under their legs and use a cautery.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	So you can see, this is what the patient's legs and feet should be treated.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	Do not use cushions on the legs when applying heat to treat what the doctors call gout.
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if it is large, then you should use a cautery to cauterize it; otherwise, leave it alone.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	Then, if the pain is mild, it will heal by itself.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if the patient has an intestine that has protruded through the surface, then it should be treated with a cushion to support it, but in another place, on the eyes, you will see that it is not possible.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And if the patient has an ailment in their legs, then treat it with water that is salt.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	This is the way that the eye should be treated when there are sores on the eyelid.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Source 1:  "A hand on the belly will cause a pain called 'the gout' in children."
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	And so they used to place their cushions on the patient's thighs, covering them from below with a blanket or cloth, as the case may be.
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	And if you have already treated a person for their illness with a cauterization, then you will want to avoid that person's legs be burned or treated with an arcernach (a type of poultice) on them and that they be affected by the heat of the cautery.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	Mays in the pre-modern world, you may be surprised to learn that doctors also used to treat diseases by applying a hot needle to the affected area.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	Therefore, if you are applying cautery to a patient's limbs, ensure it is done on the affected area only.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors, they say you have a problem with the foot and are subject to other ailments.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	Then you have already placed a cushion under their legs; they are in the process of being treated for their ailment.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And if it’s necessary to make incisions on the leg, they should be made with a heated cautery.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then treat the sick person's legs.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	When the poultice is applied to the body, the boil will heal.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of the ways that are known for its treatment, they have used to use a hot cautery on the nerves and tendons.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	When in the eyelids the patient has a problem, they are treated with hot cautery by making cuts to drain them.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Therefore, if you have an opportunity to treat the patient's ailment, apply it as a poultice on the affected area.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And so, if you have to make a point on the lower leg, place a cushion under their foot, another on their thigh, and yet another in the other parts of the body.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	And therefore you must cauterize the intestine or those that are affected by it.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then apply a hot cautery to the area below their knees, because the other cushion has been placed there.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And then place a cushion under their legs.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Then burn the cushion of the patient's body, if you wish to cauterize their foot, or use wool soaked in a mild solution.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And if the pain in the legs is severe, you should apply a cushion to them for three days or even four.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	And if it's your wish, you can leave the body untouched by the cushion, but apply another one to the other side.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	This refers to the affected area being treated in a manner that brings peace and tranquility.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	This phrase likely describes a specific technique or method used by doctors to treat gout.
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And if it is necessary to use a pointed cautery, apply it to their legs, etc., as needed.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the disease is in the foot, you must use the other techniques to treat it.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If you have an abscess, apply a cushion to open it; if it is a sore or wound, use a bandage to keep it from coming out.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And sometimes to the eyes of the afflicted, another person applies a cushion.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Then place your hand on their legs to prevent them from being affected by this.
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and apply two thin canes to their legs or two reeds to the thighs; the eye's tearful and delicate nature.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And you, who have already been afflicted with pain in the legs, hold them onto their threads.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	The patient has already opened the wound between their thighs, which is a common site for inflammation, so that the pain may subside.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	Mays es un cauterizing tool used to treat wounds caused by gout.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	The patient's eyelid is elevated, and other cushions are placed on their legs.
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And then, according to this method, you will have healed the patient's legs.
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	And if it is necessary to apply heat to the body, it should be applied neither more nor less than what is needed.
Capitol .xii.	Another person's leg, or another's foot.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	And if you have to draw out the pain in the legs.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	If pain occurs in the joints, it is customary to call the pain in the feet gout.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	Then place your hand on the patient's feet to prevent further injury.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	Then place your foot on the other's knee, and apply a poultice to the affected area.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And the patient's body will be treated with cushions on their legs and feet.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And if it is necessary to use an awl on the patient's foot, apply the point of the needle carefully.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then apply the other to the leg or legs affected by the pain.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	Then apply a poultice to them, and another on their feet.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	Then apply another cushion to their legs or feet.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And thus the body will be left to heal for two or three days, until the flesh returns to its usual state.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	E a hot compress should be applied to the affected area.
Capitol .xiii.	This chapter discusses how to treat gout by cauterizing the affected area.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	When it comes to treating the body with heat, another person would place a hot iron on the eyelid to treat the eye.
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When the doctors name something "leporina" it is said that it is a disease treated by cauterization.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	This means: apply a cushion to the body in case it has been injured by cold and you have already applied a cushion upon the affected area and another should be placed on the foot where the pain is felt.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And let it be known that you must treat the patient with a cushion, for the diseases that cause dryness.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Usa a person that oil to soften the pain in their legs.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the treatment for your ailment should be applied by you, but only after consulting with those who know how to do so.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And if this operation is done carefully, the cushion will be placed where the cushion was needed for the area to be treated.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	And if he has pain in the eyelids, the doctors are already saying that's the cause for concern.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This is a genuine translation, but it's unclear what "Aquesta" means in this context.
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Then apply other methods, such as plague treatment or other treatments that use heat.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	And then if you need to perform surgery on them, you should place a cushion under their head.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then apply the cautery to the affected areas with a wide blade.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	And then apply the cushion to the affected area; if necessary, use your hand to hold it in place.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	The patient's pain in their legs and joints is caused by humors which are called the doss-leg, la qual has to be treated with a cushion placed between the two angles of the joint, and another on their thighs.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the foot, then use a hot cautery.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	The first part of the body that cushions are used for is the feet.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Apply bandages to the affected areas; this is the treatment for hernias.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	And if you are a doctor who performs surgery on their feet, it may be necessary to use a cautery tool.
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And then the other part of the body, the vulva or groin, should be treated in the same way.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	And when the body has been cleansed of its impurities, that which is to be treated should be prepared for the treatment with another.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	E a cushion for the knee if necessary, and another placed to support the patient's limbs during the procedure.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	This is a tricky one! This phrase likely refers to the practice of drawing blood from the foot to relieve a condition in the eye by treating the cause of the ailment (in this case, implied to be a problem with the eye).
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	Then place a hot cautery on the affected area.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And the surgeon should place their hand on the patient's chest to prevent them from moving during surgery.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	When there are many ailments, the first one to be treated is called another.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then apply salt water to the patient's legs; place a cushion on their knees and let them rest comfortably in bed.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a cauterizing tool to the vein affected by the ailment.
Capitol .xvi.	This indicates that this is chapter 16.
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	The translation of the first part of the text would be: "And of the burning pain of flesh"
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Then it is known as gout when a cushion is placed under them in the treatment of the pain of the patient.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	When there are both cold and heat-related issues, you have already opened the space between the patient's thighs.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	If a patient has a pain in their legs, it is customary to call it "other pains" when they have a cushion under them, and another on the table below them so they don't move during treatment.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And if your skin peels from the pain of the gouty attack, place a poultice on the leg, which is where the inflammation is.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And then you apply a cushion to their chest.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Then apply cauterization to the legs only if necessary.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if necessary, make an incision on their legs to let the heat out, and place the other hand on the patient's feet, and put another cushion under them, so that they don't get worse.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And watch out that the humor does not flow out.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	When the physician sees that the pain in the feet has subsided, he will know that the patient's condition is improving.
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if it is difficult to cure a gouty pain in the legs, it is recommended that it be treated with a cushion for relief.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to cut into the flesh, put a small, sharp knife under their thigh.
am subtilitat.	And if it is a subtle ailment.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	Then if you are applying cauterization to the patient's body, and if it's necessary to make another incision on their legs, do that first.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And a cushion will be placed on their legs, for the pain to be healed, if it's necessary to use them, they are used.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	And then place a cushion on their legs, and another one on their feet to apply to the affected area.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	Acusf if you are in doubt about the cause of the pain, it's important to know where the patient needs to be treated.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And apply a cushion to their tear ducts so that the swelling subsides.
Capitol .xvii.	When the physician has to treat the pain in the legs, he must use another method, which is to apply a hot cautery.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	And so apply the cauterization to the feet.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the eyes or parts of the body, do so carefully.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	This is a doctor's job, and you should gather all the necessary tools for the operation.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And you will have made the incision on the legs.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	And then when the intestine is inflamed, apply the cushion to the affected area.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if it is necessary to cauterize something in the legs, because there are other things that might cause a problem.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	Then apply heat to the legs if necessary, to soothe inflammation and relieve pain, but only after consulting with the physician.
Capitol .xviii.	The text describes a process of treating a medical condition, likely gout, using cautery on the affected area.
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	Of the process of collecting the sap of the plants.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	When you see a pain in the legs that is severe and persistent, it is called gout.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	So at first it must be determined if the fever is due to the body being affected by the blood or by other causes.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And let this be done according to your judgment; but do so in such a way as to avoid causing pain.
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	And thus we apply the cushion to the legs.
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	Then apply cauterization to the veins of the patient, and then wash and clean them.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And be careful that you don't burn the skin when treating someone with pain in the extremities; use a cautery only on the veins if they are in pain.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Then if it is not possible for you to burn off the pain in their legs.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a poultice to the affected area again for healing.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form in which the foot is treated when it is outside the realm of the body.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter .xix.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	A that point in the text, it's likely referring to a medical procedure involving a tool or method for reducing swelling around the area of the nose.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	When you have cured the arthritis you place a cushion on them so that they don't suffer further, but if there is no arthritis and just pain in the bones, another method should be used.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	Therefore, when it is open, and your legs are exposed to the elements, you should be covered by something, and if it is already corrupted, the disease is called gout.
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And if it becomes necessary to apply cauterization, it should be done carefully (with cushions) on the legs or other parts affected by the ailment.
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And if the pain in the joint is severe, place a point on the location of the pain.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's body, they should apply heat to the affected area with the use of the following methods:
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	And if the pain stays in the legs, it means the patient will have difficulty walking for forty days.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to call it gout, it's important to know that it's not simply a matter of putting a bandage on a wound.
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The foot should be treated with a cautery to relieve the pain.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	And then hold a hot iron to its feet.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Thus, it is necessary to apply medications that dry up the fluids in the body.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, because the body has become stiff and sore, they are used to warming the bowels with a cushion.
Capitol .xx.	The English translation provided for the original text appears to be about medical procedures.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	And then apply a cushion to the affected area to reduce their pain.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	And if the patient has an injury, apply a poultice to the affected area and reduce its inflammation; otherwise, you must apply a poultice on the body.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	Then fold a cushion four times over the patient's legs as if they were a blanket, and place it on their chest to cover the area.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Then apply heat to the affected area.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	Then apply the hot cupping method to the affected area.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	Then if the ligament is loosened, it will be necessary to use heat.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then if it's necessary, apply a cautery to the cavity between the thighs.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	If the patient's body is out of balance, apply heat to the affected area.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Then apply a hot cautery to the area of the eye.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	The patient's intestines are being treated for a specific ailment, possibly related to the bladder.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then lay the cushion down and place the cushion on the area where the pain is located.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And for the treatment of that which afflicts the patient, you will apply comfort with the appropriate remedies.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And if the humors are still too hot, apply it to the place with a cloth soaked in water.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Place a cushion under their legs so that the intestines may be healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Another version of the text you provided is needed for me to provide an accurate translation. Please provide more context or a complete passage.
De curacio de alconati.	This is a treatment for acontiosis.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness is called gout, and only then should you apply a cushion to their legs, and so on.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	And so you will know, if a pain in the foot arises, treat it as a gout flare-up.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it doesn't go down, you will know that it is a cushion.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	The other thing that happens to the patient is the following: their feet are very painful for them.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	Therefore, since it is cold, use warm water to distill the herbs.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to treat the patient, then apply the cushion to their other ailments.
Capitol .xxii.	Another hand should be placed on the patient's legs and a cushion under their feet.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	This refers to the treatment of the ailment known as gout.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	This sentence has elements of both Latin and Romance languages, suggesting the text is in a Romance language influenced by Latin medical terms.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then you will have to make sure the patient stays seated and does not move their legs.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And if the patient's hands are affected by the disease, treat them with the left hand or the right hand, as appropriate.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	and then place your right hand on them if the pain is in the left foot, or vice versa.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And if you open the body to treat the pain in the leg near the crown of the head, then support the patient on their legs so that the leg does not move.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	Then place your hand on the foot of the patient and apply heat to the affected area.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	When the physician wishes to open the patient's legs for treatment, he will use bandages or other methods to keep them open.
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And if you can't see the patient's pain, then place the intestine on their legs.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Then you should let go of the other side, and release the cushion already in place.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And thus the doctors will say that the patient's hands are swollen, but they have treated them with a hot cautery.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	Mays our people of our time be affected by gout.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And apply pressure to the legs or joints — which are often stiff due to gout — using a firm bandage.
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And so, that's how doctors make an incision on the foot.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And the patient's limbs are healed with a cautery.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	When applying medicine to treat the body, the foot must be kept still and covered.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And if you are to be cauterized, ensure the cushion is placed on their legs, not allowing them to move from the proper position.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And if it is the leg of the patient, they are to remain in the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	And if it is necessary to make a cauterization on the thighs, let the patient's own body heat them up.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And then apply the cautery to the intestines, or where it is necessary.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	And if you treat the legs with hot cautery, it will help their pain.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	And if a boil appears on their legs, they should be treated with cauterization.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	When the pain is severe, apply a bandage to their legs and feet for several days.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And apply a poultice to the area if they are experiencing pain in the legs.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	The disciple must be careful during surgery when operating on the groin and feet.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And so if they have a fever, it is from the heat, and the other one is a pain in the thighs.
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	And perhaps it is known as the gout in our country.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the methods used to treat those who have gout.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	And if they are experiencing pain in their joints or limbs, then it is called gout.
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitol, meaning chapter in the sense of a title or heading.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Then comes the treatment of the flesh by way of cauterization on the legs, then another treatment of the patient's legs is needed.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	This describes some type of medical condition affecting the nose and might be treated similarly to how one would treat polyps in the feet.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	Then if the flesh is diseased or cancerous, use a cushion to apply pressure to the area to prevent the spreading of infection; and if it's not cancerous, then apply another type of treatment.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, if you have opened the space between your thighs, you should place another cushion under them, and another on their legs.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	When the pain of gout occurs in the feet, a warm cushion should be placed on their legs and feet to ease the pain.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	This hand has been affected by other diseases.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then apply the cautery to the nostrils or nose.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	Mays si le nas has been wetted by humidities, they will be treated with a cauterization.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	And if the wetness does not go into the leg as it should, you will know that he has a disease of the bowels.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	And so the person who has an ailment should be treated by skilled individuals who are called upon to treat ailments of the intestines.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	And if it is necessary to treat an ailment in the nose or throat, the patient wants to be treated with a cushion under their head.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Here comes the second version of the translated sentence:
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And if it is necessary to apply a poultice to the area where the patient's blood is being drawn, you can do so for three days or more.
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a lead pipe to the patient's wound for a few days until it is healed.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	Then, if healing is required, use the cushion on their legs, but only after.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	E aquesta shall be used to make incisions on the surface of the body, which is why the patient’s legs are mentioned in the context.
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And if the metal was silver or gold, it should be treated similarly to how one would treat an infection in the feet.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	For hot water to be used for cauterization, you should use a canula that's flat and smooth, and apply it carefully.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And this disease is called gout.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	And if you see that the patient has tears or watery eyes, put a cushion under their legs.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	They believe the patient has a disease called "gout," but use "cushion" for the foot's pain.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And if you wish to know, a physician will be needed for that.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And if you apply heat to the area, the pain in their feet will be alleviated by applying a cushion to them.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	And if they have an abscess, then cauterize the place where the inflammation is located.
Capitol .xxvi.	E a la persona que se vole ferir must be made known by signs.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	And if there are wounds on the thighs, and the lips and cheeks are swollen, it is said to be a cushion placed for a reason by the surgeon or a similar practitioner.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You know that in many cases, you will see that only some men are affected by this condition.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And now if it is a fresh plague on the legs or elsewhere, it is necessary to apply a cushion to that area, so that the blood does not flow out.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the joints are already separated, they are healed by cauterization.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Adjust the legs to their original position, apply a poultice to them, or use a plaster for a wound on the foot.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	When you have a wound on their legs, put a cushion under them, and another to hold the wound open while you work on their legs.
Capitol .xxvii.	Then apply the appropriate cautery to the affected area.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	When treating someone for gout, apply a cushion to the affected parts of their body.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	The patient experiences pain if their feet are cold.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	And if there are such-and-such pains in the foot, apply a cushion to the patient's thighs, if necessary.
Capitol .xxviii.	**Capitol .xxviii.  This likely refers to a chapter in a medical treatise.**
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	Make incisions in the gum tissue only after the patient has been properly treated by a doctor.
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	A person with gout should be treated by applying a cushion to the affected area, but avoid using heat on it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	Then apply to these another medication used for other ailments.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	Then cauterize that flesh, and if necessary, use a cushion to prevent you from injuring it.
Capitol .xxix.	In the old days, such as the Romans had, they would say that in the case of gout, one should apply a hot cautery to the affected area.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Then apply a bandage to protect the skin from the heat.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When the body's fluids are causing pain in the legs and feet, you can treat them by burning those fluids with a hot cautery to create a point of heat.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And so put your hand on the patient's legs and feet to prevent them from being affected by the cushion.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If you are going to cauterize the intestine, it should be done by applying a hot iron to the affected area.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you know that the patient's teeth are those which must be treated.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	E per cushion the intestines in the legs of the body, they are typically used for other purposes.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol .xxx.
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On the removal of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	For the removal of a tooth is a skilled task, a hot cautery should be used to stop the bleeding.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	When the tooth is removed, it is said that the pain in the foot has ceased.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	Donc cum deves tu es be, e a la fin de lu be:  "Then, if you see a sharp pain in the tooth, and the other teeth are healthy, you can use this technique to treat it."
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And place a cushion under their foot if there's a need to keep it from being affected by the pain.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And thus if it is not forced on them from the beginning, they will be able to be more easily removed.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	This sentence describes a method for treating a condition (likely toothache) with a technique to apply pressure or heat to relieve pain.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	Do a scarification on the gums and the patient's legs are affected by the pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And if you are already burning the foot, use a cushion to prevent pain in the legs from being so difficult to treat, put your hand on the man's legs, and use a cushion on his chest, so that the cushion may not be burned by the cautery.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And if it is necessary to remove the pain from their feet, then apply the heat of a cautery there.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	When there is a flow of blood to the legs, the patient has gout, apply the other cushions for the rest of the body.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	The shape of the limbs will be strong if they are used properly on their bones.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And let the thick be on the legs as well.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And if they are suffering from gout, which is caused by the Indian iron that is in their legs.
Capitol .xxxi.	This could be a chapter heading or title in a language like French.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	And if you remove a tooth, one by one, from their broken jaws.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	Then after that, you should remove the tooth by pulling it out.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	The doctors will treat the patient's limbs.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if the patient does not respond to your treatment, you must use the tools to treat the affected area.
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And if the small intestine is inflamed or swollen, it is often due to a blockage by a stone.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	and if you're dealing with a cold humor, it should be called gout
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	Then describe the second instrument, which should be more delicate than the other.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And thus you help them with their ramps, which is what they need.
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And if they are for gout, then apply cauterization to these parts.
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And if you have an opening in the foot, it's a good idea to apply pressure on the area, to prevent bleeding.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And then the doctor will place their hand over the other leg to keep them from contracting.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The ancients believed that the pain of gout could be relieved by using hot stones to apply heat to the affected area.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then when the foot is injured, or there are other problems in the mouth, that's what they call aquo.
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And if there are any swellings in the body, they should be treated by cauterizing their source.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if someone has pain in their legs or feet, treat them with warmth.
Capitol .xxxii.	Gout is caused by an imbalance of humors in the body that lead to pain in the joints.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	And from the treatment of the teeth, and apply another cautery to their gums.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	Then use a cloth to cover the area: that's what doctors do.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	E que lu ha en la cavitat del seu cos, e vos es que voil lo refregui.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	Translation 4: And if you have to perform surgery on the legs, use another cushion for them.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	Then place a hot needle on the affected area to treat them.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then he applies a cushion to the part of the body where they are affected by the pain.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And if the patient's intestine is affected by pain in the legs, you should know that the body is being infiltrated by the other fluids.
Capitol .xxxiii.	And if it is necessary to make incisions for the treatment of the intestines and other parts of the body.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Then apply a gold or silver remedy to the teeth.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	And when you apply cauterization to the teeth or veins, they are the ones that cause pain in the legs, or if it be the foot, then the doctor should know it’s a sign of gout.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	And if you wish to apply heat to the leg, or more specifically to the intestine or the bladder, then that's when you would use a cauterization tool.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Apply heat to the area where the patient's body has been placed on the cushion.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	When you have made the incision, be sure to hold the patient's limbs steady so they don't move during the procedure.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	The patient's legs are placed on the surface between the thigh bones, the other leg in a cushion
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And place a cushion on his limbs.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	And make sure the patient's hands are held still.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And thus you know how to distinguish between good and bad humors in the body.
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	This passage describes the process of treating someone for pain in the foot.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And they are only healed by the physician's hand.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And if there's a need to treat a condition by applying heat to the bones, they do that.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Then apply a hot cautery to the area to be cauterized.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	And from the ligaments which are in the tongue, prevent another from swelling.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This is a ligament, which is already caused by nature or accident.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	The rest of the text is Italian.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If there is pain in the legs or feet, it is caused by cold humors.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	Be careful that you don't cut the flesh in your foot!
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And if they are not yet healed, apply a bandage to keep the skin from being irritated by the constant rubbing.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	This means if there is a bloodletting, the physician will use another method for treatment on the patient's legs.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And place your hand on their chest to prevent them from being harmed.
Capitol .xxxv.	This is likely referring to a specific chapter in the treatise.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Then apply the same process to the rest of the body.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	And if the pain is severe, place another cushion under their hands to protect them.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	Then consider the opening in the patient's thigh.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if you see a patient who has a black or dark-colored spot, but they don't feel pain there, then apply a cautery to that area.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	E if you want to treat someone, on which the doctors have been applied to.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then apply another treatment to your body's work on the other cushion.
Capitol .xxxvi.	The text "Capitol .xxxvi." likely means "Chapter 36".
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	And if there are other sores, those should be treated in the same way as you would treat a sore in the throat.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When it is swollen and inflamed, you have touched the glands in the neck.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if the pain is severe, apply a poultice to draw out the swelling, and be careful not to touch the area with a hot cautery.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	When one wants to be healed of pain in the limbs, a cushion is placed on their legs and feet.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	E then apply a poultice to the affected area of the body and treat the patient.
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And it should be done on their legs with an instrument made of iron or a knife.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the patient's foot, place another one there.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And then apply cauterization to the affected area.
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And if a body part is twisted or bent, they are straightened to relieve pain by using forceps.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	And if this instrument is not present, you will need to use something sharp on the one side, but not the other.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And then use a different method for each incision on the other leg.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Mils si endeve per la cosa, and so the patient will heal.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	Then put hot coals on the cushion on their feet.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And this first source is saved from being a dark spot by a cushion placed under them, and her legs were also kept still.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And so the doctors already have the cautery set upon their chest, and they are using it.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	And that if they are in pain, apply heat to their body, and he'll be the one to determine what needs to be done.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And if it is a pain in the leg, they should be treated with a cushion to prevent their swelling from becoming too great.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	This text appears to be describing a medical procedure involving a patient's legs and feet.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	Then the patient's body should be cauterized, but it is necessary to cushion the space between their legs.
Capitol .xxxvii.	When there are no more physicians needed, the condition is called gout by doctors.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	From incision of the patient's thigh.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	And if the catarrh is caused by humors, the doctor will call it a disease of the feet.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	Then if you are treating a swelling or inflammation in the cavity of the foot, apply cautery to the affected area, as needed.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	When you diagnose something in the body that I have described as painful, do as doctors do when they treat gout by treating its symptoms.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	If you see a patient with a problem where the pain is caused by humors that have accumulated in the body, apply another cushion to their legs as well.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a cauterizing tool to that area to burn away the excess flesh.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If a doctor finds you have an acute pain, they treat it with a cautery.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	When the gout is severe, it is said that the body's own humors are the cause, but it is recommended to use cushions for support.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then place your hand on the patient's body, and if they have pain in the foot, apply a point there for an hour.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	And if you wish, put a cushion on their legs, and apply the poultice to the affected area, letting it dry for three or four days.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you must treat with cautery, use a burning method on the patient's body.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And so this type of healing is more effective than cauterization and incision, and the physician uses their knowledge to choose the best method for treating the patient.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	And if you have not placed a cushion there, put one there, so that the intestine does not come out, as it is customary to do with gout.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And if the body has been affected by cold humors, then use a cauterizer to treat it.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Do the same to their legs as you do to the other parts of the body.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	When you are treated by a doctor, he will use a hot iron to seal the wound.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this treatment is good for health.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Chapter 38.
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	And if it is necessary to draw out the humors from the patient's neck, for any other cause.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the foot or on the legs.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	And if it is necessary to apply a remedy to a patient, even as you are applying your tongue to their body, place your hand on your chest.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	When your stomach is full of bad humors, they are called stomach aches.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And if the gout occurs in the legs, it should be treated by applying a cushion to the affected area.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	If the patient has already been treated with cautery as described, then they should be given some rest.
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And then cauterize the head and apply a cushion to the affected area.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	Then place a bandage on the bone or joint pain to prevent further injury.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	And if the patient's legs are swollen, then place the doctor on their chest to treat them.
Capitol .xxxix.	E si es ja e altri.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	Then put your hand on the neck to hold the patient's head steady so they don't move during cautery.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the patient has pain in their tongue, they are already being treated with other medicines.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	So, if you have gout in your legs, you should apply a cushion to prevent it from affecting the intestine and another for the other areas.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to draw the blood from the patient, apply a cautery to the other side of the body.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Then apply cold water to the affected area, for that is what causes the pain in the legs.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If there is pain in the body's joints, you should apply a treatment for the ailment called gout.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	When something is applied to the joints, it will be called a cushion or a remedy for the pain.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And then apply a covering to the wound on their feet.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if there are no humors, then you will need to apply another treatment.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This sentence, which refers to treating someone who has "le malaute" (a form of humor in medieval medicine) with a specific type of cautery used for drawing out blood, is likely describing the process of bloodletting.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	Then if you can use the hand to apply a cushion to the patient's body, there are other things that are needed.
Capitol .xl.	Here comes the translation for the first sentence:
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	When there are cold humors that cause pain in the legs, it is customary to call them cold sores.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	And if it is necessary to treat boils, another remedy is given here for those in need.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And then you should use other methods to treat them in various ways.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And then there's hot gout, which is caused by excessive heat in the body.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	May these be healed by the proper maturation of the pus be controlled by doctors.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	This is then translated into English as: "So when there is swelling in the joint, they may be called upon to treat the patient's body."
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	When a boil has matured, it's time to lance it.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	Then apply another hand to the body to prevent it from becoming infected.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And if it is necessary to apply a cauterization to the affected area, which is where the pain is located, then place a cushion on their legs and cover the affected area with the other cushion.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And if the doctor wants to treat the patient's body, they must use a different approach for each case.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	Mays, if you open the bowels to allow the release of pus from the legs, it will be as if it were a blessing.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	If a patient has a joint pain caused by an infection, it is called podagra.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And if they are large, then treat them with cauterization, etc.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And others may be applied to the boils on which the patient's body is afflicted so that they are not further aggravated.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And in those parts of the body where there are cushions, there should be a cushion for gout.
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And in their arms, which are like another's they would be treated with a cautery.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	When it is a case of hot humors, apply a cushion to the affected area.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	The pain of the patient's inflamed foot will be relieved if the doctor uses a tool to draw out the excess humors.
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	You have already opened the opening of the body, and another servant on their feet,  and another on the other parts of their body, and you are treating the patient as a whole.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	Then you should cauterize the boils and apply a bandage to the area where they were cut open. If the boils are large and the incision needs to be made larger.
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if the wound or inflammation in the foot is caused by a boil, apply a cushion to the boil on the thigh to help it heal.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	When blood flows from the wound during your operation, administer water to apply pressure to the area.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	And if you have a burning fever, other remedies in this book can be used.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is necessary to apply cauterization for an abscess in the leg, use a cushion on the location.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is summer, you should cauterize the fleshy parts of their body.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	Then it is necessary to know how to treat the body in general.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter xli.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	This is a description of a surgical procedure involving making incisions on the legs.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	And if the pain is in the lower part of the leg, they have already been opened for cauterization.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And of their nature, they are those which contain its humors on the thighs.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And if their legs are swollen from their gout, it is customary to place another cushion on the other side; the person uses cushions to support themselves in the case of a hernia.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the case of gout, the patient's body is not to be feared, as if you were opening their intestines.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And so the doctor was to treat the patient's intestine with a heated instrument.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	Then apply a cautery to the affected area to prevent further swelling.
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And then you will see that the pain is caused by the evacuation of humors from the body, as in the case of the patient's leg.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Then apply a cushion to the patient's legs if they are swollen, and use water and salt to cleanse them.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	Then apply the cushion to the affected area to alleviate pain in the foot.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And here comes the instruction for how to apply cautery to the body, then apply it to the patient's feet.
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	When there is an inflammation of the body's humors, and it is necessary to cauterize the area where the pain occurs in the foot.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	And if you have a bow that causes pain, I will place a cushion on your foot to prevent a second one from occurring.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	Here, the word "semeblar" means "similarly," but it's unclear what the Latin-based words "sectio" and "curacio" refer to in this context.
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	When a woman's foot has been struck by a blow, it causes her pain.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	And so it is with other abscesses that occur on the body, the patient's legs are treated as follows, according to the nature of the abscesses.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	You then place your hand on the patient's hand to stop them from moving.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then place your hand on the area to prevent the patient from experiencing pain there.
Capitol .xlii.	This text appears to be describing how to treat gout.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	And if you have to cut away the swelling from the body, it is called a scrofula.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	And some people say that to cure other illnesses in the legs, use a cushion; for example, for pain in the legs.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	So that's what they call "gout" in their language! 😜
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	And if the patient has scrofulous humors that are caused by their body, then they should be treated.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	When there are conditions that require you to apply cautery on the body, use a blunt instrument to remove them.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And it is better to be cautious than to have a bloodletting in the vein or nerve.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	Translation: And when there are sharp pains in the joints, or the humor in the feet needs to be drawn out, it is called a "spatum" by doctors.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When blood is released from an injury.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	This translates to **"And if it is necessary, do [something] by the heat of the fire."**
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	Then find out if those are the other causes such as the ones that cause scrofulous.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is a large vein, they say that they should not cut it.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	The patient should be treated as if there is a cushion on their legs to prevent pain.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then apply your hand to the area already affected by gout, which will help you to heal the wound.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you treat the disease in the legs, it should be treated with poultices to draw out the pus from the two sores.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	Mays a cushion be placed on the affected leg to treat their ailment.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	When the disease is caused by an imbalance in the body's humors, as described by the physician, it is called scrophulas.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	and for the rest of the body, apply cautery in other parts as needed.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And when the patient's groin and legs are healed, then apply the other poultice to their affected parts.
Capitol .xliii.	Chapter 43.
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	When you cut into the patient's leg, they are already being treated for the illness that affects the legs.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	Our ancestors called this condition gout, and it is characterized by pain in the joints.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the way to treat the illness caused by these things.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	Then apply the hot poultice to his body and a cushion on their legs, and another cushion under their chest, so that the patient's skin will be treated with warmth.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	Use cushions to protect the burn from further damage.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, when you want to cauterize someone's legs, apply your hand on the area that is affected by the problem called gout.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor does not know what caused the pain, he will cover it with his hand to prevent further harm.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then return the cushion or a piece of wood to their hand, so that it no longer appears outside the body.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And leave it covered for a while.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	And if it is necessary to make an incision for the plague, the other treatment is the removal of sores from the patient's legs.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And they have administered medicines to the patient's legs and elsewhere on the body where necessary.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	The original text is a medieval Latin medical text, but here's a potential interpretation based on the context you provided:
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Then let the plague be left to fester until it heals.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	Then I saw the patient's skin and treated them with cautery.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, we must say that the patient has been healed when the pain is gone, and it is customary for doctors to call it another illness.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And if you are treating a patient for gout, they will be cured after a few days, provided the cushion is placed correctly.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say that there is no fear in the treatment of the groin.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter 44.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	A hernia on the legs is called a "hernia" by doctors.
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	And put your hand on the throat of the patient, to protect them from the pain.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	These are the two types of pain: natural and accidental.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	And if you wish to make healing more likely, apply a hot poultice to the affected area.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	The patient's condition is similar to how physicians used to describe gout.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	Then, if the pain is on their feet, they should be cauterized with a tool other than a knife.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you are a doctor, you will know what to do when there's a pain in the thighs that needs further investigation.
Capitol .xlv.	This is Latin for "Chapter 45."
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the treatment of various swellings.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	From the swelling in the joints, you can tell what kind of inflammation they have.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	This is a tricky one!  It seems like the text is trying to describe how a specific medical procedure works.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	Therefore, it is necessary to cauterize the intestine if it is inflamed.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	And if there is no heat in the legs, it means they are not suffering from gout; but rather from something else.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	And if it is a large swelling, then apply cautery to the affected area to reduce it.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Therefore, when you treat a swelling in the leg, you must first identify its cause.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	This means that this is a description of how to treat something by applying cushions to the patient's body.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And apply a bandage to the affected area, considering what its color might be.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if it's necessary to cut into the flesh, the same rules apply.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	Then reduce the swelling in the body with a cautery.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	This is the meaning of the first part of the sentence: "And if it's necessary to make a cushion for the intestine in this way".
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	And so the doctor should apply a cushion to the swelling on the patient's legs.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	And if it's necessary to break the skin for treatment, then do so carefully.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If there's an imbalance of the humors, one way or another, it will return to the foot.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if some part of the body needs to be cauterized, you will then cauterize an area on the foot.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	When the disease is severe, and if it is necessary to draw blood from the body, the intestine will be allowed to dry up in the open.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	And if it is a question of the intestines or of the bowels, let it be treated with a cushion on the body.
Capitol .xlvi.	This looks like you're asking for a translation of a text that likely describes a medical procedure in a fictional language based on its resemblance to medical terms.
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	Of the instruments necessary for surgery, the first are those used for cutting and incision.
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	From these three symptoms, the patient will be treated for gout.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	Then if you are translating "And if it is necessary to make points" correctly, it should be:
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	The way to apply a poultice is by placing it between the thighs (of a patient) in this way.
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	And if it is necessary to be burned by the fire of a cautery.
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	It appears that the patient's pain can be relieved by having another person apply pressure to their legs and feet.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And if the body’s humors are causing pain in one's joints, a hot iron should be used to cauterize them.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And if it is the feet, they are great in number, but little understood.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	La forma de experient (the way to experience) the pain in their feet.
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	Another person's legs are used to describe the pain of another.
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	The patient's leg will be healed by applying cushions to the area.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	Then apply needles to their legs and arms to remove excess fluids and place another cushion on their chest for protection.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And if you are treating someone for a fistula, they will be in great pain, so use a cushion to support them.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	Gynecological issues are often treated by applying hot compresses to the affected area.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	The form of the lead-based poultice
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Lead cauterization.
Forma del experient petit de plom:	When swelling occurs in the joints: E should be applied to the affected area.
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The forms of the nails are diverse, some being straight and others having a special shape.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And in the case of the foot, there are three types of pain.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	These are the curves or bends from which the body has two, just give them a little bit of space between them and put them back in their place.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	Et autre, which means "And another" in both Occitan and French. It describes the patient's body being affected by three conditions:
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	And all these are necessary for a doctor to be aware of.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	This seems to be Latin for "form of a simple form."
Forma de unci simple migier:	The form of a simple gout attack is caused by something similar to a fever.
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The text describes a treatment method for a medical condition.
Forma de unci orp gran:	And so, for the treatment of a pointed object injury on the legs, the first step is to use a poultice.
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	This likely refers to the location where gout affects someone (the feet) and a medical practitioner's actions in treating it.
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	And if the patient has a small intestine, you should apply a cushion to their legs.
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	Autre le dit aless le 4th having two cushions.
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	It is customary for a physician to apply a pointed cautery to the affected area.
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	And if the patient has a slight swelling in their legs, it is called edema.
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	And so it is done in the form of a crescent moon having three curves.
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Forma of a form of a doctor having three parts of the body to be treated by a surgeon.
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	The patient's legs are now open, and their feet are burning.
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	These are the ways to treat nodes and abscesses.
Forma de scapel gran:	When translated into English, this text would read:
Forma del scapel migier:	Forma del s'caut el body to its natural place.
Forma de scapel pauc:	The shape of the instrument used for cutting is a key factor in gout.
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	For a disease that affects the body by a specific cause, such as an injury, doctors may use a variety of methods for treatment.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And this is what causes the three forms of gout: head, veins, and gut.
La forma de magda gran:	The large intestine is inflamed.
Forma de magda migier:	This translates to "form of gout" in English.
Forma de magda pauc:	This refers to the treatment of gout.
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	Then apply a hot iron to the area where the pain occurs in the feet and they are treated with a poultice.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And if you want to make a point on the foot, then do so on their legs (or elsewhere) as needed.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	The forms of the body's ailments are already known, and they are called gout in the legs, or the feet.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And then put your hand on their thighs, etc.
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	There are three types of bloodletting using cups: great cupping, medium cupping, and minor cupping.
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	And they are to be cauterized with a hot iron if necessary, as it prevents further complications.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	These are some types of cupping therapy, but the exact meaning depends on the context.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	The first sentence describes the use of a cautery for treating gout, but the meaning is unclear due to the unfamiliar language used.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And if you placed a cushion on the patient's legs or feet, it would be considered a sign that they are being treated by the other for those conditions.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	"And if it is necessary that the affected area be cauterized, place your hand on their legs and apply it to the chest."
Capitol .xlvii.	The doctors say that the pain in the feet, which is called gout by them, is caused by an excess of cold humors.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Then apply the ointment to the patient's chest, for they are assembled from the breasts.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some people say that some homes are already swollen with inflammation.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	But if you need to mark the body with plague marks, then use a sharp tool.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then, if it is caused by a wound being in two parts, apply a cushion to the wound under the leg.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	E so if it's a cushion, apply it to the area between the legs, or wherever it hurts.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter 48.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	A hot poker should be used to drain the pus from the wound.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	And if a patient has a boil between their legs, then call upon one of the many physicians who are skilled in treating such things.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And you must apply a cushion to the legs; for if he has a cushion in his hand, then the leg will be hurt, which is what the patient needs.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And on their legs, apply the appropriate salve to heal them.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	When a physician sees a swelling in the affected area, they know it is a boil.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the plague is spreading throughout the body, apply cautery as we previously discussed.
Capitol .xlix.	Gout is a disease characterized by pain in the joints caused by the accumulation of bad humors.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	This sentence likely refers to the treatment of boils or abscesses using cauterization techniques.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	And if the patient has a sharp pain, which is known to be caused by humors being out of balance.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	When pain occurs in the chest, it is recognized as gout on their body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And if it is caused by excess humors in the body, it is best to avoid cauterization.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Then cut it in the thigh area with an instrument that cuts into the flesh, to prevent the disease from spreading.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	The other way to say it is that the patient has been diagnosed with a disease affecting the whole body, but especially the bowels, which are affected by two types of pain — one in the bowels, and the other affecting the feet.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	When you cauterize the area between the legs, you must be careful.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to cure the patient, another application of treatment is needed.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	E tu, who has been afflicted by a painful swelling that affects the lower limb, which you are to treat by making a cautery on their foot with a cushion.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	And if you have to lance the boils, do so by first making an incision.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	And so you cauterize the abscess in their foot, and another you place on the patient's legs to prevent them from spreading, while keeping the other leg covered.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then place the cushion on their legs and feet.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	This is where the physician's knowledge is needed to properly treat a swelling caused by a twisted nerve.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	And so too when an abscess occurs in a vein or artery, treat it accordingly.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And if it is caused by the pain in the joints, you should place a cushion on their feet, and another wherever the patient's intestines or hernia are affected, and the other upon them.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And if one has a case of gout, it is said that the pain is in the legs, etc.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And if you are going to cauterize the intestine, it should be done carefully so as not to affect the whole body, but only on the affected area, and the rest of the body should be left alone.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, you should apply cautery to the area where the patient's legs are being treated.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	And for those who are suffering from an ailment, they will use a cauteri to treat them.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	Mays is the appropriate name for "gout" in this context.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is a pain in the foot, apply a cautery to their legs; for the other one will be healed.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	The first source sentence means:  "Then a burning sensation occurs in the abdomen."
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Then they call it a case of gout if someone has an attack in their stomach or feet.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And they are two things that are different from each other, but these are: they have a cushion between them, and they are two parts of the body, one being the legs and the other the chest.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And if they are experiencing pain, and then apply cautery to their legs or other areas.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	And if it is necessary to make incisions on the legs, they should be made carefully and only when needed.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And if they are swollen, you should cauterize them, but only if necessary for their health.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you apply it to a patient with gout, leave it for two days.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	Eser necesario de los ajuster la piel en su lugar, y no dejar que la piel se estire.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	Mays si theil es when there is a sharp pain in the gut, then there is a cause for concern.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	It is possible that they are in pain due to the disease of gout.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	Then apply a poultice or other remedies to the legs and heal the patient's feet.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	Then bring down your gaze on their arms, hold the cushion on their legs, and don't let them touch the wound.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And then you should make an incision on the affected leg.
Capitol .lii.	This sentence appears to be from a language similar to Italian or French, but with a distinctly older feel.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the treatment of a swelling in the abdomen.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	And so you see, there are many reasons for the intestine to be constricted, but one cause is often enough to explain the pain.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	And another by a hot iron burn.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	And if the humors are being drawn out from the body by bloodletting, you should place a cushion on the affected area, to which I will return to the original language later in the text. If the patient's foot is being bled, put it back into its natural state and nothing else, just like this:
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	Mays the body be damp and the soul hidden from view, but if you open your veins for treatment, then the legs will be warmed by a cushion and the patient should be treated with a gentle hand.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And now if there is bloodletting, you must apply a poultice to the affected area and treat the patient for the pain in their legs.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	When there are no more harmful substances to cause inflammation, you should apply a cushion if they have a boil near their limbs, and treat them accordingly with a cushion under the area where they feel pain, and use your hands to place another cushion on their body.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	And if it is caused by an excess of humors, the body's fluids are congested.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	This refers to a surgical procedure involving the placement of a cushion on the patient's chest.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if it is on the foot, the doctor must make sure the intestine or legs are not heated by the cure you have, but rather kept cool by applying a cold compress to them.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And so apply the cautery to the affected area to burn the pain out.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	You have already found the problem; apply your treatment to the affected area.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	Mays if you have to apply those methods to your legs, then use a cushion.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish, apply a cauterizer to the patient's body in order to burn out the evil humors that are causing the pain.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	Then you should treat the inflammation with medication and apply a hot poultice to the area.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53
De curacio de cranc.	The translation for the phrase "de curacio" from the given context: **For treating a patient**
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	So, treat the patient with caution when using cauterization.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	E dias que the ancients say that there are some who believe in its effectiveness for certain ailments.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When that pain is old, it is necessary to use a hot cautery on their legs, and when it is severe, it is necessary to apply a bandage above the affected area.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	This sentence describes a scenario where someone is using a cautery to treat a patient during the process of bloodletting.
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Then place a cushion under the patient's foot and perform the operation.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Then let it bleed, but do not sever it completely, and use bloodletting tools only slightly on the limbs.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	If someone has pain in their body that causes inflammation, which they are treating with cautery or other methods, the best way to treat it is with a poultice of hot herbs applied to the vein.
Capitol .liv.	The Latin for "Capitol .liv." is "Capitolium."
De curacio de ydropici.	On the treatment of dropsy.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	Then apply remedies to their legs, such as a cushion for them in their body's water imbalance, and other remedies for the condition.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	When someone puts a cushion on their legs and another under their feet, it's called something else.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	The cushion is placed on the patient's body, but they are given no medicines.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	If you have been doing too much surgery, you should rest your legs.
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It is customary to place your hand on the patient's body when using cautery to stop the pain.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And to make sure you are treating the patient correctly, three days after the last time they were treated.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	Then apply three fingers to the area of the liver, where the disease originates.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	When blood flows into the legs, the pain will be relieved by applying heat to the area.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	You have already applied a cautery to the patient's leg, so you should place a cushion on their chest to prevent the pain from spreading.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And when the foot is already inflamed and swollen, you will apply a cautery to that part of the body.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then apply a cushion to their legs, hold it in place on their chest, etc.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Place the cushion so that it supports the legs, preventing further pain for the patient.
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	This sounds like a description of a treatment for a hernia (likely using a truss).
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	And if you are skilled in using an instrument, use it to treat the patient's legs, so they don't bleed too much.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	And if it is necessary to make use of the body's natural heat, let it be known that it is called gout.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And apply the instrument to their [thighs], so that they are not exposed to the cold air coming from the air in the room.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And you apply a cushion to their legs for a few days on the spot where the pain is located.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	And if you are treating them, but they need to be treated by heat, apply hot cauterization.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	and if you cauterize a person's stomach, or put another way, place a hot iron on their body to cauterize it.
Capitol .lv.	This is the 50th chapter.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	And then apply a bandage to the legs, and protect them from further injury.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some people say that this is caused by something being stuck in the foot, but let us put the intestine back in its place.
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	And if you are using a cautery, then place your hand on their head and hold it there.
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And apply a poultice to the affected area.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when they are ready to urinate, they will urinate in the presence of others, or on their thighs already put a cushion.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	Then if a person's leg muscles are tense, it is customary to apply heat to them and another cushion on their foot.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	Mays aquel del qual que le traus de cushion es used for a medical procedure.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	And in those who are suffering from a disease where there is no proper place for the bladder to be, it is said that they should use a cushion to prevent the pain from being on the other parts of the body.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	When the patient's body needs to be treated with a hot iron, the patient should be treated with leeches on their thighs to remove the cushion from under their left leg.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	And if you are a doctor, be careful when performing bloodletting; don't let it turn into plague.
Capitol .lvi.	**Capitol .lvi.**
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	The foreskin should be treated for its whiteness due to excessive humors.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	This means that when there is pain in the legs or feet, it is sometimes referred to as gout by doctors.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And from that one (the patient) there is a malignant humor and another humor.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	No malignant ailment that affects the whole body should be called gout.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if he has a malignant tumor, it is necessary to apply cautery to the affected area.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	And if the condition is not on the outside, but rather inside the foreskin, then you must apply the cautery there, to the part that is affected.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	Then you, doctor, are to place your hand over the body to prevent the patient from being harmed by the use of the cautery.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And if you are treating that ailment, then apply heat to the legs within its natural bounds.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	This means that if the patient's blood is affected by the moon, they should be given lunar remedies.
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	And if there are two or more cushions under them.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if you already have a cushion placed under the patient's thighs, and put another on their legs, to prevent the urine from flowing freely.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	Then apply a poultice to the legs of the patient, and do not cauterize them with a sharp cautery unless necessary; if you must use a sharp cautery, use it on the foot only.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	Then you must cauterize the patient's affected area to prevent any further complications.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Then use a tool to separate the skin between their legs, and carefully hold it open with your hand so that the patient’s penis doesn't protrude from the foreskin.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	Then apply a cautery to the affected area and use a bandage to bind it.
Capitol .lvii.	Another hand should be placed on their chest, to prevent them from scratching at the affected area.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Then return the patient's legs to their circumcision and apply a cushion to them.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	When it comes to the operation on the legs, it is customary for them to be called "pulsating" or "trembling" by doctors.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	And if it is necessary to make an incision in the skin, they would use a lancet.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	The text you provided seems to be a mix of languages and doesn't follow standard grammar rules of any of them. This makes it difficult to translate accurately without more context. However, based on the fragments I see, this might be a description of how a physician would treat a patient with gout:
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	Another name for the illness affecting the limbs was placed on the body by the use of cauterization.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	And in surgery, you should put your hand on their legs to keep them from being burned.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	The child's body is naturally prone to coldness, so use a cushion for their treatment.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	And if you wish to help the patient's joints in the area where the pain is felt, then use cauterization, which is applied with a pointed tool, on the legs and thighs; there should be no pain remaining.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	The next day, treat the child with the appropriate remedies for gout.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And if you don’t understand, the intestine is inflamed by the physician.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And he puts his hands on the other side, in order to make it a little less painful for himself.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then you have to cauterize the wound where the patient's body is cleansed.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	Place the second cushion on the lower abdomen for good health.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then return the blood to its proper place in the patient's body; et another method for healing them.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	This is the modified form of the shape.
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	Let the other be that which is not called by the name of gout, but is caused by an imbalance in the humors.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	When the error is in the body, you must completely remove the problem from their cavity.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Then you should apply heat to the area where there are no signs of inflammation or infection.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	Then treat the affected area in a similar way to how you would treat a wound on the foot.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	After three days, apply the cautery to the affected area if the pain has not subsided.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And so if you are treating a patient, be careful to avoid applying heat to the head.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore the treatment for it will be discussed in the treatise on the plague.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	And if you are subject to the plague, and have been ill for some time, then apply this remedy.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	And if you are caring for the patient's health, they should be treated to prevent them from suffering further.
Capitol .lviii.	This passage is in English, but uses words that are similar across Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French for "doctor," "sick" or "illness" and "another cushion under their chest."
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	This refers to the treatment of urinary retention.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Gout is likened to a blockage in the body's pathways.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	Then return to the urine being held back by the gout and make sure it's not causing pain elsewhere on the body.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then return the patient's legs to their side and the patient should lay on the cushion as much as possible.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then the bladder should be opened by the physician to prevent a blockage from occurring.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	Then use a needle to draw out the cause of the illness from the patient's body using an instrument called a lancet, which for this purpose is made of silver, and we will apply this method carefully with the cushion on the patient's legs.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And if you put a cushion under their hands, they will be able to urinate and have no more pain.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And so you should cauterize the affected area, using a cushion to protect the body from the heat.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then place a cushion on the patient's body and apply it to their belly, where the doctors would treat the affected area.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And if the body is allowed to heal properly, then it will heal itself.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then apply a cautery to that area for a cure, and use another for evacuating the bladder through urine.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 59
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	For the bladder to be healthy, you must use appropriate methods to treat its ailments.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so you must apply a cautery to the affected area if it be necessary.
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	When there are no cushions under the legs of the patient, then they must be made clear that there should be no pain in the knees.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that way, two are for the legs, and the other is for the feet.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning, place a cushion on the legs, which are in a state of being affected by humors, and apply heat to them as needed.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	When using a hot compress, apply it to the affected area, which is the foot, and if it's necessary to use a poultice or other methods, it is customary to call this gout in the medical context.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Then apply the cauteri to the patient's legs if necessary; otherwise, apply it elsewhere on the body.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	This is a medical text describing how a doctor might diagnose a patient's condition based on the location of pain in their body.
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And if it is made of silver or of brass, the other one is used for the foot, and it's important to help a person in pain by using your hand on them.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And so you should apply a cushion to their legs and a bandage to hold it in place.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And then apply it to the legs.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then apply a cushion to the bladder, so that the other humors do not descend there.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	And if you want to stop the flow of humors, you place a poultice on the patient's body which are already in use for the swelling and pain that often occurs in the foot.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then apply a cauterizing agent to the affected area to relieve pain.
Capitol .lx.	The sixth sentence is in Latin: "Then, if you have a burning sensation in the legs."
De extraccio de peyra.	Peys
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	We have already spoken about the types of treatments for the various types of diseases affecting the intestines and bladder.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And if they are severely ill, place cushions on their legs and feet.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And if there are stones in the bladder, they will be found by the physician.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And if it is necessary to treat the patient, here are the instructions for doing so.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	Apeuza le cushion on la sua leg forz e que le beyes es dressat to prevent the infiltration from spreading.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And then apply poultices to the children's feet and keep them warm.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	May this be a sign that the first person to speak up will be the one who gets their wish granted.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And if there are many humors that are too large, another solution to the problem would be necessary.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	It is customary to call gout by doctors when pain affects the intestines or feet.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then place your hand on the affected area to help them.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And if you have an open wound, it is covered by your hand so that the patient does not feel pain.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	E aprop has already placed a cushion in the other part of the body to prevent inflammation from spreading further.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Then place the cushion on their legs, and another on their feet.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if it is necessary to use a cautery on the left side, place it so that it does not touch the intestine.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And if he is a servant who has been placed in the cavity, he should be treated gently.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And you slowly bring the patient's foot back into place.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then apply pressure to that area, which is where the patient is supposed to hold their hands.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command that they be cauterized by placing the instrument on their arm; if the pain is in another part of the body, place a bandage on it.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so if the pain in the legs or joints is severe, this is how you would treat it.
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	Then apply heat to the area according to the severity of the illness.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And it is customary for doctors to say that the patient has a problem in their legs or feet, because they are the ones who have suffered from it.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that place already mentioned the doctors are accustomed to apply their treatment.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Then you have your hand on their legs, put your hand in the proper place.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	For doctors who are skilled in medicine, they may use tools to treat the patient with these skills.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot cure it with remedies, then use a strong acid to cauterize it.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	This is a description of how to use cauterization for treating gout in the feet.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	When there is a great deal of pain, it is customary for the physician to know what causes it, but sometimes they don't know which of these two things is causing it:  if the pain is caused by an excess of humors in the body, they should be careful not to let it become too intense or frequent.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	And use forceps to remove the diseased part of the body if necessary.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, after completing the operation, apply aloeswood and dragon's blood to the wound.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And apply a cloth to the place where the inflammation is present for the patient's benefit.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then you have already applied a cautery to the affected area by the third day.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And so when the patient has been cut off from their pain, the wound should be treated with a cushion and the patient's feet held firmly by the physician and others.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	And when the inflammation of the body is caused by the pain of a cushion placed under their legs, they are to be treated with a cautery applied to the area, and a poultice of hot herbs should be used to draw out the blood.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply heat to the whole body of the patient.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	You have already applied the proper treatment to a patient's legs, etc.
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it's a small stone that needs to be removed, place a cushion under them, so the patient doesn't feel pain from the removal.
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	When you have to treat a patient for a condition caused by an imbalance of humors in the body.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then bring them (the cushion) to the patient's legs, so that the intestines are no longer exposed.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	...and placed a cushion on their legs, placing it under the cushions of the patient's feet...
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And then you must carefully remove the cushion from their body, and let the other part of the body be treated by another physician.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	The first part translates to "And if you have to cauterize someone, place a cushion on their feet, and hold the cushion in place with another hand."
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery on the foot, then use it for all the other ailments.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And here comes (the person who) is in charge of their body.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And from there, hold their hands above the knee.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Then treat the patient's feet with a special kind of cautery to help them heal.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	And when he has opened the intestine, so that it is not constricted by the bandage.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And if there are cushions on his legs, he has to pay attention to the cushion above.
Capitol .lxi.	And then apply cautery to the affected area.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Another common treatment for pain in the legs is bloodletting.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	This translates to "When gout appears in the legs".
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	Gout is cured by keeping the patient's legs warm.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	The woman is suffering from a severe pain in her legs.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestines or their surrounding areas, it is important to know that it's done by skilled people.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	And if you know how to perform this operation, it is best to do so gently.
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth condition is that if there are indigestible stones, they are removed from the place where the pain was felt.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	And when there is pain caused by the need for it to be used.
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	When doctors cannot cure the patient, they need to be careful how they speak about their condition.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	And if the woman is afflicted with the disease called gout.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if there is no pain in the legs, it is said to be caused by other factors.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If they are not a virgin, they will use another method for treatment.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then apply a cushion on the patient's feet.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then, in order to relieve them, apply your hand to the wound.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	If the patient's condition is such that they are injured by hot, cold, or wet humors.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And he knows that the stone is caused by an imbalance in the body's humors.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	And thus you know that you should apply heat to the affected area.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if blood flows freely from a wound, apply a bandage to the affected area and keep the other leg warm.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And so they say that he who has the instruments for the operation should be careful to use them correctly in the extraction.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if blood flows, and you know that the cause of the ailment is from the circulation of bad blood, then you will put a poultice on the wound, for that is how one treats it.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Then return the patient's feet to their proper place.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	Then apply a cushion to their leg or foot, as needed.
Capitol lxii.	A cushion is placed under the affected area.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Then another cushion under their legs, and another on their feet, as well as on the body they are to be placed upon the patient's body.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	Gout is caused by an excess of humors in the white humor which is what causes the pain to be felt in the groin, thighs, or other areas of the body, but only if the patient has a specific condition.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And another name for this condition is gout.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And put a cushion on the chest, as is necessary for its weakening.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And thus the patient's body should be treated, if it is already being affected by the humors, with a certain type of cushion.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	Then apply a poultice to their feet and other areas where inflammation occurs.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	And if it affects the patient's own body, then it is considered true rheumatism.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if the doctors are treating the body for moisture.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And if you want to know the location of the pain, then judge by the color of the humors, the redness of which indicates its presence.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	And if it is commanded to make points on the patient's body, they are burned with a hot iron.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And if you need to place a cushion on their body, et cetera.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And another on their left side, and commands that a second cushion be placed on the right side of them, to prevent the patient from being injured.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Then apply the hot iron to the patient's feet.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	Make a section on the patient's thigh, carefully cauterize the vein, another section on their foot, and then cauterize the other veins.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	You have already opened the way to treat the disease by removing the excess humors from the body.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And the patient's feet will be held in place by the physician.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	And in this manner, separate the intestine between two thighs so that the patient can be treated with a cushion.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And if pain lingers in the legs or an excess of fluids, the patient will be treated with a lancet.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	Mays is translated to "then" in English.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	Then apply another cushion to the affected area.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	That is the way to apply a cushion for their comfort.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Then apply a cloth soaked in vinegar to draw out the excess humors.
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	Then treat the legs with a cushion of wool for their pain.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	Then you are ready to apply a cautery on their legs.
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And if it is necessary to make marks on the legs, then it is the Greek way.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	When the intestine is inflamed, it requires treatment with a poultice.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	When the foot needs to be cauterized, use a gentle touch when applying the needle and carefully place the cushion under the patient's foot so as to protect all surrounding tissue.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And if it is known that the patient has a lot of blood in their intestine, it is pus-related.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	Then you must do a proper cauterization to avoid pain.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	This phrase describes gout as a painful condition that doctors often use a pointed cautery to treat.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Therefore, if you are treating a wound, it is also customary to apply another bandage over the affected area.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And so has the patient's wound been opened wide, and then apply a poultice to it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And if it is necessary to pause the intestines for a while, they will be relieved by a cushion.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And so you would have another place the cushion under his legs to prevent the pain from spreading.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	For the first time in its entirety, the text says: "Then place a cushion on the patient's legs, and precede the intestine with a cushion."
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	This means that the patient's body should be positioned so the pain will be gone.
Capitol .lxiii.	Capitol 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	To cut open a hernia and perform surgery on it; to heal the body by cauterization.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	This text describes the use of a poultice for treating a hernia, which is a condition where an organ or tissue protrudes through a weak spot in the muscle wall.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And if he/she needs to be cauterized, the cushion will help.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Then treat the affected area with a cautery to prevent the swelling.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And if there are other things wrong with the body, a poultice will be applied to them.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	E for the patient's body it is a good sign.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes they will diagnose the patient's condition based on swelling in the feet or legs.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	When your body is affected by inflammation in the veins, you must apply a cushion to the skin so that it doesn't spread.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	When blood vessels swell up from cold humors, you must apply a bandage to the affected area.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	E if it is necessary to make a mark on the legs, make one below the knee and apply a poultice.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, you should hold the patient's body in place while they are being treated for gout.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is an adhesion in the intestine, then apply another cautery to the patient's thighs, which will be used to treat them.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	When there are many conditions that cause pain in the bowels, it is customary to treat them with a cushion behind the patient's thighs and another on their feet, as we have previously stated.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then since you have treated the patient's thighs, the cushion will be covered with wool and another treatment should be applied.
Capitol .lxiv.	Capitol .lxiv.  translates to **Chapter 64**.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	This is the treatment for a type of ailment in the legs which is called "hernia".
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	The physician should apply heat to the abdomen to soften the inflammation if there is pain in the legs caused by the ailment.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	The cure for this disease is done for fear that the patient might remember.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	But the patient must be healed by the surgeon.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And if you are to apply a bandage on their limbs, place it in its proper position.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Then you have already opened the vein, which is the way to treat it.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	Then apply the cautery to the area of the affected joint.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	This sentence describes a medical procedure using a needle and cushions, suggesting a treatment for a specific type of pain in the foot and possibly an indication of gout's nature.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And if the patient complains of pain in their joints, which you have already cut open.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Then treat the other ailments in the same way, using cauterization to address the underlying cause.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	And when joint pain is caused by cold humors that affect the testicles, it is called gout.
Capitol .lxv.	et autre do use laus (and) other things in the cavity of the body
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Then apply a cushion on the abdomen and keep the affected area covered.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	This refers to a rupture in the abdomen causing abdominal pain, and instructs on how to treat the condition.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	This pain is caused by the following things: an imbalance of the humors in the legs or something else.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	When treating the foot for swelling, the pain will come gradually and subside slowly.
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when the pain suddenly appears in the foot or toes.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And then it is said to be a type of hernia that affects the intestines.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	E in some cases, it's called "the evil" and causes pain in the feet, and when the body is pressed, it becomes painful.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	Then return to the patient's legs.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And if you place the cushion on their legs, the patient's legs are placed in a position to be treated by a cautery.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	You may have already placed the cushion on their lap; then do so on their incision and two testicles.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	E si' l'afeble in lo uos del medec, and so.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Then, if the patient has already been diagnosed with a cushion on their legs, the pain may be caused by a different kind of ailment.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	When the testicles are affected, and pain is felt in the joints and legs, the doctor will say that it is gout if the pain is caused by a particular type of humors.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And if there’s a cushion under the hand, it means they are suffering from a left-sided hernia.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	E cerqua am called by the other sources that are in the cavity of the body.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you find that there is a cause for pain in the abdomen, the patient likely has a stomach ache.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And put a cushion on their legs, four in all, for the four parts that they have to make four fine points and use one of them as a tool for the operation.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	Then place cushions on the patient's legs and feet to prevent them from feeling pain.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And apply a poultice to the affected area of the body for three days.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	You placed a cushion on the area where you would use a cushion for the patient's legs.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And let him put a cushion under his feet;
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	Apply hot poultices to the affected area, as described above.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	Then apply heat to the area where the intestines are, which would be the cavity, but don't let the patient overheat.
Capitol .lxvi.	"And if the patient's intestine or other ailment requires opening, I should be careful to avoid the use of the cauterizer."
De hernia ventosa.	Then describe the patient's condition in detail as if they were a tapestry or fabric piece.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	And then the patient's pain was addressed by the doctor using fire as a treatment method.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	Then treat the first line of the patient's body (the cushion) to prevent the swelling from spreading further.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the plague according to how we have said, until the patient is healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	This sentence looks like it's from a text that was written in a medieval language that uses "Chapter" to denote sections.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	You have already placed a cushion under them.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	When there are pains in the legs, then make a point on the knees, as we have previously mentioned.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	Then apply heat to the affected area only if necessary.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	When the foot pain is prolonged, the cushion should be placed under it.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	This practice, which is the treatment for this ailment, is typically called "the cure of the legs".
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes the illness is cured by burning the skin in three places.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then apply a cushion to the patient's body.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	Translation 4: You have already opened the space between them, et autre on their chest, and you can close it again with a bandage.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And now adjust the two parts of the body to be healed by the use of cauterization, if necessary.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	And if you need to remove the intestine from the body, use a cloth or your hand to prevent the patient's leg pain from worsening.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	For the cure of the plague is to be done by cauterization.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And so the patient will be healed in this place.
Capitol .lxviii.	Capitol .lxviii. describes the treatment of gout in the context of a doctor treating a patient's condition.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	And thus they would be softened and calmed.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	And if the skin is inflamed and red, you can be sure it's a case of hot, burning pain.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	When the pain subsides, the patient should be given medicine to heal the wound.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And apply a cauterization to their legs, and another on their foot.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And a cushion should be placed under them, tending to their wounds.
Capitol .lxix.	Another (and likely incorrect) example of a possible translation of the title could be: "Chapter 69".
De castracio.	Concerning castration.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	And so that's how we treat the patient for the disease they have in the body.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	Castration can be done by either attrition or incision.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	This is the way to cure the illness caused by cold humors.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	When performing surgery to repair a tear or incision, you should ensure that the surgeon has a clear view of the area by removing the bone fragments from the joint.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And if there are problems in the legs, then apply a bandage to help them.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Then cauterize the area near the thighs, as needed.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And do not allow anything to cause a cushion to be placed on their legs because they need to be treated for something more delicate than a simple ailment.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This is the way to castrate animals, because it is easier to remove the cushion if the animal is in pain.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Then apply the appropriate treatment for the plague.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	In men, the pain of the disease is felt in the intestines and bowels.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And if it is necessary to treat an ailment in the testicles, it can be done by applying other methods.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	In the context of medieval medical treatises, this sentence means:  When there is a blockage in the intestines or a swelling of the testicles, it is customary to treat them with a cushion.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	There are three types of treatment: for men, for women, and for those who have different ailments.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	Cove es that the patient's condition is gout.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And as for those men who have a second type of hernia, they are to be treated with a hot poultice.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	The pain in the legs and feet can be caused by a condition called gout.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	And sometimes the intestines of women are affected by this disease.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	And then, if you are suffering from a pain in the legs, apply a cautery to the other part.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	Then apply the cautery to the rest of the body, preventing the blood from flowing freely.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And if the patient is suffering from a disease that causes the foot to be healed.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if we are to treat a person's flesh as in the case of the plague, it should be called "coa"
Capitol .lxxii.	E aprop lo.cxxii.
De curacio de alratica.	Another method for treating the foot to prevent further complications
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Then, for a woman, a small hole or wound should be made on the chest.
E es o natural o accidental.	And so it is, whether natural or accidental.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	And it is caused by imbalances in the body, it causes pain in the feet.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	You must hold the patient's legs, or put a cushion under them, or they will be infected by other puss.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And if the physician deems it necessary, he will apply a cautery to the area between the legs, which is what he does when the pain is caused by cold humors in the body.
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	When fever is present and there is pain in the legs, then apply cautery to the affected area.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And do not put a cushion on your face for fear of harming yourself, but if you need to apply one, then put it on your legs and not on your lips.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	The patient's body should be treated with a hot cushion if their pain is caused by cold humors in the legs.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then apply oil to the area or place a cushion on the leg where the incision is made by the surgeon's tools.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	And if the cushion is thick enough, it is necessary to use a sharp knife for the incision.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	The doctor will be able to tell you if your illness is caused by bad blood.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	Then apply a poultice on their body to stop the bleeding, and heat the affected area with a hot iron.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And place a narrow cushion on their legs for comfort.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And if they have pain in their legs, administer a cushion under them, and let the other be placed on their feet.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And you will treat them with healing poultices to help heal the illness.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And when the pain is in the legs, cauterize to remove the humors causing the pain.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	When it's necessary to apply a poultice to the legs, they are treated as the other joint pain.
Capitol .lxxiii.	The chapter was titled after the affected body part by doctors to be treated as gout.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Treat the inflamed veins (hemorrhoids) with a cushion.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	The following text is a guess at the translation, based on my understanding of the original language:
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	And I have explained the types of illnesses that are caused by the cushion in the intestine, so I will now describe those that are caused by the other things that affect the body.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	And when they are painful, they are best called emorroydal by the doctors.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those who suffer from gout are those whose pain is felt in their legs and feet, as well as the other parts of the body.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	And if you wish to treat the body with heat, and apply a cushion to their legs, then use a hot iron for the legs, and a cauterized needle for the rest of the body.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then pulverize the blood with a tool called a cautery.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Then apply a cushion to the patient's feet for one hour before applying your hand upon them.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the bleeding persists, apply a poultice to the affected area.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Then apply a poultice to the patient's legs.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	Then apply two cupping glasses to the affected area.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a cushion to the affected area and let it be applied by a skilled practitioner.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	A second person must be present to assist with the treatment.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is caused by a lack of proper balance in the body's humors, you are dealing with a case of true humoral imbalance, which is what doctors call gout.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	The patient's pain is in the form of a puncture wound.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	This refers to a variety of ailments that are all related to inflammation and pain in the joints and limbs.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And if there are diseases in the foot, and another cushion on their thighs, and other cushions on their legs, apply cold compresses to the affected areas.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	If a surgeon operates on a patient, they must be careful that the treatment for other ailments does not interfere with the surgical procedure.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	When the first signs of an abscess appear, do not treat it with a hot cautery as you would a fever.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And in the case of the thighs being affected, you should place a poultice on them; if they are swollen, apply a cushion under them to reduce the swelling.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	And so that if the midwife comes across an opening in the legs, she can use her instruments for those specific cases.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	Then apply the heated instrument to the legs and feet of the woman.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	And you should place cushions on their legs to prevent them from being injured by any other instrument.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And if you are to treat a patient's leg pain, use a cautery on their legs.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when there are blisters that appear on the feet, apply cold compresses and poultices to soothe them.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And if the leg is swollen, place a hot needle on the area to make the patient's legs less swollen; and place a cushion where the needle was, on their chest in the area of the heart.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	When the patient has been treated by cauterizing their body with a hot iron, to remove the pain, and apply a poultice to their foot.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a bandage for two days to keep the humors in.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's body, apply it to their feet, using the long-lasting heat treatment of applying a cautery with hot water and fire.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And then one must be careful to keep the other parts of the body warm.
Capitol .lxxv.	Capitol .lxxv. translates to **Chapter 75**.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	That is the way to treat the living, as opposed to the unnatural state.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	The midwife must hold the woman's body in a way that prevents her from being harmed by the use of cautery on the legs.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	When you have opened the patient's body for those who are suffering from these signs, and they are in need of help, then place a cushion under their feet so that the excess humor does not flow out.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	Then use another cushion under the patient's leg, and place the patient on their back with the other cushions.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	And if a woman's body is affected by an illness, she should be treated carefully by a skilled physician.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And if you are treating them for gout, it should be treated properly by applying a cushion to their foot or leg, et cetera.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the patient's body is weakened by nature, it is necessary to give them an egrecio cushion for the legs or feet, so that they can be healed from natural ailments, or else their humors will become unbalanced and cause illness.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And then apply the cauterizing tool to the patient's feet to stop them from being infiltrated by heat.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	When it is necessary to treat a woman's bloated stomach with cauterization.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	Mays, in this case, be translated as "the month now belongs to the Christians"
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And if it is necessary to treat a patient's thighs and nose, here's how you do it: apply compresses to the affected areas, which should be done with a cushion for the first hour.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the pain is in the legs or feet, use a gentle hand to reduce the swelling.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	When there is pain in the leg, use a hot cautery to treat it.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	Then apply a hot cautery to the affected area and use your hand to push the intestine back in.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Then apply cauterization to their body, if necessary, to remove impurities in the blood.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the foot swells, apply a bandage to hold the foot in its proper position, and place a cushion under the swollen area.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	Then you should apply a cautery to the legs if they have an intestine which has been badly treated.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	Then, if you haven't already done so, apply heat to the affected area.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if you must cauterize the joint or legs, make sure the patient's body is warm.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Then apply the treatment to the legs, so he can be healed.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	E cum vezes that are located in the legs.
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And then apply a bandage to their feet.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Then apply heat to the affected area to relieve pain in the legs by means of cauterization.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	Then you will have to apply heat to the area around their legs, so that the patient's bowels do not become cold.
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Then gently press on the patient's abdomen, and apply a poultice to the affected area, which is the feet.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if the intestine or stomach are affected, a cushion should be placed on the legs to prevent the pain from spreading to the feet, while the patient is being treated with a gentle touch.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then place cushions on their legs one by one, preventing pain, and apply pressure to their chest, above the knee.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	Then apply a hot cautery to the affected area.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	And if you have to cauterize (or apply other treatments) on the legs or feet, then do so by placing them in a specific position.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	Then apply a strong cautery to their legs, for if they cannot move them, they will be burned.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And so, if the ailment is in the foot, you should place a cushion under them to reduce the swelling.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	Then apply the cautery to the legs and use another cushion for the gout.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	This midwife must hold the child's foot gently and return it to its natural position.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when he has been placed on his body between his legs and arms, and another cushion beneath him.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then command your companions to apply a cushion on their knees and place another one on the foot, and then tell them to stop there; let the patient rest on that side.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The patient's foot was already being cauterized by another.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	When treating gout in this manner, consider using a hot cautery for relief.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if you have to treat the patient's feet with hot iron, use it when they are cold.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And if it be necessary to use cautery on the affected part, do so gently, because God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	And then apply a cushion above their legs to prevent them from experiencing pain in the area of the knee.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	But if the patient's body has a nature that causes pain, it is called gout.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's legs or feet, it should be done with a cautery tool.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if it is difficult to treat, apply a poultice and treat them carefully.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And if it is a woman who suffers from gout, she is treated with a special cautery.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	Remembers that you are reminded that they can be formed from a medical perspective.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	And some women suffer from the painful disease that is commonly called gout.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And if the patient's legs are opened for a hot bath or a poultice, then the cushion is placed on the body of the patient.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Capitol lxxvi.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	And then when the foot is injured, you should treat them in the same way as the rest of the body.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	Then consider using the methods we have just mentioned when treating it medically.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	And if the woman suffers from humors, it is best to apply the cushion to her legs.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And if there is a rupture in the first place, one should apply a bandage to prevent further rupture.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you should apply a poultice to their affected area, and moisten the other parts with an ointment.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And if there is a need to make an incision, then place the woman's hand on the incision.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Then place cushions under their arms, or use his hands to hold the patient's pain.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	And if there is a need to apply cauterization between the feet, then place a cushion on their feet, and another under them.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And if you are treating someone with pain in their joints and another pain between their left foot and right foot.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then apply a cautery to the legs or use another tool if necessary to hold the intestine in place, while using the other tools for proper treatment.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And if the patient has pain in their legs, they should be treated by applying a cauterization to the affected area.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And if a portion of the body has been treated by them.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the patient's body is afflicted by the coldness which causes pain in the joints, then they are said to be suffering from the affliction called gout.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the patient has an ailment in their body, they are called upon to be treated by doctors, e.g., pain.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And if it is necessary to make a point on the legs of the patient, then place a cushion under their feet.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	Mays call it “the gout” in the same way that they use the term for other types of pain.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And treat them as nature dictates by using forceps to remove the offending humors.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And then, if the gout is caused by cold and dampness, apply a cushion to the area.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	The doctor will soon be able to cut into the area in question.
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	If swelling in the legs occurs due to an excess of fluids, treat it with a cautery to draw out the fluid.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the pain is in the foot, it is customary for doctors to apply cautery to the area where the leeches are applied.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	If you've got an excess of humors in your body, you are said to have a "gout" in your foot.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	"Turn the head on their side and place a cushion under their legs."
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the mouth of the patient is constricted, then use a cautery to cause heat on the affected area.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	Then apply a poultice to soothe the patient's affected areas.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	Then apply cautery to the area if needed, but always carefully consider the location.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	When there are issues with swelling or hernias, apply a cushion to the affected area.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	Then burn the second toe, if necessary, with the second tool.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	Then apply a poultice to their body, for the treatment we have described.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	When it comes to other treatments, for example, you should apply heat to the legs and use remedies to address the condition.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to her legs, it is applied to the feet.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	You will apply a poultice to the patient's abdomen; and place a cushion on their legs.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And if there are many things that plague him, he will be treated by doctors for a long time, but the patient may still suffer from gout.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then you have opened the space above their thigh, it is customary to call it an ailment of the leg or foot, if the pain is in the legs or feet, put another cushion on the other one.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	Then they are ready to be called upon by the bones of the dead.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Et la motz es sempre stata in piace de sa plaga.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	When you are in the cavity between the legs, they have already placed a cushion under the feet.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	Then use a cushion to remove the blockage.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Then apply heat to the legs, not their knees.
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is how you treat a person suffering from pain in their limbs, which will be painful to them.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	And so the patient's body will be protected from harm, will have been cauterized, or treated by other methods, if the doctor deems it necessary to protect the intestines from coming out of the body, they can use a cushion.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	The patient's body was being prepared for cauterization by placing cushions under their body and supporting them with two "fusts" (sticks) so they wouldn't feel pain during the procedure.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	Then you will have two cushions on the patient's legs so that they can be closed.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	Take its form, which is like a cushion, and place it on the foot.
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	And if you place forceps on the body, it is customary to use them for those who are sick.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But perhaps the intestine is affected, but they have to be careful.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	This text describes how to treat the body for gout.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then your hand should be used to apply pressure to the intestine, preventing further damage from the cushion by its own weight.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	This refers to the patient's condition, but since I don't know what "vertitgat" means, I can only guess that it means "the way" or "the state of being affected by"
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	This is the form used by healers to treat patients who are suffering from gout.
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The form of treatment for a large swelling in the leg is to apply a cushion to the area.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	And if the patient's intestines are inflamed, it is customary for doctors to use a special tool called a *forcep* in such cases.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	When you are treating a patient with gout, use your hand to apply pressure to their feet.
Forma de unci havent una spina:	The text describes a situation where a physician is using cauterization to treat an ailment.
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	Forma de unci having two spines.
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	This form of tongs, used for gripping things, will be useful to pinch and hold the patient's bowels.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	If a patient has a spastic disease, they are treated by a doctor who knows how to use a cautery.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Apply a cauterizer to the legs of the patient.
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	When pain occurs in the joints, especially in the feet, it is called gout, and they are used to treat it.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And so you must apply cushions to the patient's legs and another to their feet, as needed.
De extraccio de la segondina.	And if it is necessary to treat their legs, they are treated with a hot iron.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	And if the patient has a second cushion, put it on the patient's hands and legs.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if you are unable to cure it, use a needle to draw blood from the affected area, but don't worry about it too much.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	These herbs or some of them should be submerged in water, and the patient's hands are placed upon them.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	Then place a reed in the mouth of the mother to hold the other reeds.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	Then put your hand on their leg to prevent them from feeling discomfort or pain.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	and if it is necessary to apply a soothing treatment to the affected area, you should apply it gently, because the one who has gout is very sensitive.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Before the disease of the foot was cauterized, they were easily treated.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And if the patient's legs are drawn up tight, they should be relaxed.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	And if the mouth has been treated by a physician, then apply a poultice or herbs for healing.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	And if it is customary to treat joint pain in the leg muscles and put another cushion under the feet.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	And when the gouty pain comes, it is customarily treated by applying leeches to the affected area.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	Mays the patient be healed from the pain of their ailment, may they be cured.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	When there is a blockage in the body that causes pain, it’s called colic.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	When the doctor is ready to apply cauterization, he should place a cushion under the patient's feet.
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And the inflammation of the blood vessels in their legs should be treated by placing a cushion on them, which is called gout.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And if they have a condition that causes them to be consumed by the fumes.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Place another cushion under the child if their legs are affected by the condition.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	When there is pain in the joints of the limbs, one should use a cautery to burn them.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	Then treat the patient for the pain in their legs; on that side put the cushion, and another on the other side, to protect them from the sharp pain.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	E aprop pause over the patient's bowels; you are cured if the pain is from a cold that has infiltrated the legs.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	The other servant will hold their hands to prevent them from moving.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	When the disease has reached the stage of hardening in the bowels or limbs, it is called for.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	And for healing of the wounds which are infected.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	And you have already placed cushions under the patient's legs, and on their chest, to hold them in place.
E es una fistula o motas.	Then apply a cautery to the area of the wound.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	When the body is affected by certain ailments, it is customary to use cautery on those parts.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	E then they will be called for by the doctors' hands to stop the pain; e if you are sick.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	When there are blisters in the intestines or bladder, they cause pain in the legs and feet.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	This text describes a type of medical treatment where you would use a cushion to protect the area while treating the fistula.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	When the hand is affected by the gout, it is necessary to cauterize the affected area.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	If you don't feel the pain in the entire body, but only in the chest, then you should know that your cure depends on it being something else.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And then you must place a cushion under the legs to prevent them from swelling up.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	Perhaps the intestine is referring to a body part affected by gout, but it's not clear from the text.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	And in all those parts where there are ulcers or wounds, the other doctors say are due to a need for cooling.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	And if it is expected that the pain in the body will be healed by means of fire, or hot cautery is used for this.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And if you have a cushion under your legs, it is because you are suffering from an ailment that causes pain in the joints.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	Then apply heat to the patient's neck (the "neck" part) using a cautery in order to prevent the opening from closing.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	If your intestines or other flesh are affected by gout, you should know that the treatment for that is to treat the pain in the cavity of the feet.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	Then, however, you can use other remedies to heal them.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the area of the fistula multiple times, then use a cushion under the patient's feet.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And if it's necessary to cure with cauterization the foot, which needs a bandage, then apply the cushion, etc.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And then if the illness spreads to the internal parts, it's necessary to use a tool to open the skin where the pain is, but avoid using a cautery on the patient's feet.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And let those who are skilled in these matters be consulted to determine the cause of the pain.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	And if it's necessary to cauterize with hot humors, which are applied by a hot iron or other means.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And apply the remedy to the foot so that it doesn't get infected again.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And apply cauterization to the affected area; when the body's humors are controlled or cauterized, there will be no further outbreak.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	If there is a pain in the feet, then you may have to apply cautery elsewhere on the body as well.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	So if the pain is in the feet or legs, then apply the treatment to those areas.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	Then treat them as a physician would with another person's affliction.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	Then apply a point to the exposed area, using the cushion as needed, and place another cushion on the exposed area.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And if the patient has a fit, place a cushion on their legs and apply heat to the affected area.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	And if you wish to draw a distinction between the true and the false, you should know that there are other things that cause pain in the body besides the foot being affected by cold humors.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	And if it be healed, another servant will cure it.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the fistula is open, keep it so, or you will cause more damage to the skin.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	This is a description of how to treat a fistula, which is a small tunnel that connects two internal organs or a organ to the skin.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	When hemorrhoids bleed.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	And if you are using the word "other" to refer to the leg or foot, they say that the original meaning of "emorroidi" is used in the sense of "that which is needed for a procedure."
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	Then you have a small and large, and they need to be treated differently.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	And these are the causes of pain in the legs, which are called fluxes, which are caused by yellow humors or bile.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	Then have the patient's legs and feet be treated with a hot cautery to prevent their bowels from being affected by the pain.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	And then you must cauterize the skin around the affected area, as well as the intestines.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	Then, if you are cauterizing the joints to remove their humors or treat them with a poultice, you should use a cautery made of metal on the affected area, as described in this chapter.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And another thing to be healed will be placed on the patient's arms.
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	Then you will have to apply a cautery to the patient's foot.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If your patient has pain in their joints, treat them as if they had a problem with their bowels, and apply pressure to the affected area with a cushion, just as you would use a bandage on a wound.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	And for those who have a pain in their legs, use a surgical needle to make incisions.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	Let a hot poultice be applied to all, and let them not have more than one, which is two, for the sake of the patient's health, applying a cushion to the affected area, while another person applies their hand.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place another on the chest of the patient; but open the leg for the operation, or put an ointment upon it.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if the patient has a wound on their leg, cure that which can be cured.
De curacio de fistulas.	This refers to the treatment of fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Gout is caused by natural dryness.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And if the wound has become infected and the doctors say it cannot be healed, then they use a cautery to dry the area.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	Then apply cauterization to the legs if necessary to heal those burns.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	This sounds like a description of a remedy for gout.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	This sentence describes the use of a cautery to treat a condition affecting the feet, known as gota in the original language.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	And then you should put your hand on them to prevent further injury.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	The second intestine is in the following.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	The rest of the world will think that this is a disease in the feet.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And then apply a heated poultice to their legs or feet to draw out the evil humors.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	Then use fire or medicinal treatment on the patient's legs, according to their condition, as well as on their feet.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And you have to remove it surgically if it is already present.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	If someone has a large amount of pain in their body, they are considered to be suffering from a disease called fistula.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And if you have already placed a cannula in your gut (or to prevent swelling), use that instead of a knife when dealing with the patient's pain.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, make them use a cushion for their legs or feet.
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let the hand be placed above the patient's foot so that it is not pierced by the lancet.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want to cauterize the patient's foot, you should do so by using a pointed cautery.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	And by the instruments of the physicians, you will apply the remedy for the ailment.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	The text you provided appears to be in a language that combines elements of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, likely Catalan.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	This sentence is likely describing the symptoms and treatment of gout in a medieval context.
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The cairn should be placed in a specific position on the body.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	Then apply to the patient's legs, where the leg pain is most severe, a hot iron treatment.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And if it is necessary to apply a bandage, it should be applied for a length of one hand's width on a patient suffering from the ailment.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And let the other be cauterized and treated so that it does not become inflamed.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	Then apply the other two to the legs and the third to the foot.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	Then apply a cushion to the affected joint, and place the cushion on their feet.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine fails, another remedy is applied to the patient's legs, and it will be used for one whole night.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	But if you are suffering from that pain, it's a sign of gout.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	If you are experiencing pain due to a buildup of humors in your feet, these should be treated differently than other conditions that cause pain.
De curacio de las plaguas.	And then for the treatment of the plague.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You have already seen the patient's legs and feet.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	The plague is caused by something that causes pain to the legs, and another by other things.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	Orthodox physicians, or other similar healers, would be wise to heed this advice: Ointment should only be applied under a doctor's supervision.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Then apply a hot iron to the head or other part of the body to cause a burn, but only after the affected area has been heated with a different type of heat from the one that causes the burning.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the leg or foot muscles, use the appropriate tool for each.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	The pain in the body will be treated at the beginning of the third chapter.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	And if the pain is caused by a simple cause, or other ailments, then consider the following: if it's not a cautery that would be used to treat it, but a fleubotomia, lahors, are used for ailments of the chest.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And if it is necessary to perform surgery, place your hand on their abdomen, and use a hot cautery.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	Then if you have pain in your legs, it is customary to call it by its proper name, which is gout.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And if a hot poultice is placed on the foot, apply it to the affected area, and another poultice on the patient's legs, which are already swollen.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	If you are sure that it is necessary to apply heat to the area, then cauterize it immediately if the abscess is new, and place a cushion under the patient's recent one to prevent the wound from spreading.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And if you have already treated the patient, then rest assured their legs are no longer used for burning with a hot iron, e.g., if they have gout.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the plague is severe or if there are many signs of disease on the legs, then they should be treated with cauterization.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	And so you see, a plague has been discovered on their bones, they say, by doctors, who already know how to treat it, but for those who have it, there is no cure.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you are treating the body's humors, then apply your treatment to the skin, and use a cushion to support the body and avoid the pain spreading.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If you have to inquire about whether a patient has a fever or if the blood is flowing freely from the body, it means that the patient has an ailment in the blood vessels.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if it's simple plagues, you should apply a poultice to the affected area.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	Then the patient's body must be treated with a poultice, and they should have their body burned with a cautery on the thighs, two cushions on the chest, and another one on the feet.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And if you have opened the patient's body to remove the bad humors, then don’t remove your hands from them while you are there.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	Then have the doctor apply a poultice to the affected area, and use a cushion for support.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And then apply a hot iron to their veins to stop them from being altered or affected by the humors.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if these are the affected areas, then apply the cushion to the body, apply the cautery to the other areas, and use a position that prevents the pain from worsening.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	And if the patient's body experiences pain due to a fever, then you are treating them for a fever.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery, use the appropriate tools and methods.
De las plaguas del col.	When your hand touches the body.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If the plague affects the lower limbs, it is called gout in the first place.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	This is a pain in the legs, which is what you might call a sharp pain or something similar to a burning sensation.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	Do not be afraid to use the cauterization technique on the patient, but only after carefully considering the cause of the ailment in the legs.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is a wound that is healed by light medicines, it is treated with gentle washes, so it may heal well.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the cushion is large, then you must hold your hand over it to control the flow.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	Mays if to the pain in the legs the remedy is to apply a pointed cauterizing tool for relief.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	And if the artery is already cut open, then apply another cushion on the foot, and so forth on the legs and another on their feet, and cauterize the artery as appropriate to prevent further bleeding.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	The first line contains information about the process and its purpose, suggesting it might be a recipe for treating or managing a condition related to the body's natural state.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	Mays if the illness is caused by an excess of cold humors, they are treated differently depending on whether or not the patient has gout.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if the plague is recent, apply powder to the area.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	And if they have been afflicted with an ailment that has already caused them to be pierced by a fistula, it is necessary to apply a poultice to the area.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	When the plague or fever strikes, you should apply a cautery to the area between the shoulders, the chest, or elsewhere on the body as needed.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If there is pain in the legs or feet, and if it is severe, it is called sciatica.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no cure for their pain, the patient's legs may be treated with heat to prevent further spreading.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And you will see that if the other parts are treated with an ointment, the patient will find relief from the plague.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	When there are three days or more since the onset of the plague, the rest of the body will be healed; then it is safe to use other remedies for the patient.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If treatment of the ailment is delayed, then the patient should be treated by applying heat to their legs and preventing them from experiencing a further influx of blood.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	E if you are treating the pain of a person by incision, use a hot cautery.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	When the foot is injured, it is customary to apply a poultice to the affected area and cushions on the legs and feet, as well as keeping the patient's attention focused elsewhere.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If the plague has not yet spread, you should apply a hot iron to their joints.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other ailments, treatment can be done with the use of poultices.
De las plaguas del ventre.	And for plagues in the legs.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The patient's belly pain is great.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Then some have been diagnosed by doctors to be afflicted with gout because the patient has many symptoms.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	And if the foot is opened or a small incision made in it, it becomes difficult to return them to their place.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	E siu la cushion of the other two sides.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And then you should know that there are four types of sutures in the body.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And then another servant on the abdomen, if necessary.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And you will have applied it to the patient's body in the process of cauterization.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	And then I say that when the plague is caused by the legs, it is difficult to reduce it.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And so when a person has gout, it is customary to place cushions on their head and legs, and also place them on the legs, which are swollen, so that they will be heated by the fire of the cure.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	When illness strikes the legs, it is better to apply cold treatment to the area than use hot cautery.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And so when the patient's inflammation is resolved, the patient needs to be monitored.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	Then apply a cushion to his legs and use the other for treatment.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And the first treatment is to apply a cautery to prevent the spread of inflammation.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	And if you are using the instrument on someone's legs, place their legs on the surface of the cushion.
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	Then, if the pain is in the foot, use another method to treat it.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And then, when the plague is aggravated, the doctors should carefully tend to the patient's body.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When there are many hernias in the body, it should be called an open sore, and if it's on the legs, they should be placed higher than the patient's waist.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	When the intestines are affected by the disease, one should place your attention on the area where the pain is worst.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	This line likely translates to instructions for treating gout in the body's joints.
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	When the pain is in the lower limbs, it is customary to place cushions there and apply a hot cautery to the patient's body, but it is important that a skilled physician be present for such a diagnosis.
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	E questa que es la forma de fer lo.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	Then apply another cushion to the other side of the needle, and if necessary, you should place another cushion on their legs, and use a tool to remove the first one, so the patient should be careful about the cushions.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	The agues (rheumatic fevers) are called by different names depending on their severity.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And if the pain is in the knees, they are to be treated as the other parts of the body are, meaning with the use of a cushion for support.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And for that there be no sutures allowed to close the wound.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	And if you need to use needles on the leg for pain relief, place them on the legs of the one who has been affected by the plague and other ailments.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	These are the types of wounds for which these stitches are used.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second translation is for the patient's foot, the pain of which can be alleviated by applying a cauterizing tool to specific points on the foot.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	Then the patient's legs are positioned below the needle, for in plague they are treated by the use of the cautery on the body to treat a condition similar to that which is caused by the four humors.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	Then apply heat to the area of the affected joint.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	Then this same pain on their legs is what causes gout in the foot.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And if their bladder was swollen or they had a pain in the chest, then they were already plagued by a plague that's in the chest.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	The plague was healed in 15 days or so by the patient's condition.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And if it's necessary for the other doctors to use a poultice on the wound, place your hand on the patient's legs, and another on their chest, so that they have a cure for the pain.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	And according to the account of Paraula, there are two types of cushionings for wounds.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And you put a needle on their legs, separating them from each other.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus the whole body is considered to be healed by the use of a needle, as well as the thighs.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	If there are joint pains caused by other factors, then apply heat to the area.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And if you are already familiar with the pain in the thighs which can be treated with this technique.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's foot, use a different cautery on the opposite side, because the one used for the initial treatment is unsuitable for that part.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And so you cauterize the part of the body that needs it, for the sake of example.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	And the sum of this method is that you sew the skin with a needle, in which case the patient's skin or another part of the body would be healed.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	And if they are in need of treatment, let them be given proper care by those who know how to treat them.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	You have already seen the patient's intestines are opened and they are suffering.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then apply a cautery to their legs.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	This method of stitching is better than the usual light stitching.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the treatment for the sick, who are suffering from pain in the legs.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate the body, the doctor uses a pointed cautery to make an incision and then apply the hot irons to the affected area.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	You already know that it is difficult to place a cushion on their legs, and if the patient has a condition in the lower abdomen, which you might call "other" conditions, then they are called "the other".
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	And then you must apply treatment for the illness of plague.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	Then, if the cause is a pain in the legs from which the plague has come, apply heat to the affected area.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the patient suffers from other ailments than the cushion on their feet, they must be treated for them first.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	The sentence describes the need to avoid unnecessary pain for patients by using a cushion under their feet during an outbreak of gout.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	And if you fear that the plague will spread to other parts of the body, use a hot iron to cauterize them.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	When gout affects the body, a symptom they see is pain in the legs that results from the accumulation of cold humors.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And it is lighter to heal the bowels that are already open than those hidden in the body.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	Then apply a cautery to their body to cleanse them from the plague, but be careful that the cushion does not cause further harm.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	Perhaps a new treatment for the plague was needed, which required a precise understanding of its nature.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	When you are afflicted with pain in your legs or feet, use a poultice of herbs and spices to ease them.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And if it's necessary to apply a cautery on their legs, place them over the cushion already there.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Then apply a cauterizing tool to the affected area to prevent the pain from returning.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	And if there are ruptures in the intestine or stomach, you can have them repaired with a cushion to prevent it from coming out.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And if you find that a wound has been inflicted on a patient's leg, treat them with care to prevent further complications.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	The second line translates to: "Then place a cushion under the patient's legs while they are still attached to the body"
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And another place for the cushion, and no other!
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then apply a hot poultice to the affected area and if pain in the foot arises, treat it with cautery.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	This text appears to be a humorous attempt at writing in medieval language, likely using a combination of English words with a medieval flair.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	Then treat with a method that uses ants.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	If there's a fever that is widespread, it is known as the great plague, which is often fatal and rarely cured completely.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	The text is in Latin.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	If you know how to translate this passage, please provide me with the translation for comparison.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And if you are a real wound, and if there is a cushion for the patient's feet.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	E in some men, the blood flows slowly through their arm.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And sometimes this cushion is thick and warm on your knees.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	Then, when treating a patient, the treatment should be applied to their body; otherwise, it's not good.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	When doctors use a tool to help them, they need to know how to treat it correctly.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And let me know if you want to know how to treat fistulas.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And if one wishes to avoid fistulas in all areas of the body, including the veins, arteries, and other parts of the body, then apply it (the remedy) to the area with a cushion placed on the affected part of the body.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And so, to treat such an abscess on the foot requires more than just ordinary methods.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	If you are in need of medical treatment for an ailment, you may seek help from this practice.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	Mays es que has de subtil, other words for the patient's ailment or condition are needed.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	When there is a need to cauterize the fistula, you will place your hand over it.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then apply a poultice to the other areas of the body where pain exists, such as the legs or feet, but first apply a bandage to the wound.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	You have already mentioned that your work is about the treatment of wounds, which are also known as "gout" by physicians, but now you want to discuss a specific method for treating these ailments.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And now, when you have exposed the fistula.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then return to the body that which has been opened by the other cushion.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	And if it is a fistula of great distance, use a cushion to support the abdomen and thighs, and place another cushion on top of the first one, so that the patient's body will not be hurt by the heat.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And if the patient has an opening in their leg due to a wound, they will need a physician.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	And if there are already cushions on their legs, they should be used for support.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	Mays is a proper noun, so it is likely referring to something specific.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	Then consider if the cause of the fistula is in the thigh or leg, for it is from the same place as the other two are located.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	When the foot is affected, you must use a lancet to remove the excess fluid.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	Then if there is no cure for the patient's sickness, you will be healed by a cushion, as well as the pain in the thighs being treated.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And if it is not cured, you must treat the cause of the pain in the body, which is a sign that it has not been treated properly.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the bone is affected by the corruption, then you use the fine forceps on the patient.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if you must use a cushion on their legs, use it skillfully.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	Then apply cauterization to their body, only if they are afraid of a hot burn.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	Then you should apply pressure to the bone with your hand.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	If you are suffering from pain in your legs, use a cushion to apply pressure to them, and an Egyptian poultice for the pain on their thighs, because the patient's leg muscles are prone to pain and require a poultice.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if the disease attacks the legs or bones, it will be the same as that which corrupts the body.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	When there is a disease in the legs or feet, it's necessary to apply a cautery on their body where the pain is located.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	Then I will show you how to apply cauterization to a man's body.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Then place another one on the legs, and use the rest for the man's legs, and keep the other hand warm.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	Then return to the patient's body, put your hands on those areas affected by the pain in their toes.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then the doctor will apply heat to the affected area by applying a cauterizer.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And if it's necessary to cauterize the patient's body, they are treated as such by doctors.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then apply a hot cushion to the person's body and use other tools for the treatment.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Then bring the patient's legs to their natural position, and another on their feet.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And then, the patient's pain was great in their legs, so that they were very sore.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And now, place a heated cautery on the already exposed joint.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	Then I apply the cauterizer to the patient's legs and feet to prevent their pain from spreading.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then you should place your hand over the affected area to prevent further complications.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And if a patient has pain in their legs, then apply cautery there.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And if there's no need to cauterize the intestine, don't perforate it.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then the patient already has a cushion to put upon them, and another will be placed on the bed for the rest of the day, and their chest will be covered with a small cloth.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to make a cushion for them in the operation of the operation of a cutting tool.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so they will heal their condition, which becomes soft and fleshy; the treatment should be continued with the same, and the patient's legs kept warm to prevent the humors from hardening.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	When there are pains in the legs, apply your hand to the affected area to use a cushion for support.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	Then place it decently so that you don’t burn the flesh.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	This sentence suggests that if someone has pain in their legs, the treatment should be to apply small heat packs to the area rather than letting the ailment fester.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If the disease has reached your feet, you must apply the cushion to the affected area.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And if there is an infection in the area, it will be treated with cautery.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if the pain is in their foot, apply cautery to the place where the pain is located from other sources.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	When there are pains in the legs, it is customary for doctors to call them gout.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	Then return to the patient's body the cushion from their chest.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	I have seen that the patient has pain in their legs and feet.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	Then you will know which treatment is suitable for the patient's ailments because this art is very long and difficult to master, so if you want to use it, you need to be well-informed about its application.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And then you must place a cushion under the patient's feet to avoid complications, as well as between the thighs.
Forma de serra:	And if it is a cushion, put it on their legs and other things.
Forma de autra serra:	This is likely referring to a type of surgery involving the use of a cauterizing tool for treating pain in the feet.
Forma de autra serra:	This translates to:
Forma de autra serra gran:	Forma of a large vein or joint, and it's possible meaning is related to gout.
Forma de ray:	Forma de ray:
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	If the patient has pain in their foot, apply heat to the affected area.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	It is not appropriate to translate that literally.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	To make it easier to understand, I'd say: "The form of the razor is larger than the other forms"
Forma de razori menor:	A form of gout.
Forma de razori lat:	For a sharp pain in the razor, apply a poultice to the affected area.
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	When there is pain in the foot, one must treat it medically.
Forma de lu:	When you burn the skin with a cautery, it is customary to apply it to the feet.
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	And if the foot is swollen or inflamed, then you should apply a poultice to their legs.
Forma de razori autra subtil:	Here comes the second sentence:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	This describes the form of a slightly different type of pain in the joints.
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	This appears to be a Latin phrase.
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Then apply the cushion on their legs, and then if they need to be cauterized, proceed with caution.
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	And so is the form of the minor incisors:
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	And if it is necessary to make incisions, the other incisions are made in the same way on the legs as they are on the arms.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Then apply a cauterizing tool to the affected area.
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	The first sentence is translated as: **"And the first (sentence) is triangular and sharp."**
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And if it's caused by iron from India, it is treated similarly to how you would treat other conditions like those that cause pain in the legs and feet.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	And place your hand on their legs to stop the spread of the pain.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	Then return to the text:  The doctors are saying that if you have a body part that is not healed because of the coldness, it means that the person has been poisoned by a poisoner.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	When there is a burn or injury in the body, it is called gout.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And similarly if it is caused by venomous humors it is called gout.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the wound in the finger is affected by heat, apply a bandage to protect it from infection while the patient has a fever.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And similar to how you open the space for the surgeon's operation, use a cautery for the burning that occurs from the inflammation.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	Then you will place a cauterization instrument on the arm above the elbow.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if there are other causes for the pain in the patient's body, then they should be treated according to those causes.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, if necessary, open it up with a cautery.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And place your hand on the foot to prevent pain.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	This translates to:
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	Then treat them with cauterization, for if the patient's legs are burned, the ailment will be fatal.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	Then if you want to cut off a limb you should separate it from their connection with the body.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And if there are points to be made on the foot.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	Mays it's if you apply heat to the affected area; if it works, the patient will feel relief from their symptoms.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And apply it to the affected area within that same patient's leg.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	This is the first sentence translated from a language that looks like a combination of languages from Latin-derived Romance languages.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And then the inflammation in his foot, if it has been opened up by you, will be healed.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	The patient is healing, and the cushions are placed on their legs and a cushion is held under them to prevent the pain from spreading out.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Lon gtemps has been placed on the thigh for the patient.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	A cushion will also be placed on his hand, to contain the superfluity from the other parts of the body.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And if I have opened the space between the patient’s thighs, it must be closed again.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	But since he has been cured by the doctor, he should be returned to his place.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	This translation is an example of how a doctor might say that the patient's body is ready for the operation.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	On their proper application when using medicines for purging.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	And if it is necessary to apply a hot poultice to a member to treat it.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	But perhaps if the disease is prolonged in the feet, it is called zukem.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	Translation 1: And if it is necessary to make incisions on the foot, it should be done carefully so that the patient doesn't feel pain.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	And then you apply an enema to the patient for their constipation, and put a cushion on their feet.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	And then apply the poultice to the affected area.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	Then apply your hand to his/her feet, and let them be treated with water for two hours.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then apply heat to that area (the feet) using a medical instrument.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	Then return the water to its place, and hold the patient's legs in place.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the patient has no tolerance for the Egyptian treatment, then they are likely suffering from pain in their feet or legs.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And if there are other reasons for the pain in the legs, apply a suppository to bring out the bile.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And then you can apply a poultice on the patient's thighs, or use other remedies to stop the intestine from being swollen.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if you want to use a cautery on the patient's body, be careful not to open the wound too wide, and place the canula upon them gently.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And if you put a poultice on the affected area.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	And then if the pain is located in the arms of the patient, it is the elevated part of the body that is affected by the cushion.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	Then prepare the arm with its remedies.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And apply cupping to the affected area, which will help them.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	Then apply a cushion to the patient's foot, and if necessary, apply another on his leg, and another on the arm; let the skin be covered with a cloth spread out for that purpose.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	May the pain in the knee be relieved by a hot poultice.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so you should know if it is necessary to apply heat or cold to treat the ailment.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	Then if you wish to consider the location of the pain in the foot, and whether it is due to other causes.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	And if the patient is in pain, then they should be treated by applying the cushion to the affected area.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	And if you find that the intestine is swollen in your body, then you must apply heat to it, and hold li's illness at bay.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	"And if the pain persists, you can use a cushion under their legs."
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And if the patient's legs are already swollen, it is another type of cure that applies to them.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	Then apply a poultice to their body.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes they are treated with these herbs that are used to treat the illness in the feet.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	Then if you are applying cautery to the patient's legs or joints, it is necessary to have the intestine treated in a similar way, as was done for the other hard parts of the body.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	And they are to be treated with a cushion placed on the affected area between the patient's thighs.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	Then apply to the affected area a poultice of its own or another poultice for a cold humor in the leg.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	Then apply the hot cautery to the patient's feet, but do not burn them too deeply.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	When the bones are already hot and the flesh is healthy, and the burning pain of gout is treated, they will be healed, and the rest of the body will be healed as well.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	And if illness has already settled in the bones, it is necessary to cauterize them because they are the only ones who can truly be called healers of the body, for they are the ones who have healed it.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you cauterize a patient's legs, they will experience relief from the pain.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	If you are dealing with a nail driven into the foot, cauterize the wound at the beginning of treatment for the gout.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	And if they are sick, they will be told to be treated with a cautery.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	A pointed tool is used to treat some ailments, but for other ailments, it's best to avoid using it on the area affected by gout.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	And for that reason, they should be treated carefully.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And those who are born fleshy are to be considered as having other causes for their ailments.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	"Mays de que" in the text translates to: **And so** if there are other factors at play, such as
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Mays, the pain is caused by other things, but you should use the appropriate cautery for the ailment.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	Then apply heat to the areas of the body where they are experiencing pain.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And if it is necessary to separate the limbs for a moment, you should use a cushion to prevent the intestines from being touched.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly if you have applied cautery to a patient's foot who has a condition of the body, the cushion will be placed in the same way on the limb.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	Devices are used to treat illnesses from cold humors.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices can be found in many forms, some appearing as they are, others in disguise.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then use the strong purging medicine on them as needed.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	This text is written in Occitan, an ancient language spoken in southern France.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	This is a tricky one, but here's my best guess:
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	And then hold your hand on the patient's chest to prevent them from moving.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	E venis de la podragua, and another on their legs, for bloodletting in the foot.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	And if you want to make that part less painful, use this method for its application.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's leg, you must first cauterize the area below the knee.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	Then apply another cushion on their legs, and another to the patient.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And when it comes to the pain in their legs, it's customary for doctors to treat it with a cushion.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And so you have placed your hand upon the patient's legs, for another to be elevated.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	Then apply a cushion to their legs or another on their feet.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	Then elevate that which is below the other's second cushion, already opened by the first cushion, to the second section.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And then apply a cautery to the part above the foot.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	When you are working on a patient's legs or elsewhere in their body, if they have a large amount of swelling or a lump in the groin, place another needle under their thighs, and another one on the affected area.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	Then apply your hand to the affected area; if it is necessary to cauterize, do so only after you have consulted a physician.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when the patient's intestines are affected by the cold, they should be treated with oil and herbs.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if the veins are constricted or twisted, then the other parts of the body also are.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	Keep your prudence and you will avoid causing harm to the patient's body and pain in their joints.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	The patient's form or location on their body where they are experiencing pain.
Forma de unci orp:	Apply a poultice made of herbs and spices to the affected area.
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	If the body has become too swollen, it is necessary to apply a cushion; if it's just the foot, then treat only the foot.
De extraccio venae cruris.	On the legs.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This disease is caused by hot temperatures in the legs just as much as by humors.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And if the pain is in the legs or feet, it's likely a condition that affects them.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And if it is necessary to make points on the legs it will be done.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	E senhal de la l’adveniment (which means "and if it's the vein") causes the pain to be felt in the legs, and the patient's body may feel feverish when doctors apply heat.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then you apply a poultice to that joint, and apply a hot compress to it.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And if there are other pains in the limbs or elsewhere, it is necessary to use a cushion under them and a bandage on their leg.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And so the affected area should be cauterized to prevent the disease from spreading.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	And if a patient has a pain in their legs or feet, they should be treated gently so that no further injury occurs.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from these other veins, they have no need for a cushion.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the patient's body, put a cushion under them, so that their legs are covered with the cushion for several days.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	When pain arises in the joints, the doctors usually call it "gout".
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And if it is necessary to treat gout, that is what I will say about it.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	And when there are worms that have been generated in the skin, it is called bovine disease.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	In some places, this disease is called gout because it is caused by an imbalance of humors in the body, which are believed to be located in the foot.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And if there are other causes for pain in the legs, then put a cushion under the leg and the patient should be laid on their side.
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	When the disease has affected the legs and the body, it is necessary to apply cushions to keep the humors in check.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And if you wish to cure them and remove the pain from their body.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you are treating a wound that is in the flesh, apply cautery to the area where the patient is being treated.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	Then return to the body's natural state, and you should place the cushion on their own flesh.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	When a physician needs to make incisions, they should be made carefully on the affected area.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This disease, which is called gout, affects some parts of the body, and the pain moves from joint to joint.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you will see that I have seen that the patient's body is already in good shape for its original condition.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	And I saw in another man a small swelling in the vein of his arm, which was swollen because of a gout attack.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	Then, if necessary, apply heat to the area and keep your hand there for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then place a bandage on the other arm to prevent the spread of the illness.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And you have already seen the patient's feet, which are covered in sweat.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	When I see you have done so, I will say that you are sick with the gout.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	This is how a doctor might have described treating gout in a woman's feet.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And if you think they are just that old, think of the pain of the old woman who has been suffering from illness.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery, they should be applied to the legs.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	This sentence appears to be written in a language similar to French but with some archaic spellings. The phrase "e quas" likely means "and if," as in "if you wish."
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	Then, if you do not apply the other methods, then use others to stop the bad humors from leaving the body.
De extraccio de sagetas.	On treating gout.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are made differently for different types of wounds, and so are cauterized by applying heat to them.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And thus you should treat gout, which occurs on the limbs, by applying pressure to the affected area.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And if the doctor wishes to cauterize the affected areas, they will use a hot cautery on the joints, and then put a cushion under them, so that the heat may reach the part where the inflammation is.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	Therefore if there are these signs, you should stop the treatment and remove the arrow.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	If the pain in the body is like gout, then you are very sick.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And when the cushion is placed under their chest.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the pain is located in the foot, then it is necessary to use a cushion or other means to elevate and support the foot.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	The arrow has caused a wound in the stomach.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	If a sharp pain occurs in the lower abdomen, there is no hope for the treatment of the illness except for the use of cautery.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If urine cannot be stopped by placing a cushion under them, it is called a dangerous bladder condition.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	Perhaps the body's parts that are affected by the others can also be saved from harm if the arrow hits them.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	Then you, the physician, should apply your hand to their leg or foot, and cushion (or other material) to the injury in the patient's legs.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	When it is in a man's thigh, apply cold compresses.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	When the patient has a pain in their legs, they should be treated by a physician.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	When the Juizeu came to himself, he recognized the illness as gout.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And if you put a needle there, another guide will be needed for the cushion on their chest, and another to guide the other needles.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And it was customary for the patient to be treated with other treatments in addition to the previous ones, so that he may be healed from that illness, and no longer suffer.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And if one were to use cautery on a patient's back, it would be customary to warm the area first.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	And if the woman has a fever, it is customary to call it 'leeches' plague' on her hands and feet.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And if he has been suffering from a wound or injury in the other parts of his body, then apply a cushion to the affected area.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And so that the arrow does not come out of the man's arm, a small cushion is placed under his right leg to keep the other limbs stable during the procedure.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And if it is necessary to bleed the patient's feet, you have already opened the space between their legs, and it is customary for doctors to use a cushion to use on their feet, and another to use on the foot.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Then the arrow's target was the right foot.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And apply a cushion to that part to stop the swelling.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	And if it is necessary to apply a cushion to the patient’s foot in order to treat it, then the arrow should be treated as a symptom of that illness rather than a cause for concern.
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	Then, with the delicate point of a needle, you will pierce the body.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And apply the poultice to the affected area for four days, which will reduce the swelling, and place a poultice on their abdomen for a period of time of four days.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	And then the pain will be alleviated, and the other (the patient) will have to be treated with a special tool for that.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	When joints are affected by gout, the doctors say that they should be heated with cautery to relieve it.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	E a quo yeu recomti a tu, this means that the physician should apply cauterization to the patient's legs.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And if a cushion is placed under them, they are called to be wise in their decisions; those who do not know how to use this new instrument will not be able to make a diagnosis with certainty.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	Therefore, I say that arrows are not drawn out from the limbs in which they have been placed.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And if it is customary to do so, then apply the treatment to the legs and place the patient on their back, covered with cushions, and another one on top of the body and the other one below; for this reason, I will put a cushion under the arms.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	Then leave the cushion in place for a few days while the patient's body is treated.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the legs, it is done by another method.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you don't apply a bandage to the intestine, place one on the affected leg for a few days, to see if the pain subsides.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	Then apply the other methods to the leg where the arrow is lodged.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow remains lodged in the bone for several days.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	The body's humors are imbalanced, causing the illness.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	Mays si es necessitat que the patient will be treated by a different type of cautery if you are a doctor, apply it to their chest, so that the pain in the joints is relieved.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	And if you are unable to remove the arrow, and prevent it from coming out.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the patient's intestines or legs, you must use it on all the parts that are affected by the ailment and its location.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	Then use your hand to apply pressure and force the bone fragments out.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	If you can't reduce it yourself, wait a few days for the body to expel the harmful humors.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	And so if you cause pain in your legs, it is called  a "que tu" shall be removed from the bone.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	Then do as you see fit to apply the treatment properly.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And so, if it is necessary to cauterize the intestine or to stop a hernia.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	And if your own efforts are insufficient, then seek the help of others to perform cautery on their legs.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	Gout is caused by an accumulation of cold humors in the body, which can affect various parts of the body.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is necessary to remove the arrow, then it must be removed carefully from the bone.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	Then apply a cushion to the patient's legs for several days.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	Then you apply to the foot, a poultice should be applied by that person.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	This may be a reference to a specific type of treatment or procedure used by doctors for conditions in the lower body.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	Then you will need to apply a strong hand massage to the legs if the patient has a concave pain there.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If you are experiencing pain in your feet, it is necessary to use a hot cauterizing tool for that ailment.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if it is necessary to apply a poultice to the foot or to the legs, they are sometimes called the "knee" because of their pain.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	A form of forceps is used on the patient's legs.
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let the patient be treated by applying a cushion to their feet, so that the pain may be lessened.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	And if a patient's stomach or foot requires treatment, then treat them with specific remedies.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	This form of pain relief is like placing the hand on the sore joint and using a cautery tool to relieve the pain.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Shape of the body, or shape of the pain in the legs, which you have already treated.
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	So too if pain exists in the body that occurs in the feet, one places their hand on the other to alleviate the pain.
De fleubotomia de las venas.	And about bloodletting from the veins.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	And if there are other causes for pain, such as those caused by humors in the gums, it is necessary to doas apply a cushion on the tongue.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	This is a medieval medical text describing how to treat different ailments through the use of cauterization.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And if there are three veins in the leg; one in the foot, which is called the sciatic vein; another in the thigh, and the other in the legs.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	And so you must apply heat to the affected areas, but be careful that they do not become inflamed.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	Then you have already prepared the patient for bleeding, and you are using the bandage to protect the place where the patient's legs will be bled.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then you use the lancet, make sure to make a small incision on the foot to drain the blood.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And apply the cautery to the top of the foot, which is located on the patient's body.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And let the patient's quantity of pain be adjusted to the two bystanders who are standing by.
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And so you have opened the space for surgery, and now the patient will be healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And that which has been described as "the treatise" by others in their works.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	And if it is necessary to perform an operation on the intestines or a sudden pain in the feet.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	You can see what you think those doctors are doing by looking at the definition of gout.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	When the joint pain comes on their limbs.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the vein in the foot, do not cauterize them there for an hour or so, and another vein will be treated.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And so it is necessary to treat the ailment with leeches, and that is how the remedy begins.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And if it is necessary to make an incision on the patient's temple, then do so by using a hot iron cautery.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the patient's condition is that which you have recommended to me; the other is to apply a cushion to the area where the vein is.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then place another cushion on their legs so that they may be affected by the cold humors, which will cause pain in the feet.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And sometimes it is caused by that which causes pain in the legs.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	This is the first time that I have seen this word used as "amulets".
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the bandage is tied to the patient's foot, which is where they are being treated.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	Then if the patient needs to bleed, perform a bloodletting on the other side.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And if it's necessary to apply heat to the blood for a long time, it should be applied with a cautery.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	And may the physician treat the vein cushion in the face and feet with these ailments.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And if the patient's condition is related to the quality of their health, and you are using a cautery tool, be careful when applying it near the cushion, as it can cause burns.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	This text describes how to perform a medical procedure involving the legs, likely a bloodletting.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	And if it is necessary to make a cut between the intestines due to leprosy, do so carefully.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	Then the quality of the bloodletting on the legs of the patient will be determined by the state of the patient's health; and they are ill-treated due to the skill of the physician.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And they should be treated by cauterizing the veins in order to correct them.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then if it is necessary to apply a cautery, and another cushion is placed on the patient's legs, et voilà!
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And if you have a small opening in your foot, use a cautery to make a cut on their hands.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The quality of their hands is that they are left to be filled with your hand by the patient.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If the patient's humors are unbalanced, they may be advised to undergo bloodletting.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	"And there are two cushions for their legs, and another one for them."
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	It is customary for doctors to treat wounds on the lip by applying a poultice.
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	Another translation: Another cushion is placed under the patient's feet to stop them from swelling.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And if it is necessary to make a cut on their foot, it will be a different procedure from that done on their legs.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	When translated into English, the first sentence would be:
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then, when a poultice is applied to the affected areas, one must apply pressure with a cushion to prevent the gut from protruding further.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And if it's not caused by something more complex, they might call it a "gout" in the legs.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	The form used by doctors for the treatment of this type of ailment.
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	And if necessary, open the veins for him who has such a need, and apply a poultice to his inflamed body parts.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the method of performing a bloodletting on their feet.
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And so for this operation, you must carefully prepare the patient's legs and gently apply your hand to the affected area.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	Mays le (the patient) must be treated for three illnesses: one with a hot iron, and another by applying a bandage to their leg.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And when the patient has a fever, they are to be burned with a cautery for a while on their legs, using a pointed instrument, and then adjust the position of the burn so that the patient's skin does not come into contact with the cautery, and it is necessary to do so.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the appendix doesn't come out from the other side, then do that which you would do for a hidden herniation in the thigh.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	The bloodletting must be done carefully and only on the arm, so that the incision does not touch any veins in the wrist or hand.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	And when there is pain in the space where the bowels are, avoid applying it to the joint, which should be treated with cautery.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see blood in the phlebotomy, apply a cushion underneath; and if it is necessary to make a cut on the arm, then use your hand to hold it steady.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And if you fear that it is something worse than a simple cold, use a cushion to protect their legs from injury.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	Then you should know that if blood is not drawn from the vein, you may use a hot cautery for treatment.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	Then apply a cautery to the affected area if the patient's leg has been healed with another method.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And the pain in their legs is caused by the cushion, which has been placed under them to prevent the eruption of the foot and its pain.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	This text describes the treatment of the condition we now know as gout.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	And if you hide a wound from the world, it will be hidden from all those who would treat it; for then, leeches are applied to the wound, so that they may be treated with bloodletting; and this practice has been practiced for centuries.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if the vein is between the bones, then you are to do what needs to be done for a hernia.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	Le juvament of the young one shall be healed by the first bloodletting.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	> And if the pain is in the feet, apply poultice to the affected areas; do not use oil or other ointments there.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	And if a doctor has to cauterize the patient's foot, it will be done by a physician.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	When joints are swollen, apply a cauterizer to reduce the swelling, but only after the initial treatment.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	And if it is necessary to make incisions on the legs, one must consider their quality.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	Then at the beginning of the illness, doctors administer leeches when there is a leeching point on the foot.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	Then let the patient be bled for three days.
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	Cutting into the body to let out blood is called "bloodletting" by doctors.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	The patient is to be cauterized on their legs and feet.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the foot or other parts, for those suffering from the disease called gout, which affects the feet, it's done by applying a cushion to the affected area.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	And if you want to remove the illness from someone who has a weak stomach and vomits, it should be done carefully.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	Then apply a cauterizing poultice to their feet.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And if it is necessary to make a bath for the patient, but only if the ailment is caused by something other than gout, then hold their hands in a cushion so that they do not come out.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	So is the time for the third hour that the bloodletting be performed on them.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	The animals have already been pierced by pain, and the animals must be kept from harm's way.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And if the patient's pain comes from a hot humor, they should be treated by the doctor for its cause.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	And if the patient has a fever, they must be treated by a skilled physician.
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	Then place a cushion under their arms and hold your hand on them to keep them from shivering.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if there is a constriction that is caused by cold, the pain may be less severe.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And if there's pain in the legs, place another cushion on their feet to prevent them from feeling worse.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And if it is necessary to perform bloodletting on the patient, only use that vein when it is the one already being used for bloodletting; otherwise, use a different method for bloodletting.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, the doctor must be consulted for these reasons.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And if the ailment is a pain in the legs or feet, you cauterize the leg for a short time.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if the area becomes inflamed, it is customary to call for the use of a cautery.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	Then apply a cautery to the affected area to prevent the blood from letting further out.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	When you are concerned about the blood flow in your body, and fear it will come out again.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	The doctor will apply a poultice to the affected area to treat the pain.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And when the doctors have applied pressure to the area above the bowel pain.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And similarly in all cases where the pain is located, it is customary to apply an oil-soaked bandage for its relief.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	E encase le which are the signs of the illness that you should be aware of, and how to treat them.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	Then apply a cautery to the vein's flow in their legs or elsewhere.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if it lasts for several days, you should apply [a remedy] to the affected area, a cushion should be placed under their legs, or a similar remedy used.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	"Then apply heat to the affected area."
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	Therefore, if you are treating a patient with an injury to their leg, they must be treated in a way that addresses the cause of such injury, which is bad humors, by applying a cushion to the area.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And put on their legs a poultice to apply the treatment.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And if it is necessary to draw out blood from someone, you should use a cautery tool.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	And if the pain is in the legs, it is called a black leg by physicians.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And if the surgeon needs to open a vein for bloodletting, he must use a cauterized incision.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And if there's a need to stop the pain, then apply heat to the body.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And if it is necessary to draw blood from the patient's arm, it should be done through a cut, not by using a pointed instrument for a procedure they are accustomed to calling venesection.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This method is safer than if the patient has an incision in their arms or legs.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	Then apply the cautery to the area to be treated, and apply a cushion to their leg; and use other methods for the rest of the body.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	Then apply cautery to the patient's legs.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	Then apply a leech to the vein on their body's flesh for a while.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And here are other causes for fainting in addition to those previously mentioned.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	For the second time I am forced to say that the bloodletting of the body's humors, as you know, is called for when the patient suffers from a certain ailment.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	Mays that the patient's arm should be bled for seven or nine hours after the first bloodletting, it is necessary to perform the second.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	Here comes the second cushion under the legs, which are already supported.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	Mays if you are in the midst of the operation and the patient experiences pain, then apply a bandage to their legs or arms, depending on the location of the pain.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And if you wish to release the pressure on the joint pain in their arm, treat the vein issues with a cushion, for there are too many veins to be cauterized.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	When the patient's body is hot, it will be cooled with a poultice.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	When the vein is inflamed, it is treated by placing a cushion under the patient's thigh.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	If there is no need for a cushion to be applied on another limb.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And then apply a cauterizer to the vein in the arm or leg for the purpose of drawing out the pain by applying it there.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And if you wish to prevent swelling in the legs or feet, use a cushion and apply it under them.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the small intestine, it should be done carefully.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	You can cauterize the patient's veins if they are experiencing pain in their legs.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	E si es that it is the most appropriate place to perform surgery on the intestines or bowels.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	If pain in the foot occurs frequently in the cold season, it may be due to the fact that the cold humors are infiltrating the body, causing inflammation.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And for a hot disease, they are used to bleed them, but the other diseases you should treat differently.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	When the right side of the body is experiencing pain, the first part of the body to be treated by cauterization should be the right foot.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And the purpose of bloodletting is to remove the bad humors from the body.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And if you wish to make your hand stop at the right place.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	And if it is necessary to use a hot poultice on the affected area, you should put it there, in the water bath; if the pain is not relieved by a hot bath, apply a hot compress directly to the site.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And similarly, if your doctor says you have an excess of humors in your legs, they are called gout.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	And if the left-hand side of the body is affected by a disease, then apply heat to the area.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And for bleeding the feet, you should do so similarly to how you would apply a cautery to them.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And so the pain in the first parts of the body is akin to the pain of a child's birth.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	The patient's condition is like that of the intestine which needs to be treated with care.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And so the physician should apply cauterization to the patient's thighs to treat them.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	And if you are treating someone for a disease of the blood and they place a cushion on their legs, then put your hand over the wound to prevent them from opening their legs and spread the intestines apart, and so forth.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And if their bloodletting needs to be done.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	If you wish to treat it with hot cautery, it is important to avoid cauterizing the veins in the legs.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the doctor makes a mistake in the first incision, he should use a cushion to prevent his hand from slipping.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And if it is a wound on the foot, it heals.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	Then place (a) device on the patient's legs to prevent pain from the sciatic vein.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And bloodletting was done on the patient's arm.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the nature of the pain in the foot is such that it is felt by the patient, but only when they are on their back.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	Therefore, when you cauterize a joint or a region near it, you are to apply a cushion to the affected area, and use another cushion for the other parts of the body, and place a cushion under their legs; then put the other one on the patient's legs.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And if you have many men on their knees, they are already using the other one to be used for something.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And let it be treated, as much as possible, for the patient's sake.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And another cushion under their knees will help them to be cured.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	The text discusses how to treat an ailment called "gout" by using a cauterizer on the affected area.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	And for corns, and for those who are already suffering from them.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	Bloodletting can be done in two ways: one on the foot, the other by making incisions and drawing out blood from the groin and legs.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And if the pain is caused by cold humors, then it's treated with cauterization, otherwise with another method.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And if there are many cuts on the body, they are already done to the body, and the patient has been treated with other cushions for the rest of the body or something like that, and a cushion is applied to the affected area.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	Then apply heat to the veins in the affected area, so that it may be treated by bloodletting.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	This text describes using a cautery tool to treat pain in the legs and feet by cauterizing them.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	And here comes the English translation: And if the cause is that the person is suffering from fever in their body, they will be given a cushion under them, and another one on their legs, and another one on their chest.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	Therefore, when the doctor applies a poultice to the affected area, he must apply it properly.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And if the spine or neck are affected, it's called another type of gout.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This gout is treated by lancing the affected area to remove the excess fluid.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And if he does not heed, let him be treated by a physician.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And if you need to use a cautery on their joints they are at risk of burning, because of the way they are positioned.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	And if it is necessary to use moxa on the legs, then do so in a way that avoids injury.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	This describes the treatment of an ailment, possibly indicating a bloodletting procedure for conditions such as intestinal pain or another condition requiring a cut.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And when the wind is purged from the body, the patient feels better after being treated.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And if there are pains in the body that are caused by things such as the above examples, they were called by the doctors "alhazgo."
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And command the phlebotomist to apply his hands.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the veins in the patient's jaw, another servant should be placed on his gums.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	And if you have already cauterized the two spatulas, it's now time to treat the patient for the cold humors.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	When one places the bloodletting on the small veins or the large veins in the body, it is to prevent the blood from all three parts of the body.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the surgeon to cauterize the flesh when the patient's body is marked by a cushion.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And so it's done on the legs and another on the thighs, which are used for applying a cushion to the stomach.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	For the patient's comfort, use a hot iron to cauterize the affected area; do not use a hot iron on a thin or weak part.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	If you are translating from a combination of the languages you mentioned, then the original text seems to be a mix of medieval medical terminology and terms related to those languages.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	For this sentence is in Old French, and the meaning depends on the context provided by the previous sentences.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And from their legs, the patient's intestines are treated to prevent them from becoming inflamed.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And if you want to use a cushion for their chest, apply it lightly.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	Then apply a hot cautery to the cavity so the patient's hands don't ache.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	Then return the patient's body to its original state, and another hand will hold the intestine.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	When a man suffers from gout, which is in the legs, he should be treated with a cautery applied to his feet.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And command another servant to hold their hand over the area to be treated.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if the first part of the body is used for cautery, it is translated as gout.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	When a patient has pain in their legs, you should place a cushion under them.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	Then apply the cautery to the third degree, so that the blood flow will be reduced, but do not let it reach the bone.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And then apply a cautery to the vein in the foot.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we wish to have bloodletting performed, we should use a lancet for the bloodletting, and treat it accordingly.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And you are now thatch-covered, a place where they are only for the deep.
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	In summer, when the weather is hot, the wound should be treated with soothing oils, but in winter, it's best to leave them alone.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if you have a large amount of excess fluid, apply an oil to it.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If the pain is in the joints and caused by cold humors, it is called gout.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	Then use a cushion to support the patient's intestines while they are being treated.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And if the intestines are affected by excessive fluids, use water to cleanse them.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	You should apply cautery to the patient's body if needed, but prevent it from being used on their legs by placing a cushion there.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	And apply heat to the area where the bloodletting is needed, before the bleeding.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	At the beginning you must consider if the patient has gout or another condition that causes pain in the joints, and apply a poultice to alleviate the pain.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	Then treat it with a bandage.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And if it is necessary to make the patient's body hot, they should be given little wine or other things that are good for them.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And if the patient has an ailment related to bloodletting, it should be treated with diet and phlebotomy.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	E if the patient is to be treated with a poultice on their legs or for other ailments, apply it to the affected area.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	If you cauterize the liver by using it as if it were a wound, call the pain caused in the joints that follows, "gout" so that they are not mistaken for other ailments.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And if you are using a cupping glass on the patient’s legs, it is said to be applied in the same way as for bloodletting in the case of an ailment that causes pain in the limbs and affects the body.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And if it is necessary to reduce swelling in the foot, they will leave the patient alone, and apply a poultice, and they must use their hands carefully to draw out the poison.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	And similarly apply it to the liver and spleen if there's a need to relieve windiness in them.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these are applied only to the legs in this way, but also to other parts of the body.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	Then apply a hot cautery to the affected area to treat the underlying cold humors.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	The doctors would apply heat to the area where they applied their hands to the patient's body.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Forma de ventoza es un type of medical procedure.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	Then place a cushion under their arm or leg to prevent them from being harmed.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And if it is in the thigh and leg, put your hand there to stop the pain.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And if the patient has this kind of swelling; and do not let them be treated by those who are inexperienced in treating it.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And their cupping glasses were placed on the legs of young men and on the arms of strong people.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of making a point with fire is that the patient will feel better if you apply a cushion to their leg (the original meaning likely referencing the location of pain).
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	A cushion should be placed on the affected area to prevent pain in the intestine.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	E so that's how they treat the patient's condition in the way doctors would call it.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	Then in the case of a sickness of the bowels, apply a cushion to the patient's abdomen.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This is the way to treat great pain by applying a leech:
Capitol .xcvii.	Chapter 97.
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	The patient's blood is drawn from his veins and leeching is used to treat other ailments, such as the use of cushions on the feet for gout.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And if the condition is found to be caused by excess humors, it is customary to treat it in a particular way.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	Then if the patient has no other symptoms, place your hand on their body during the day or night, applying pressure to the affected joint in the morning and evening.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	Then apply another hot cushion.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	Then if it is at all possible to do so, you must cauterize the affected area.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	Then, if there's a sore spot on their legs, apply a poultice.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if you are experiencing pain in your legs, use a cloth to apply pressure and prevent the spread of the ailment.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	When blood is drawn from the body by the heat of the fire of the disease, or when there are other symptoms in addition to those mentioned, a cushion should be placed under the patient's legs, and another on their chest, to avoid complications.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And if leeches are used on the affected area, you must remove them when they have finished feeding.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if leeches are prohibited from being used, they will be burned by the recent blood.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	And when you wish to cauterize, apply ashes to the legs to prevent the burning from spreading to the rest of the body.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	And thus began the treatment of the thigh with the restoration of health.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is essential for the practice of medicine; it deals with fractures and dislocations.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	O son my intestines!
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And if the doctors are concerned about what they see in the patient's body, then they apply their hands to his legs.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	And if it is customary to call the pain in the feet gout, then you should put your hand on their leg.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	Then I have already explained how to treat a patient with a description of the ailment based on my own experience and knowledge; now I will describe how to treat the ailment using methods that are common among physicians, as well as those used in treating a person's affliction.
Capitol primier.	Chapter one.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	And another on their legs, which they should use to burn away any humor that might be causing illness.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	And if one wishes to burn their joints with hot irons, use the following method.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	Then it is called an accident by the common people, and when there is a fracture or if you need to make points on the body, use a cushion for a cushion and another for the legs of the patient, and so that the surgeon does not have to apply a cautery to the area where the intestines are.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And if you have already treated a patient for an ailment with herbs, but they are thick-blooded, you should be careful when applying heat to their legs, as it may cause the blood to flow to the head, and the veins in the leg to be congested.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then if you are unable to reduce the swelling in the patient's legs, return to the other methods.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	E’l:  "And then apply a bandage to the wound."
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	Then it is said that the person has a problem in the legs.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And thus if their joints are affected by humors, then they are called "gouty" or "gouty-like".
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	The patient's strength will be restored if you treat them with a hot cautery when pain arises in their broken bones.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And it is necessary for the patient to be treated with a cushion under them.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	Mota diversitat del cos is the same as the words used to describe it in the first language.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	When a patient's legs are injured, doctors call it by different names depending on the type of injury.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I have seen the patient's leg in its own chapter.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Mota diversitatis in itself can be dangerous for health reasons.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	E so are there different kinds of bone breaks; some are caused by dislocations, and others by fractures of the bone itself.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And if there's a wound on the legs, you should use proper tools to fix it.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	And then apply a bandage or splint to the legs to protect them.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	The pain is from a bone issue, likely related to pain in the feet.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	Therefore, when there is no apparent twistedness or pain in the bone itself, then the diagnosis is not gout.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	If you have a joint pain, it may be due to cold humors, so apply compression to the affected area and use gentle cauterization.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And if you have already opened the space around the patient's feet and hands, and they are suffering from pain in those areas, then apply another cushion to those limbs.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And after the apostema subsides, you should use a hot cushion to treat the inflammation.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And if it is necessary to apply heat to the legs or feet, it should be done carefully.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Then apply cauterization to the second part of the body (the leg).
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If the patient has pain in their bones, two cords may be necessary to apply pressure to the injured limb.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And so let your hand be placed on the patient's leg when they are in pain.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And then place the cushion on their chest, so that they are safeguarded from harm by the cushion, but be sure to use your strength carefully when placing a cushion.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	Then you will touch them with your hand to heal them.
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Then apply a cautery to cause intense pain if gout causes swelling in the feet.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	The patient's legs are affected by pain in the joints, so use a cushion to relieve their feet.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	When a body part has a problem, it is called gout when in the legs.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those who are small in stature like arms and legs.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	Then you must cauterize the affected parts so that they do not suffer further damage.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	And if it is your hand, you can use three cauteries to burn the feet, the third one being placed on the foot.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And if the patient's bowels are in danger of being affected by a burn, you should place a cushion on their body to prevent further injury.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Then apply the cautery to the patient's legs, slowly at first, then gradually move it around.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Then take another bandage and bind the injured foot.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	Then apply the bandage to the leg or knee of the patient.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	When a doctor sees that a patient's humors are no longer causing inflammation, they can stop applying the cushion to the affected area.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And be wise in the choice of the woods used for making the fire.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	And if the surgeon needs to make incisions on the patient's body parts, he will use his/her knowledge to do so properly according to the nature of the pain in other areas of the body, and place a cushion on the area being operated on.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	Then you should use a cushion on his legs, as well as a bandage to hold the bowels in place.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And for the rest of the body, it is customary to apply a poultice.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	Then if necessary, place cushions on their legs to prevent pain in the joints from extending beyond its limits.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	And if you place cushions on the patient's legs, it will relieve pain in the joints.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	You see, the patient's body has been swollen for some time, so they should be given a cushion to prevent injury.
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This sentence describes applying a poultice to a wound on a patient's leg, but it's unclear if it's referring to a specific type of injury or ailment.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	And if the patient's legs are injured, apply a poultice to the area where necessary.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And if you put a cushion under the patient's feet, it helps them to not get gout in their legs or feet, which prevents further pain.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	This is a good sign that you are using a tool to help the patient's humors from becoming too inflamed.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	This describes how to treat a patient who has suffered from injuries to their legs or feet.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	Then apply a poultice to the patient's feet.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	And if your leg is affected by a fracture or you need to use a cushion on the skin for pain relief, then apply it under the place where the injury is located.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	Then return the pain to its proper place and put heat on the affected area.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Then, to treat them, they are applied to the patient's body.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Take 2 parts of marshmallow root and 1 part of their other herbs; then cook them in a pot (with) a little bit of water to make an ointment: take 2 parts of marshmallow root and 4 parts of comfrey.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	Mays if it is a cure for a patient's ailment.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	The pain is sharp and localized in a specific area of the body; the pain from that cause will be more noticeable on the feet, as they are furthest from the heart.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	This sentence refers to a method of treating a broken bone using bandages.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	This practice, also called cauterization, was commonly used to treat injuries by applying a hot iron to cauterize them.
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	And if you want to treat an injury or pain in the foot, prepare this plaster.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	If you have pain in the joints due to cold humors that infiltrate your body, apply another kind of treatment.
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	Then apply pressure to the cushion and another to their chest, to keep it from causing them pain.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	Then apply that to a cloth to hold back the pain and after a time, let the patient rest for an hour; then apply a poultice to their legs and let them be treated with a poultice of water and salt.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And he has placed the cushion on their thighs.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	Then apply a poultice and let it dry, and cover it with a bandage.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	When the joint pain was severe in their legs, they healed them by applying a hot cautery.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	E ayusta en la cushion under their legs.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	This phrase translates to a description of an operation to relieve a blockage in the body.
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	If a doctor's hands are placed on a broken bone, and they are not able to help it at the beginning, it is said that they have done something wrong.
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	For I have seen that it is more reasonable to be spared from such an affliction, for they are always in pain.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Of all the types of injuries, a broken bone is an injury to the skull.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	And the causes of fractures are numerous, and their shapes are diverse, some being caused by various factors.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And a cushion under the patient's legs; a cushion under their feet.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	This bone is broken, and the pain in their body will be intense.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And if there is a fracture in the bone, it is called a fracture of the bones by a special term used for this type of fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And if a person suffers from a fracture or other ailments, they are said to have a weakness in their bones, and another that affects the legs and feet.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	Then apply a hot cautery to reduce the swelling in their feet.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And if there are fractures in the bones of the foot, they are called gout.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And then you must place the bandage on their legs and keep it from them.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And you've learned about all these types of fracture, which are the ones that are treated with a cushion and those that require surgery.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And if the blood vessels are affected, it is customary to call it gout.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	Then if one wants to prevent the effects of these ailments, it is necessary to apply a cautery.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if your body experiences accidents or ailments, it is necessary to treat them immediately.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	When the cause is cold or dampness in the body, it is customary for doctors to call it a disease of the foot, one should be cautious of such conditions as gout.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	If you put pressure on the patient's intestine, it will be necessary to make a cut.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	E si l’autre placed on their chest, they are already holding the patient.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And if you see signs of inflammation on their legs, apply a poultice to treat them according to its nature.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if there are boils on the body, or if one wants to treat the disease known as cauterization.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And there are two types of surgery.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so the one method goes, to apply cautery on the bone.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And then apply the cauterizing paste to the affected area for a second time.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And therefore it is necessary to apply a cushion to their feet so that they are not too hot.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And if they are burned by fire, the pain will be relieved in their joints and they leave them alone.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and stiff, it is called non-perforating by those who know medicine.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	This means that doctors are wrong to call gout a disease related to the blood vessels.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you burn the lower part of the leg where the pain is located, as long as the pain in the bones is severe, you will need to use a cautery for the treatment.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	This is a description of three types of wounds: "And so you will treat them in a way that suits their nature, as if it were a fracture you would treat the wound on the legs.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	Then, as you are accustomed to do, cut into the legs with a sharp instrument to drain the fluid from beneath their surface.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And if you are careful that the surgeon doesn't touch any part of the foot.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	But if it is necessary to perform surgery on the bone, then the surgeon must use a more delicate instrument.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	You have already opened the intestine and placed a cushion on their legs, so that they are ready for the treatment.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if they are in great pain, it is necessary to make an incision on the foot.
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	Then return the intestine to its place, and if there are other symptoms, treat them accordingly.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And use hot cautery to treat the condition as if they were a patient who needed a cushion on their legs, but do so carefully.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When it is necessary to apply a cautery to the surface of the patient's legs, the doctor should use a cushion to prevent the burning from reaching the bones.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	When a bone does not break properly, then a cushion must be placed under the area of the broken bone, and the patient's body must be positioned to avoid unnecessary pain.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And so you must put them on their knees and use the most subtle of razors.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	Make a small incision on the larger vessels to help them heal.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And then it is necessary to study this art carefully.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And you put another cushion under their legs, so they're ready to be healed by the great physician.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	When pain occurs in your second (or other) toe, apply a poultice of oil to the affected area.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And let the patient be given this treatment for one or two days
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	Then administer these medicines to the patient, which are powders that will be applied to their legs to heal them.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And when you have treated the plague-stricken person, it is important to keep the wounds clean.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	E therefore if it is necessary to cauteri in the other parts of le body.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area for gout relief.
Capitol .iii.	And here is how to translate the following text:
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	On treating a broken foot.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	Knowing which parts are cartilaginous, it is customary for doctors to call it gout.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If a member is fractured, you should apply a bandage to it.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And if you are going to perform surgery on the leg, be sure to place a cushion under it.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	If a joint in the body is affected by an illness, they are to be treated with a hot cautery.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	Then make two cauterizations.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And if it is possible, restore the cushion to its place on the leg of the patient; otherwise, it is best to use other methods.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	E if you place your hand on their nose to apply pressure, apply it to the cushion.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the feet or limbs, they will be treated by applying heat.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes the nose is affected by a runny nose and pain that is intense in the cavity but also affects other parts of the body.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause, if you wish to use it, is called gout if you have it in your feet.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if there are other times that a boil appears on the legs, place a cushion under them.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If a boil occurs on the body, use the following recipe to treat it.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	When joint pain is caused by cold humors that cause infiltration, it is called gout in the medical tradition.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	Then apply heat to the nostrils, so that he will be healed by the use of a burning cautery on the legs, etc.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter 4
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	When the jaw is dislocated, the bone is fractured.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	Therefore, if the jawbone is broken, but not dislocated, the treatment is to apply heat to the affected area, and if the jaw is dislocated, it should be treated with a cushion, and then it should be set back in place.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	Therefore, if the fracture is on the left side, the patient will need a cushion to hold it in place.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	Then you should apply hot compresses to the two sides to promote healing.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And if there are gold teeth in the mouth, you must use a cushion to keep those teeth from being damaged and the other teeth are fixed properly with a pointed tool.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And command the patient to maintain a calm and still demeanor, and to be quiet as they are being cauterized.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you are concerned that the condition has been altered, then apply to the affected area a remedy that will make the patient's body return to its normal state.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And so if the cushion that you apply to them does not cause pain, the condition is not considered a true fracture.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	For boils or other ailments that may arise, apply a poultice to the affected areas.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is caused by the bones being separated, consider using cautery on the bone to burn it.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the doctor deems it necessary to open the vein, then apply cauterization to the area, and place another cushion under their hand, and another under the patient's chest, etc.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	Then apply the appropriate poultice to the affected area for the relief of the pain.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	This is a description of a treatment for a condition affecting the legs, called "trinquat" in the source language.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	The bone in the body can be broken in three ways: by being crushed, by being twisted, or by an imbalance of blood humors.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	And if a bone is fractured or broken, or another condition exists that causes pain in the bones, then the patient's body should be treated with leeches.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And if the bone in that area breaks, it is necessary to cauterize the fracture.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then place your hand on their legs to prevent them from being injured.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if there is no cushion available, then place your hand on the patient's chest to prevent them from suffering further injury.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot apply a cautery to the external parts of the body, use a cushion to apply heat instead.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And you place a cushion on their legs after they are elevated, and keep the patient's arms pressed down upon the bone of the body, for the purpose of the treatment.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	And so the physician puts his hand on the patient's body to treat the ailment.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is necessary to perform surgery on them, you must use your hand as a cushion for their hands; it is important to have a cushion for surgery.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And if you have a need to use leeches for bloodletting, use one from the person's thigh, which is another name for the area where they are applied.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	The length of the operation will depend on the severity of the case, but the duration should be as short as possible.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if you have opened the bone for the plague boil, then adjust it carefully.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if there is little disruption, you put the cushion on their legs.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	Then apply a cushion to the affected area.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	And then apply a bandage to the area, covering the area with a fine cloth.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And then, for a sprained ankle or knee, apply a bandage to keep the injury from worsening.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And if the patient's pain is in the shoulder, hold the injured area open with a cushion, and you have to keep the broken bone elevated during the day.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And if the patient has fever in their legs or thighs, it should be treated within twelve days.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And apply the plaster to his legs, so that he may be treated for gout.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And if it is necessary to cauterize and soothe a man's legs, it is done in twenty-eight days, after a period of twenty-eight days of rest.
Capitol .vi.	The text appears to be in a language that borrows heavily from Latin, but also incorporates elements of Italian, Spanish, and other Romance languages.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	This refers to the treatment of a fracture in the shoulder.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	A spatula is broken in the area of the patient's body, but they are not to be treated as such.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And so, when there is a fracture in a limb, it is treated by the surgeon's skill.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then apply a cushion to the patient's legs, but place it carefully between the thighs according to the amount of pain.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If your body is subject to a disease, the doctors are saying you have a problem with your bowels (in this case, a condition called 'the spatula') and that's when they will say it is a case of the spatula.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	And so, to treat the condition, the physician should use compression and another cushion to support the body.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the foot's location during surgery; if it is soft or weak, it should be supported by a cushion.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	Then apply the cautery to their legs.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	The first edition of the Latin-like medical text translates to:
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And then when it is done, you will have dissolved the humor that causes pain to the joint.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you must treat them, use a pointed cautery to drain the humors of gout.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	On the treatment of pain in the feet.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot is now open to receive cautery treatment, but the cushion must be applied carefully on the legs.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	Then place your hand on their back, to prevent their pain from spreading to their thighs.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And if it is necessary to make a cautery on the patient's body, and you have to make a cautery on their chest.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	Place a cushion under the patient's head and apply bandages to the affected area.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	When the patient's humors are too much in the legs or chest, it is called a disease.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	And then apply the cautery to their affected joints.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	Sapiens, only physicians can treat gout, but do not use cushions or ointments for that purpose.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And if you know the pain of the bones, then apply the proper treatment.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And apply a poultice to the affected area.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And then if the fracture is in the foot, you have to apply cautery as well, because it's difficult to treat.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And if it is a cushion which is placed under their legs, they should be given another.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	Apply cauterization to the legs or abdomen (in case of inflammation) of the patient.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	And if it is necessary to make points on the body, this is what is done for gout.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	When they are in pain, some doctors use bandages to treat them.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	Then place a cloth soaked in oil on their legs, and another on their chest, to prevent inflammation.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if he causes the bones to be pierced by the pain which they don't want, and another cushion is put on the foot, the patient will suffer less, and fear the piercing of the bone, therefore, is lessened.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then apply the two-day treatment to the patient with a hot compress, and use plasters to heal them.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	And if the intestine or cushion is placed on the foot, it is customary to treat the patient for gout with it.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And if they are affected by gout, let them be treated on the leg where they feel it in their limbs.
Capitol .ix.	This refers to a treatment for the condition described in the second sentence.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	This refers to a treatment method involving placing cushions under the patient's legs during a medical procedure.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	And if it is necessary to use a cauterizer on the patient's leg, then use a cushion for support and protection.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And so you must know that if you have a cushion under them and another on their legs, it is customary to say they are suffering from gout.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you have pain in your joints, you must call it gout when applying cauterization.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you want to know if they will heal or not, apply a hot cautery to their sides.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	This sentence refers to a medical condition that affects the legs, and states that it is not a hernia.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	And if it is caused by something else, it is better and lighter to be called Mays.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And if you pierce the abscess it will be possible to apply a poultice to heal it.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a bandage to that joint so as to keep it from becoming inflamed.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	When your body has suffered from the pain of gout, which is caused by points in the skin, you should apply heat to the area.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	When a physician has made an attempt to fix the broken bones in the foot, and the pain is from a cold humour, one should be careful that the other parts of the body are not affected by it.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel pain in your legs, apply a cautery to the area where the pain is felt, and treat it with medicine for the treatment of the plague.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10
De restauracio de la ancha.	Then apply the treatment for a cushion (placed on the legs) for the pain in the foot.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	And if the bones are affected by the pain that makes them break, then it is customary to call it a broken bone.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	And you have already placed your hand on the patient's leg to prevent a cushion from being used.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	Then return the cushion to the patient's body, and hold it in place.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	Then apply the cushion to the affected area.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	E then the patient must be burned with a cautery to remove the cushion from their leg.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	Then apply the appropriate poultice to the affected area, while keeping the patient warm.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	The first sentence tells us that if a patient's legs are affected by the mentioned ailment, the physician should treat them.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	Then treat them as you would a wound.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	It is customary for doctors to treat gout by applying hot compresses to the affected area.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	When a wound is inflicted upon the shoulder by a surgeon, he should be careful to avoid severing the tendons.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	Then you restore the health of the patient's body in two ways, one by placing the joint back into its socket, and another by using a poultice.
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	Two more cushions are placed on their legs, so that they will be supported.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's legs, they should be burned in several places.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And if the cushion is placed on the patient's legs, the doctor should apply a poultice.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And if the wound in the body be in the other parts of the body, it is called the other way, by the other.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want to cauterize a bone or a joint, the other would be placed on the legs and another on the hands.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	So if the injury is near the muscle, apply another cautery to the affected area.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	Similarly, if the fracture is to the leg, you should use a bandage on that area.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	Mays, if necessary, treat the boil by using a poultice and applying a hot cautery to the area after seven days to prevent its return.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And so you must treat the affected area with a poultice to protect its skin from the burning.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	Then apply a cushion under their arms, and place a cushion on the patient's legs to prevent them from being cold or inflamed.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And so you should use hot poultices.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And thus, you have opened the body to allow for another person's hand to be placed upon the patient's foot.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then put a cushion under their legs, and another one on their feet, if necessary for pain.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And if it is a tight fit for your body, you can be sure that the doctor will have to use a cautery to burn out the bad part.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when it is necessary for the body to be treated by a physician, it is customary to treat them.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	Then apply a cushion to their legs and return the intestine to its proper place.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	Then apply the cautery to the patient's legs as you said.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And if you consider all parts of the body for three days, it is forbidden to eat food that causes inflammation.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	Mays three days after the pain has passed.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	When experiencing a fever, the patient has other conditions that may be causing the pain in their legs.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And you must carefully consider the location of the ailment, so that the pain does not spread beyond the affected limb.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And if the doctor needs to apply pressure on the foot, they will place a cushion for that purpose; and another cushion will be placed under the patient's leg.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Here comes the translation:
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is severe, it takes two months for it to heal.
Capitol .xii.	Another one
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Then apply a cushion under their [the patient's] arms.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	Two bones are the cause of pain in the legs; they are long bones, one calls them the small bone, which is the bone where the gout will be found, and the other one calls it a cushion.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And so the treatment by cautery should be applied to the affected area, using cushions to support the patient's legs and feet when treating them.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	The doctors will call it a gouty condition if your feet are affected by a disease that causes pain in the body.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the pain is severe, they used to call it "a broken leg" in their own words, "the fire" is in their foot, it is difficult to heal the fracture.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And two bones are already in place on his legs, they are bound together.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore, if it is the bone of the leg that is affected, it is customary for the doctor to use a cauterizer to treat it.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	When the body is affected by great pain, you should apply a hot cautery to relieve it.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if it's necessary to make a strong cauterization on the feet.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And if you have to use a hot cautery, place it carefully under the skin, so that the burn does not reach the intestine.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And if the patient has pain in the legs, hold them in place so they don't experience pain.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And then let the patient be placed on his knees.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And so you must adjust the patient's bones for their best health.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if the pain in your body is caused by the way the bones are formed, then treat them with the power of your hands.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if you are applying a poultice to their feet, you should apply another to the affected area, and then place your hand on their feet and hold them in place with the hope of preventing further damage.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	So if there is a wound in their legs, the patient should be treated by an expert.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	Then apply a poultice to the wound.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And now you will see how the patient's joints are affected by the condition gout.
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And if it is necessary to cauterize, it's important to place the patient on their back or side first, and then apply a cushion above the location of the fracture to protect them from burns.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And let the sheets be soft so they do not worsen the condition of the illness.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the other body parts that are near the legs to be treated for a few days.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if the pain persists, apply cold water to the area.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let it be known, leave the metatarsal bone alone, for it is the one that must not be opened.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	Here comes the first line of the English translation:
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	Then, if it is necessary to treat the patient's gut, apply a poultice to their legs and use other methods for pain relief.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	Mays the patient has a problem that prevents them from having their bowels moved for 20 days or so.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And so the patient's leg was held in place.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And if this fracture occurs in the legs, the patient should be treated according to the disposition of the humors.
Capitol .xiii.	The text you provided appears to be in Occitan, a Romance language spoken in medieval southern France.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	And if the patient has other problems, the physician should be dealt with accordingly.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that under the thumb:
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And if a patient's wound or injury is located in their legs, they are to be treated as one would treat a burn.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And if the patient has a broken bone or other ailments, the doctor should know how to treat them.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	Then apply a cushion to the affected area.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	When you are treating an injury on the foot, apply a bandage to the wound to protect it; this is how to heal the wounds in your gut and feet.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And if it's necessary to cushion the palm of the hand, it is placed on the other body part.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	Then if the fracture is outside the body, you should place a cushion on the thighs, to keep the leg warm and prevent further displacement.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if the intestine is affected by the disease, or ailment, called gout, it can be treated with a poultice to draw out the pain in the feet, and another use a cushion on the foot.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	Mays es que la lesa engualhat, or in the case of a fracture in the other parts of the body, the rest of the leg are treated with a hot cautery.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	E consider the patient's recovery, and apply the other to the affected area if they are suffering from such ailments.
Capitol .xiv.	The fourteenth chapter will be read in the next chapter.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	For the restoration of the bone of the leg.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones of the leg are broken, and they declare it to be gout based on the feeling in their feet.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The patient's body is positioned to avoid the pain of being burned by the hot cautery.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And then place his hand on their bones and another to hold them steady.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	When the doctors were called, they were ready to use their knowledge on the patient's legs, which was necessary for them to do so.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And if the patient's wound is infected, it should be treated with a bandage and poultice.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And when the physician has examined the legs, it is called a malaute upon the legs in order to prevent it from being swollen.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	This means that if you are treating an infected area (the "abscess") in the foot, it is necessary to use a hot cautery.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	Then apply a bandage to prevent excessive movement.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And then apply a bandage to the affected area.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And so you place a cushion on the affected area to prevent the pain from spreading further.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	And if you have to remove a part of the body, per so you should treat the intestines as they are for the ailment.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Then you have begun to use the bandage for the pain in their bowels.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Then place two cushions on the legs so that the patient's legs are supported.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Then if they are a doctor's assistant, or if there is a problem with the patient's intestines, a cushion should be placed under them.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	Then you should put the cushion under the patient's leg and hold their bones back in place.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	And another place was placed a cushion under them, so that they should be cushioned against the leg.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	Thus, the pain in the patient's legs should be treated with cautery, which is why it is called claudication.
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And if the patient's legs are swollen or has other symptoms of illness, it is customary to call it gout.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	This refers to restoring a broken or fractured bone, likely in a medical context.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	This means the patient is to be treated as for a wound in the foot, but the translation needs clarification: it's likely referring to a type of pain relief treatment.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	Then apply a burn to the affected part of the body, for the doctors are in agreement that this will cure the disease.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And then the intestines are restored to their proper place.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And on that round place, place a cushion for the patient's comfort.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	And if the patient has a fracture, it is customary for doctors to apply other treatments as well.
Capitol .xvi.	This text likely describes the treatment of gout, which was a common ailment in medieval times.
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	And another cushion must be placed on their legs.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	When the intestine and joints are affected by the affliction of cold humors, it is called  "gout" in the medical profession.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And if you apply a cautery to the body, the pain must be relieved.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if there are two bones together, it is called gout.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the patient has a slight pain, then apply the lightest possible cautery to the affected area.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the pain is in the bone, there are other causes that are not related to the previous ones.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	And then place a cushion on their legs and they will be fine.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But if the injury is in the legs, it is called "gout" by doctors, which can be treated with cautery.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	When there's pain in the thigh, you can use a cushion to apply pressure.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And if it is necessary to apply bandages to the patient's thighs, one applies them on both sides, and another holds their hands down.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And apply two leeches to each leg, one on each side, three leeches being the standard number for such treatment.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	Then place a cushion under them for which they are known to be susceptible to pain.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	The physician is saying that if you have a wound on your foot, it is likely gout.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	And when you have treated the patient for a few days, you will be able to judge if the pain is in the legs or feet.
Capitol .xvii.	When the pain occurs in the legs, it is customary to place a cushion under them.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	And put a tool under their legs to help with ankle pain.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	When there is pain in the entire body, or the legs and feet are affected by hot and cold ailments.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	Then you have already opened the patient's leg to prepare for the treatment.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place a cushion on the legs and hold the patient's hands above their body.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then, place a poultice on their legs, a cushion underneath, and keep their hands held over them.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	Then place a strong cautery on their legs.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And if the pain lasts for three days or four, then you know it’s a case of gout.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	This may be a bit of a trick question, as this sentence seems to be describing gout in the context of the body.
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And cushion his other legs with this cushion as needed, so he may be treated for the condition of the intestines.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	You have already opened the table on both sides, and you must make sure that the patient's bowels are properly protected with a cloth or cloth-like material, and that the quantity of this material is appropriate to the size of the opening.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And so that the patient's accidents do not suffer further injury, you should apply cauterization to the affected area.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol .xviii.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	And if it is necessary to apply a bandage to the foot and hold it in place with your hands, it's for the best.
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When the woman's bowels are inflamed, apply heat to their location.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And so the midwife places her hand on the patient's body, gently pressing down on their legs to push the pain away from them.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And so place another cushion on their legs to support the patient's body.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	And so for seven days or thereabouts.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you want to make the humors return to their proper place, use a cane-like tool to draw out the fluid from the affected area;
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	When there comes to be a cushion of cushions on the body, and the intestines are inflamed, it is then called a serious illness.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And if a bone is broken in the human body, apply the following remedy to the bones of the legs:
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And es que the patient's intestines are now exposed in the cauterization process to treat your ailment, so that the patient cannot feel pain.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	Mays en la vergua means "in the same way" or "likewise," indicating that this phrase continues to explain how the medical procedure is performed on the afflicted area, which in this case is the foot. The text describes a situation where the body is affected by an ailment ("les humors") that causes pain and requires the use of a cushion during the treatment.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter .xix.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Then apply the other hot cushion to the patient's leg and let them be treated in the usual manner.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	Translation: And if you are a doctor who treats someone with gout, they should be careful to avoid applying a cautery to their legs or feet.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	Then if there is no other cause for the pain, you will have to apply heat to the affected area to prevent the disease from worsening.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And if the patient's legs are affected by gout, do not delay treatment.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	You have already caused the patient to suffer from a condition that causes inflammation in the joints.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	And if the joint is dislocated, put it back to its place in the leg.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	Mays si is necessary to prepare a doctor for surgery.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And in this way, the patient's legs are made ready for the operation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	Apply a cushion to the legs, as if to prevent further pain.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then, place a cushion under their feet and let them be known as the person who needs help.
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's feet, they should be treated with a hot iron.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	And if the pain in the legs is caused by an external injury, apply a cushion to the injured leg.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And then apply a poultice to the affected area and let them rest on the cushion to prevent further pain.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	Then cover the area with your hand to prevent the bone from coming out.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	Then if you cannot reduce that bone by force, use a saw to cut away at the bone.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then place a cushion under the area where the leg bones are located.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And if the bones are returned to their natural place, they will still feel pain.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	And now if the patient's body is swollen, which means he has an illness caused by humors that are out of balance, you can use a poultice to apply pressure.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	Then apply splints to the legs according to the amount of space needed for the patient.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	Then if you are careful, they will be spared from the plague.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	And if it is necessary for the patient's legs to be treated.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	Then you must apply a hot compress or poultice to that area, but be careful not to open a new wound.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	When a doctor has already diagnosed an illness as plague.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	Therefore, apply a hot compress to the affected area to reduce swelling on the feet.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	You may need to use a cushion for support on their arm or arms.
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And if your legs have been opened, you should apply a cushion to their pain.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	When you have put a hand on the patient's thighs, place another one on their chest, and let them rest in that position.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And then you should apply remedies to cure them from the illness.
Capitol .xx.	The English translation for "Translation 1" (in your example) should be "And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient, the physician will place a hot iron on the affected area."
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	The treatment of the nodes (which are swollen) in the case of a broken bone.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	This is what happens when one has a pain in the bowels, the belly is swollen, and it must be treated carefully.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	The doctor should use these methods in the case of recent humors on the body, they are to apply remedies to the affected area.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	E it is a disease that causes stiffness in the joints, which can be severe if left untreated.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Mays (meaning: perhaps) in the original language, you may need to use a different translation depending on context than if it was just a simple "yes" or "no".
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter 21.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	And if there are humors that are causing the pain to be in the legs and they are open, another cushion should be placed on their thighs.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	And you have already restored the patient's bone to its original state and treated the causes of pain in their feet.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	Put a cushion under their legs if they are swollen and another on their feet if they have swelling there.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area so that they may be treated with water.
Capitol .xxii.	Another translation for the Latin-like phrase "E que" (meaning "And so") is provided.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	And to heal broken bones, one should treat the injury carefully so that they do not cause further harm.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	If the intestine or the feet are affected by the disease of humors, you have to treat them.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	This is a text about treating gout and how it affects people in our land.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	And then apply a poultice made from herbs like that to the patient's legs and apply a poultice of mallow to the affected area.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And if it is necessary for the patient's humors to be balanced.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	And if it is necessary to treat the patient's leg pain, you have already removed the cause for it.
Capitol .xxiii.	Capitol .xxiii. would be translated as **Chapter 23**.
De sermo en dislocacio.	This Latin phrase translates to "Of speech in dislocation"
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	Gout is a condition where your body's humors cause pain and swelling in a joint, leading to severe pain if it occurs in the feet.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	So when there's a dislocation, then apply the cushion to the affected area and close the wound.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for that reason, you should apply the cushion to their legs in order to avoid pain from the tightening of tendons.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When bloodletting was required, let the patient's leg be bled out and let the other leg be treated by the other method.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And place a cushion on their legs, or to be precise, on the patient's ankles.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	And if it is necessary to set right the patient's body, and you have made sure that the pain is caused by humors; then proceed with a cushion for support.
Capitol .xxiiii.	And apply this treatment to the affected joint.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Then move the jawbone back into its proper place.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If the joints are dislocated, the cushion is used to support the patient's legs while they are being treated.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When there is a small joint separation, it will heal itself.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	If the dislocation is complete, it can be reduced immediately.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And then apply heat to the affected joint, if the pain is located in the legs and feet, and make sure that the one with the pain will have his or her body treated as a whole.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	When les metges, then have they been called for the pain in the feet?
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	Therefore, when using a poultice for gout, apply it to the affected area.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	And if he is sleeping, place your hands on his legs to keep him from going elsewhere.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And if you have to apply it to the patient's legs, you can use the cushion.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	And if there are difficulties in the reduction of a dislocated bone, you must reduce the pain by relocating it to its proper place.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when there is pain in the joints, or if you have a sore on your feet, it is a sign of a bad prognosis.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	And for the treatment of the dislocation of the shoulder muscle, or if you are dealing with a dislocated collarbone.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	When the intestine has been opened by an incision, and another on the feet to stop the pain from spreading further, then it should be cauterized.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	and if it is necessary to apply heat to the patient's body.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And thus the patient will be protected from pain in their legs and feet.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then apply those remedies to the patient's body, and other remedies on their legs, to prevent the pain from spreading.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	Then the patient's limbs should be treated with the other humors to make them better.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to apply an ointment, let alone place a cushion on the patient's legs, so that they are calmed.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And if they are separated from their proper place, another treatment for that specific condition is necessary.
Capitol .xxvi.	E aplegat the patient's intestine already affected by the hernia to be cauterized, they are the same.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	For the reduction of a dislocation of the muscle.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the doctors know it as gout if the body's humors are out of balance.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And if the patient's second toe is out of place, they are treated by the doctor with a poultice, and the joint pain in the foot is caused by something else.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And thus you must apply more force to dislocate the limbs, and for those joints that are difficult to dislocate, use bandages to keep them in place.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	And if it is strong, it's a bruise or a gouty attack.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then, if there is a need to cauterize the foot, apply the cautery to the legs, and.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	And it is known that when the foot's pain is caused by a cold humor, it is called gout.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	Then apply cold poultice to their skin if needed.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And of this dislocation, an easy reduction is made when it is fresh, as gout often is.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the minister applies his hand to the patient's legs, and the cushion on their thighs, and the other parts of the body.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	Maybe if the affected area has not been cauterized, use warm compresses to soften and reduce inflammation.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Then a cushion should be placed on their legs to prevent them from being affected by the disease.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	Then place a cushion under their arms or upon their chest, and another upon their knees, to prevent the intestines from being exposed.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	Mays if severe, leave the patient alone.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And so the patient should be placed on the table in such a way that the leg bones are well supported by cushions.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce the pain through other means, they should apply this treatment:
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	E aprop place your hand over the patient's head to prevent them from making a fuss.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	A prop·o you have placed the cushion, the patient's legs are now in its place.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And if the patient has pain in their feet, they should be treated with a cushion for their legs and a pillow for their arms.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And since the incision in his muscle has been completed, apply a poultice made from wool and the hot iron to the affected area.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And if you have another hand, and so another person should be placed there to hold it.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	And if there are already cushions under them, then you can rest assured that the patient will be healed.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If a limb is affected by pain caused by humors, see that it be treated properly.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if you place it (the cushion) on his legs, he'll be able to stay in that position for a while, but the wound will not heal.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	The treatment of dislocation in the limbs, especially the legs, should be done by medical professionals.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the other usual remedies have been applied, but another treatment is needed.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if you apply heat to the affected area, it will relieve pain and restore normal sensation.
Capitol .xxvii.	Then apply the proper name for their condition.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	On the treatment of dislocations.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Sapias that the patient is in pain on their legs because they are being treated for a condition by the same name, but if the patient’s illness is due to a different cause, they are simply told what the pain is.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	Then you must apply heat to the affected joint, otherwise, the intestine will be inflamed, and very bad humors are difficult to treat.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	This is a difficult text to translate accurately without knowing the specific context or language.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	And if a dislocation occurs in the legs, it should be treated immediately to avoid complications.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if they don’t want to use the cautery for the joint pain, other methods should be used.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And let two servants extend their arms, while another, placed on his legs, holds them in order to prevent the pain from spreading.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And apply a bandage to the arm if necessary.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	When the doctor touches the joint with a cushion, he is forcing it back into place.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area and you will be able to tell which part of the body is being treated by the patient's condition.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Then apply cautery to the affected area; if necessary, place a cushion under the patient's feet.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	This refers to the use of cushions and bandages for treating pain in the legs or feet.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	And if you apply a cushion to it, and leave it on their legs and feet both day and night.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And place a cushion on their legs; one on the first leg and another on their foot, then repeat the process on the other leg.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Then return the intestines (of the patient) to their proper place.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish to apply the technique of cauterization, place a cushion over the affected area.
Capitol .xxviii.	**Capitol .xxviii. translates to Chapter 28.**
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Treating the dislocated joints in the arm.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	When the foot is injured, it is treated by applying a poultice to the injured area, or by setting it in its place using cushions or other means.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And then the doctor will place their hand on the affected area to prevent the pain from spreading.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	This text uses the word "palma" in the context of a body part being treated, suggesting it refers to the hand as if it were an object, but it's likely referring to the concept of using a tool or treatment method on the affected area.
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And so it is good if you return to it quickly.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	Mayes may be treated with a hot point to draw out the bad humors.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	And if the intestine becomes inflamed, apply a cautery for 5 days to keep it in check.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	Then apply heat to it if you must use it on the legs.
Capitol .xxix.	In the first chapter, it states that the cause of the pain in the joints caused by cold humors was known as gout.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	And the treatment of the dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	And if there are still some pains in their joints, and they have to be treated, then cauterize the area.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when the pain is caused by gout, it is best to place your hand on the affected joints.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And place the support for the head of the finger.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	And then place the cushion under their legs so that they do not feel cold.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when the pain worsens in the evening, apply a cushion to the affected area.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	And so you must cauterize the patient's thigh, e.g., apply a cushion to the affected area.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly, for the same reason, they are called elsewhere in the body.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol .xxx. translated as:
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	From the patient's feet, take care to remove the dislocation so that the bones are set back in place.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	Then apply the other to the patient's body and use another method for its cure.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And if it is necessary to place a cushion under the patient’s legs, there should be cushions on their legs, their arms, and perhaps even at the edge of the bed, to prevent them from falling off the bed.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, it is called gout.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	That's why we call it gout when doctors put their hand over them, to prevent the disease from spreading.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	Mays in their chest or legs, for the healing of those parts, they used to use a poultice which was applied by me (the doctor).
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And if there are injuries to the legs, they are also treated with another method.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	The pain in the legs or feet can be caused by something that is not actually a problem with the foot itself.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	Then he'll be a healthy man again, but only if the disease is treated properly.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And if it is necessary to burn it, do so carefully, using a hot iron.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	Then the minister must have placed the cushion on their feet if they are suffering from pain in those areas.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And the person who suffers from it should have his/her legs tied to the bed.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And if there were two or more physicians, they would be called to heal them.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	The doctor holds the patient's feet to ensure their comfort and support during the procedure.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	Perhaps place a cushion under them, as you have mentioned, and another on their feet, and so they may be applied to the affected area.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And if the patient's leg cramps, then place your hand on the area to prevent it from spreading to other areas.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And you have to cauterize the wound with a cushion (to prevent the flesh from being burnt) when using a hot cushion for treatment.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	This translation is based on your provided example:
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	And in the length of the other two, its size is a foot's breadth.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	Then place your hand on the patient's head, making sure to keep it steady.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	And in this way, the patient will be given relief from their pain.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the way to treat it:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	Then apply a poultice to draw out the cold from their leg, which is where the pain is located.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And if the pain in the joints is located in the legs, apply the remedy described above to treat the area with a cushion; otherwise, use a different method.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	If the swelling remains after the application of medicines, then apply a lead sheet to that location.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	When your joints are stiff from a cold and you have pain in your feet or knees, you're likely to be diagnosed with gout, which is often caused by poor diet.
Capitol .xxxi.	This could be the beginning of a new chapter in the treatise.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	Another hand placed on their thighs, they will be treated.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	la causa del mal de la metges la ja has establit un other that they are caused by humors in the body.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	This text describes the intestine being burned by doctors.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	When bloodletting is practiced on the body, it is customary to cauterize the area where the blood has been drawn from the leg or foot.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	And if you wish to treat a patient for a dislocation, make sure the skin is cleansed thoroughly before applying a cushion.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	When his leg has been dislocated, the patient's legs are already being treated by another.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	When the cold humors are released from the body, they will be on their legs, and the patient will have a fever in the leg.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	When joints are affected by the pain caused by an illness that affects the feet, it is customary for doctors to call it gout, but if it occurs elsewhere in the body, it is not.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	Another translation: When there is pain in the joints, it is customary to treat them according to their location.
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area, but only if you are sure that the opening is new, otherwise, use their left hand for the other methods.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	Then prepare a strong poultice and apply it to the affected area.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	The patient's body, placed on the table, was then treated with cauterization on their legs.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And he must be held by his arms while one person holds the patient's body and another places a cushion under them, so that they don't fall through and injure their bowels.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this kind of condition is common to all four humors.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And if the dislocation returns, it's as we have said it is necessary to cauterize.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	And if the limb is dislocated, a cushion is placed under their leg, and they are lowered to the floor slowly.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	Then another man will be placed at his side, who has good knowledge of the body, to cauterize him.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And this type is cured by the lightest touch to the joint.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	When gout flares up in the feet, they should be treated with this kind of cauterization, apply a cautery.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let it be known that the other has already been opened four parts to two parts.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And if the illness is serious, the cushion should be placed under the legs and not too high on their body.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And you have already placed a cushion on the patient's legs.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	And if there are pain in their feet, place a splint on the foot to hold it in place.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	Then if it is necessary to make a point on the legs, use another cushion for the head to prevent injury.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	When a patient has a problem with their humors, they are usually treated with cauterization.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	And if it is necessary to treat a swollen area, they should be treated with a cushion.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	When someone is suffering from a pain in their legs, they may have a problem with the humors.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And if the dislocation is in the leg, the doctor puts the patient's leg out straight on the table.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	E’s if the pain is located at the back (of the body) it is not good to make a burn there.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	And if it is necessary to apply pressure to a place on the body, have it applied with a cushion.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	And if you have already used a cushion on the cushions (legs) — and let it be known that the pain was severe enough to require the use of a cushion for three days or four.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then compare one leg to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	When there is no longer pain in the body, then you can remove the cushion from the foot.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see the need for a cushion to be placed on their legs, they should be placed there for three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And if the patient has been cauterized through the feet, it will take several days for them to recover.
Capitol .xxxii.	The text appears to be in a mix of languages, possibly excerpts from different medical texts.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	And so it is customary to treat a dislocation.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The patient experiences pain in their feet when the gouty humors are on the outside of the body, but if the pain is in the toes, they should use another method.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The sign of gout is when the body's humors cause pain in the foot.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	And to stop the intestine from being infiltrated by something bad, they are said to be treated by a skilled hand, as we say, which should be used with care.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	When your leg is exposed to cold air, you should apply a cushion to protect it from the chill.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then apply a bandage to that area, and place another cushion on their hip, for three or four days, and use a bandage to bind the bandages.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	For a few days he'll apply a cautery to their legs for them.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	When the pain in the foot subsides, apply a bandage to the affected area.
Capitol .xxxiii.	And if it is necessary to treat the leg or foot pain.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of the dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	Then apply hot poultices to the affected area and bandage them properly.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And that he has been treated for an ailment in the past, but now the cushion is placed on the foot.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	The treatment for gout involves applying heat to the affected areas.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	This is a tricky one!  Here's my best guess at the meaning:
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And if you need to cauterize the right leg of the patient, it's done by placing the hand on the left side of the body.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Then apply your hand to their legs, and let it be applied to their feet with two right hands.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And so, place your hand on the patient's pain, as if to apply a cautery.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then you apply the hot cautery to the third toe with a cushion.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	And if it is necessary to do something twice or apply it to the foot, so be it.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	Mays si a tu may have a cushion placed on their legs to protect them during treatment.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Then apply a bandage to the affected area after treating it with cautery.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And if the patient's leg is opened up to treat the dislocation.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	Then, apply a poultice to the affected area.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And if you are to apply fire to it, another servant should be placed on their legs, and another one on the foot so that the heat does not harm them.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Then leave it alone for two days, and if the pain persists in the foot, apply a cushion and treat it accordingly.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And so the patient will be prohibited from going outside for 40 days.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	This describes a situation where someone would need to be in a position to prevent further issues from arising.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if the patient has a fever, then you must apply a cushion to their thighs.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Another use the word "gout" in its proper sense.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	This may refer to treating an injury affecting the fingers.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	Cove that the patient's foot be treated with a cautery; and let the patient rest in their bed after being healed by the above-mentioned method.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	If a doctor needs to use a tool to make a mark on a bone, it's called a dislocation, which is what they call gout.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then place a cushion on the patient's body to cover the area where the pain occurs.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And if the patient's belly needs to be treated, place a cushion under it.
Capitol .xxxv.	This is a section heading from a text written in an archaic language, possibly indicating a chapter on gout treatment.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	Some joints are dislocated in the same way that a limb might be broken, or by some means separated from the rest of the body.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When the heat of a hot stone is applied to the body for too long, it is customary for them to call it a burn.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	The wise doctor, who understands the nature of diseases, should carefully cauterize the affected area only if necessary.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	Then apply the poultice to the affected area at the beginning.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the limb returns to its normal state, we are ready to apply poultice or other treatments.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if there is a dislocation or fracture in the bones, you'll need to perform a surgical procedure.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	And apply your hand to the treatment of the patient's ailments, and treat the patient's bowels with caution.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	When translating this sentence from Latin/Spanish/Italian medical texts: Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasis are written on the foot of a patient, and you must keep them in mind as they are the ones who will be affected by the illness.
Amen.	Amen.
