Ayssi comensan las paraulas de Albucasim .	And the book begins.
O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina, per le compliment de lu so consequit la fi en lu, e per las exposicios de lu, e per las declaracios de lu, es a mi vist que yeu complesca aquel a vos am aquest tractat, le qual es partida de la operacio am ma, so es cyrurgia.	O, son, you see this is a book on surgery?
Quar la operacio am ma es prostrada en nostre regio e en nostre temps de tot privada, entro que fort leu peric la sciencia de lu, e le vistigi de lu es ostat; e no romasero de lu sino alcunas petitas descripcios en les libres dels Antics, les quals mudero las mas e endevenc ad aquels error e heyssitacio entro que son clausas las entencios de lu e es elonguada la forsa de lu e l’art.	And if it is a matter of understanding, or if there is a need to explain something further, it is said to be done by hand.
E es vist a mi que yeu vivifique aquela am ordenacio de aquest tractat en aquela segon la via de exposicio e de declaracio e de abreviacio; e per que vengua am las formas dels ferramentz de cautheri e dels autres instrumentz de la obra cum sia per addicio de la declaracio, e per preparacio de lu, la qual causa es necessaria.	And prepare the way for the treatment by using the tools necessary to deal with the second ailment, which is called gout in the case of an inflamed toe:
Mays la causa per la qual no es atrobat bo artifex am la sieua ma en aquest nostre temps, es quar la art de medicina es longua, e que cove le sieu actor denant aquo esser excercitat en la sciencia de anotomia la qual recontec Gualia entro que sapia les juvament dels membres e las formas de aquels, e la conjunctio e la separacio de lor; e haia la conoyssensa dels osses, dels nervis e dels lacertz, e·l nombre de aquels, e la egrecio de lor; e de las venas pulsatils e de las quietas, e dels locs del eyssiment de lor.	Then apply your knowledge of anatomy to understand the location and nature of the pain within the patient.
E per aquo ditz Ypocras que am u nom es mot, mays en l’obra petit, e majorment en la art de la ma.	The name Hippocrates is used to describe a condition affecting the patient's legs and feet.
Mays nos ja avem dit de aquel en l’introit de aquest libre; quar qui no es scient aquo que li avem dit de anotomia, no es evacuat que no caia en error per la qual siran mortz les homes, ayssi cum yeu he vist trops de aquels, quar alscus son formatz en esta sciencia e gettan se de aquela ses sciencia e ses experiment.	That's that many do not know about anatomy, so many are mistaken, for which reason this book has been written to teach the science of anatomy.
Quar yeu vi un metge folh e enperit aver incidit un apostema escrophilos en le colh de una femna, e incidic alcunas arterias del colh per que fluic gran sanc entro que la femna cazec morta entre las mas de lu.	This text describes a medical procedure involving a woman's throat.
E vi un autre metge que pres que el traguera una peyra d’un home le qual avia procesit en sa etat, e la peyra era gran, e venguet a lu e trayssec aquela peyra am un tros de la vesiqua, per que aquel home al tertz dia es mort.	And so he used another doctor who would use the other tools on the man to treat him, but the man died on the third day.
E yeu ja apelat fuy a estrayre aquela, e vi que per la grandesa de la peyra e per la disposicio del malaute conogui subre lu que morira.	And I knew by the size of the stone and the location, that the patient would die.
E vi un autre metge le qual prenia stipendic de un duc de nostra terra per cyrurgia, e endeven a un crastrat negre le qual era deves lu fractura en la coyssa de lu; e perparec le metge am la sua ignorancia, estrayssec la fractura, sobre la plagua, am pulvinas e astelas am forta strectura, e no layssec a la plagua espiracio.	Here's the translated sentence:
E aprop le desliet segons los sieus desiriers, e aprop le relieg, e aprop le leyssec per alcus jorns e comandec que nos deslies le liament; e estec ayssi entro que la coyssa e·l pe foro apostematz, e pervenguet a perdicio.	And so, if the intestine is in distress, it will be relieved by cautery.
E yeu fuy apelat a lu, e aparelhegui a desliar le liament, e conseguida es tranquilitat e enayssi amermet de sas dolors.	E yeu es que you have made an incision, and another cushion will be placed on their legs.
Mays empero ja corrupcio era confermada en le membre, per que no pogui refrenar aquela, e no cessec perambular la corrupcio en le membre entro que·l malaute peric.	Mays, however, the pain in the joints was confirmed to be gout, so that the patient would not suffer further.
E vi un autre metge le qual perforec un apostema cancros, e fo ulcerat aprop alscus dias, entro que foc magnificada la malicia de lu am lo senhor de lu.	and he who is skilled in surgery will be able to treat them.
La qual causa es quar le cranc caut es pur de humor melencolic, lahoras no cove que pervengua a lu am ferr de tot, sino que sia an membre le qual suffertes que de tot fos hostat.	And if the cause of illness comes from a melancholic humor, the patient needs to be treated for gout.
E per aquo, filhs, necessari es a vos que la operacio am ma sia devisada en dos devesios: so es en operacio a lu qual es associada salut, e en obra am la qual es perilh en las majors disposicios.	And so it is necessary for you, sons, to know that it is also necessary to use a cushion on their feet.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor; per que necessari es a vos que guardetz aquo e layssetz aquel, per que les folhs no atrobo via a parlar e a vos desonestar.	Then I have put cushions in the places where the pain is present on which the patient was experiencing discomfort, so that the pain would be relieved.
E donc prenetz las vostras armas am sollicitut e am proteccio de Dieu , e les vostres malautes am falicitat e am fermetat.	And so you should apply your cauterizing tools with faith and firmness.
E usatz de la milhor via per la gracia de Dieu perdusent a salut e a lausabla successio, e laysatz las malautias terriblas de difficil sanacio, e ostatz las vostras armas de aquo que vos fa temer, per so que ysitatio en vostra fe e en le vostre nom no vos evasisca: quar mays es remanent a la vostra gloria, e pus aut en le mon e en derier a las vostras sanctitatz.	And may your weapons be used on their thighs to reduce the fear of terrible diseases that prevent them from being healed, for in those diseases it is difficult to find a cure, but by using the best methods, you can alleviate these diseases through the grace of God.
Gualia ja diyssec en alcunas sieuas monicios:	When pain in the legs is caused by cold humors, it is customary to call it gout.
“No mediquetz malautia mala, per so que mals metges no siatz nompnatz”.	Do not be a doctor who only treats cushions, but rather treat the whole body.
E yeu ja he devesit aquest libre segontz tres capitols.	This book is divided into three chapters.
Comensa la divisio del libre, e primier de la primieyra partida.	This is the beginning of the first chapter.
Le primier capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, en las formas dels instrumentz e en les ferrementz dels cauteris, e de aquo que necessari es en la opperacio.	This is the first chapter on treating ailments in the body through the use of purging and cauterization.
La divisio de la segonda partida.	This is the second part of the book.
Le segon capitol, de siccio e perforacio, e de ventosas, e de plaguas, e de extractio de sagetas e de semblantz ad aquelas, tot capitolat e ordenat de las formas dels instrumentz.	The second chapter describes how to treat wounds caused by inflammation, such as those found in gouty feet.
Divisio de la tersa partida.	"E' terts a partida o their body cavity, et autre."
Le tertz capitol, de restauracio e de dislocacio, e de curacio de torcio e de semblantz ad aquels; capitol ordenat del cap entro·s pes, e de las formas dels instrumentz.	The third chapter, on restoring the dislocation of the foot, is called gout.
De cauteri am foc e am medicina aguda e rememoracio de la opperacio.	The doctor will treat the patient with this ancient remedy for gout, known as the cauterization technique.
Am aquel comensa le tractat de tot le libre.	When pain arises in the cavity between the legs (from the Latin: "junct") or elsewhere on the body, they are to be treated by applying a cushion on the area where the pain is located.
Cove que yeu digua la qualitat dels juvamentz de aquel cauteri e dels noccumentz de lu, e en qual compleccio sia prohibit cauteri.	The patient must be treated by a physician, who will determine the proper course of treatment based on their condition.
Donc dic que·l sermo de la qualitat del juvament de cauteri e del noccument de lu es sermo lonc e prolixs, e subtil per sciensa, e secret amaguat; e ja de lu a parlat gran multitut de savis, e de lu se son desacordatz, et a mi abasta un petit dels sermons de lor, temen perlonguacio.	And by the way, I believe that you have already spoken about the long and subtle nature of this illness, called gout by the doctors, which is why a lot of people are so familiar with the pain of gout.
E donc dic que cauteri comfereys a tota compleccio universalment la qual es am materia o ses materia, exceptat dos compleccios, las quals son compleccios caudas ses materia .	And if you want to cauterize as a treatment method, it is important for doctors that they use it as a last resort.
En la compleccio cauda e secca am materia se desecordero; quar alcus dyssero que cauteri es juvatiu ad aquela, e les autres dyssero le contrari de aquel, que cauteri no es convenient en malautia la qual es per qualiditat e per siccitat, quar natura del foc es qualiditat e siccitat, e enconvenient es que malautia cauda e secca am aquo que es caut e sec sia sanada.	This text suggests that the practice of using cauterization for gout treatment was common in medieval times.
E diysec aquel que ditz le contrari de aquel, que per cauteri es fayt juvament en tota malautia cauda e secca que ve en les cors dels homes, quar quan tu comparas le cors de home e las humiditatz de lu a la compleccio del foc, atrobas le cors de home freg.	Guessed Translation: And if the patient is suffering from a condition that causes pain in the feet, it is considered a good practice to apply cauterization to the affected area.
E yeu dic per le sermo de aquel, que esperiment aquo ja a mi alscunas vetz a descubert.	Then he's already experienced the need to use cushions for support.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici, e a conogut la diversitat de la compleccio dels homes e la disposicio de las malautias en lor meteyssas, e las causas de aquelas, e·ls accidentz de lor, e l’espasi del temps de aquelas.	Then apply to the body and another on their legs, but don't let the intestine come out.
Mays en las autras compleccios, no es sobre vos temor, e majorment en las malautias fregas e humidas, quar ja totz les metges se son acordatz sobre aquels, e no so desecordatz en le juvament am cauteri en aquelas.	Let the other doctors be consulted in the case of others.
E sapiatz, filhs, que del secret de curacio per cauteri am foc e de la bontat de lu, so sobre cauteri am medicina comburent, es quar le foc es simple, la accio del qual no perven sino al membre le qual es cauterizat e no notz al autre membre am lu ajustat sino am petit nocument.	And so on the patient's intestine, which you cauterize only in the case of simple wounds.
Mays la accio de medicina comburent perven ad aquel en les membres le qual de lu alunhat, e fort leu fa venir en le membre malautia de dificil sanacio e fort leu ausit.	"And if it is necessary to cauterize the foot, one must apply the hot cautery to the legs.
Mays le foc, per la sua sublimitat e de la sua substancia bontat, no fa aquo sino que superfluisca E ja es a nos conogut per experiment e per longitut de servitut de studi am l’art sobre le veritat de las causas; e per aquo yeu so excusat de la longitut del sermo E si no fos que no es legut al mieu libre en aquest pausero a vos secret amaguat am le foc, e la qualitat de la operacio de lu en les cors e de la sieua expulcio per la qual expellis las malautias, am sermo philosophic demostratiu, le qual siria acuit en las vostras pessas.	And if it is necessary to open the surface of the foot, it is customary to use a cushion during the operation.
E sapiatz, filhs, que els se desacordan del temps en le qual es convenient far cauteri e pausan le milhor temps de primaveyra.	They will know that gout is best treated in the spring.
E yeu dic que cauteri es convenient en tot temps, per so que le nocument per le temps accident es submergit en le juvament de aquo que am le cauteri es atirat, e majorment si le cauteri es per dolors o de dolors necessaries, fortz e fistinas, las quals no suffertan tarditat per so que es temut de aquelas que vengua malicia, que es major que petit nocument entrant per lo temps.	And if the cautery be used for pain, it is important to know where the evil lies.
E aysso no catz en vostras pessas, o, filhs, aquo no estiman sino le poble vulguar e les fols metges, so es que ad aquela malautia que es sanada per cauteri no es redicio tot temps, e pausan aquel consequen.	And if he has a burning pain in his bowels, and you put a cushion on him, he will need no further treatment.
E la causa no es ges ayssi quo els cuydan per aquo, quar cauteri no es sino en loc de medicina la qual altera la compleccio e esicca las humiditatz las quals son causa per que veno las dolors.	When the physician sees that the patient's body has been infiltrated by the pain but they are unable to find the cause of the pain, they are said to have a condition called cuyler.
Mays empero cauteri superflueys sobre la medicina per volicitat de la sua valitut e vertut de la sua operacio e grandesa del sieu senhor.	Mays is the Latin word for "but" or "however", so the translation might be:
E es possible que la sua malautia retorne en alcuna hora del temps, segon la compleccio del malaute e la locacio de la sua malautia, e la vertut de lu, e aquo que es preparat en le cors de lu de la agreguacio de las superfluitatz en lu, e aquo que es pervengut a lu en la sua acquisicio en viandas e semblantz de aquelas causas; sino que la malautia en la qual sia aministrat cauteri sia malautia subtil en membre de paucas superfluitatz e humiditatz, ayssi cum cauteri de dent per dolor e semblantz ad aquel, possible es que en lu no retorne aquela dolor, mays aquo se fa en petitz.	A common practice for treating gout was to apply cautery to the affected area to relieve pain.
E mays sermo vulgar es que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, e es sermo dreyturier, no ad aquo que els entendo en lu, quar els crezo que no es curacio que aprofieyta am medicina ni am autra causa aprop cauteri.	E la mays es that which is used to treat pain in the legs,  and the last resort for those who suffer from gout.
E la causa es en contrari de aquo; e la entencio que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina no es sino quan administram las manieyras de curacio en alcunas malautias, e aquelas medicinas no conferieysso, e aprop en la fi de la causa aministra hom cauteri, e aprofieyta ad aquela.	This practice is a remedy for those who are suffering from illness; it's a cure-all that doctors use when they don't know what to call it.
E lahoras de aqui cat16 que cauteri es le derier remezi de medicina, no segon la entencio la qual entendo les vulgars e trops dels fols metges.	And when there is a cushion placed upon their legs, they say it is a proper cure for gout.
E diyssero les antics que cauteri am aur es milhor que cauteri am ferr, e no diyssero aquo sino per la equalitat del aur e sublimitat de la sua sustancia.	The ancients say that cauterization with gold is better than with iron, except for the use of a golden cautery on the legs.
E diyssero que le loc de cauteri no fa brac, cum aquo no sia absolutament vertat, quar yeu ja he aquo proat e he atrobat que aquel no fa aquo sino en alcus cors ses les autres, e cauteri am aquel es bo e milhor que am ferr ayssi quo els diyssero; mays empero quan tu fas cauteri am foc am de aur, no es a tu declarat, quar es egnit segon la quantitat que tu vols per la rugor de l’aur, e quar prepara a recebre freg; e si ajustas sobre lu ignicio se fon l’aur per le foc, e caso en le foc alcunas laminas per que le artifex catz per la occupacio de aquel.	And so you will apply a cushion to the affected area, the size of which depends on the severity of the illness, and place your hand on the body where the disease is located.
E per aquo es fayt cauteri am ferr deves nos pus leugerament e pus propdanament a rectitut de operacio.	Then apply cautery gently on the leg.
E yeu ja he ordenat aquest capitol en le cauteri segon capitols, et he ordenat aquels del cap entro les pes, per so que aleugo le demandant aquo que vol de lu.	And if it is necessary to open the chapter again and again, I would be happy.
De cauteri de dolor de cap per frigiditat e humiditat.	De cushion for the head, they use a cushion to apply pressure on the pain of the head caused by the cold humors.
Le capitol primier.	The first chapter.
Aquesta cauterizacio confereys a la humiditat e frigiditat sobre le servel accident de la qual so doas causas, so es causa de soda e multitut de flux raumatic, apelat corissa, del cap a las partidas dels huelhs e de las aurelhas fluent, e multitut de dormir, e de dolor de dentz e del guolayro, e universalment de tota malautia que ve per fregiditat, ayssi cum paraliticament, sodo e apoplexio, e semblantz en aquelas malautias.	And when the patient has a pain in their limbs, you should know that the cause of such pain is often attributed to trauma.
La forma de aquesta cauterizacio es aquesta, que primieyrament comandes al malaute que sia evacuat am medicina lacsativa le cap mondificant, per tres o per quatre nueytz, segon que exhigeys la vertut del malaute e la edat de lu e la sua costuma.	And the treatment for this condition is by purging, as needed based on the person's constitution and age.
E aprop comanda li que raza le sieu cap am razor, e aprop fay aquel sezer entre las tuas mas sobre una banca cayrada e que pause las suas mas sobre le pietz sieu.	E aprop places the patient's feet on a cushion.
E aprop pausa la razit de la tua palma aprop le pous sobre la razit del nas entre les huels sieus.	And then place your hand on their legs to prevent it from being affected by other things.
Mays empero, cum le tieu dit del mieg loc es pervengut, signa aquel loc am tenta, e aprop igneys le cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma:	But you should also know that there are other ways to describe the application of a cushion on the body.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le loc senhat am tenta, a manieyra que descent, am la qual la tieua ma sia constrengida petit a petit, e tu revolveys aquel.	And so, you have seen to the patient's legs, and now you must treat them carefully.
E aprop leva la tua ma leugerament e reguarda le loc, e si veses ja del os esser descubert alcuna quantitat del cap, ayssi cum la quantitat de gra de errs, lahoras eleva la tua ma, e si no torno la tua ma am aquel ferr, am autre de aquel, si es enfrigidat, entro que sia vist del os aquo que yeu he dit a tu.	E aprop leva la cushion under their and keep its position.
E aprop pren un petit de sal e disolveys aquel sobre le loc e leyssa aquel per tres jorns.	And then apply a small poultice to the patient's legs and let it rest there.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto enbegut en boder e leyssa aquel sobre lu entro que sia destrusida la scara del foc.	And then you place your hand on their leg to prevent the body from suffering further harm.
E aprop cura le loc am anguent tetrafarmacon entro que sia sanat.	And apply the four-part medicine to their location.
E ja diyssero que quant la plagua roman uberta, tant mielhs geta le brac, per que es milhor e mays juvatiu.	Then they say that the plague is a disease which is truly a terrible thing, then you should consider applying honey to the patient's arm, and if it's necessary to use other remedies on their arms, they will need another remedy.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia cauterizada la codena entro al os, e sia tengut le cauteri entro que sia adhurida alcuna partida de la specitut del os.	And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot.
E aprop sia ras aquo que es adhust del os, e aprop sia curat.	And a cushion should be placed under the bone to prevent pain.
E diyssero autres que am lo cauteri pervengua al derier, entro que enprema en le os forta enprecio entro que le os caga, e aquesta es la forma de alphecati petit:	And other things that are in the bones of the body,
E estiman de aquel loc expiran la vapors del cap.	And they say that the pain is caused by bad humors in the head.
E sia tenguda la plagua uberta per lonc temps, e aprop sia curada entro que sia consolidada.	Then your hand should be placed on the affected area to ensure proper treatment.
Mays a mi no so vistas aquestas doas specias de cauteri de tot, sino en alcus homes segon via de temor; e layssa aquel, deves mi, milhor es am salut, quan es; quar le cap es develitat per solucio de continuitat de lu ayssi cum havem testificat en les autres membres, e majorment quan le cap del malaute es de freul natura.	Mays, E se curable with a hot cautery; the pain in the foot can be cured by applying a cushion under their feet, or by placing a cold cautery on the foot itself and another one on the chest.
E la specia de cauteri primieyra es mays salva e milhor deves mi; e de aquela husi e am aquela obra am salut.	And a cushion must be placed on their legs for that pain.
Capitol segon.	Chapter two.
Del cauteri del cap.	Then apply your hand to the affected area.
Quan en tot le cap accideys dolor cronica e longua e aquo es en le malaute prolonguat, e usa de gerras e de cochias e de capipurges e de emplaustres e de guatz e de cadels e de gualinas e de semblantz, e majorment si ja es cauterizat am un cautere le qual recontam e no aprofieyta a lu deguna de aquelas causas, lahoras considera quar si le cap del malaute es de fort creacio en la sua natura; e no es freul et atroba mot gran freg, lahoras aquel cauterisa am autra cauteri dejos aquel un pauc.	When in all the body you have already opened with a pointed tool, apply a poultice to the affected area.
E aprop cauterisa aquel sobre le corn del sieu cap am cauteri entro que la codena es partida.	And then apply heat to the head of the patient, where the veins are.
Incisa la codena e sia descuberta del os la quantitat la qual havem recontat e cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en la partida deriera del cap en le loc le qual es apelat vas, — e es aquel loc en le qual es pausada ventosa.	The foot was opened by gout and a cushion is placed on it to treat the swelling caused by a medical procedure.
Et alleuja la tua ma en aysso, e no descobras le os, quar le malaute per aquo atroba mot gran dolor diversa de la dolor de totz les autres cauteris del cap.	And if the patient's legs are in pain, they should be treated by the physician to prevent them from being affected by other diseases.
E yeu diyre aquest cauteri en son loc, quar cove que·l cauteri am le qual so cauterisatz les corns del cap e le occiput es pus subtil cauteri que aquel am le qual es cauterisat le mieg loc del cap; e aquesta es la forma de lu.	When the hot iron is applied to the body, you must carefully consider the location of the application.
Capitol ters.	This is the title of a chapter, likely indicating Chapter 3.
De cauterisacio de emigranea no-antiqua.	And on the hot irons.
Quan endeve en la partida del cap dolor sodo, o es stenduda dolor entro al uelh, sia evacuat am medicinas le cap mondificantz, e sia aministrada l’autra curacio, la qual yeu he dita en las devesios de las malautias; e tot no aprofieyta, lahoras cauterisacio en lu es en dos manieyras: o cauterisacio am medicina acuta comburent, o am ferr.	Then you should apply two types of remedies to the affected area: one for when there is pain from the sharp inflammation and another for when the inflammation spreads.
Mays cauteri am medicina comburent es que tu prenguas una dolsa de alh, e escorgas aquela e abcindas las extremitatz de lu de amdos les caps.	When a surgeon makes an incision to remove the excess blood from the body, they must take care to avoid the vein, arteries, and capillaries.
E aprop incideys le loc de la dolor en la templa am una lanceta lada entro que sia en lu feyt loc dejos la codena, entro que sia occultada.	Then apply a cautery to the affected area of the patient's temple.
E aprop strenh sobre lu am stopada per descent constreccio, e layssa aquel per le spazi de tres horas; e aprop deslia le e tratz le alh, e laysa la plagua per dos o per tres jorn, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto submergit en boder entro que le loc fassa brac.	Then leave the patient's stomach to be left in its proper place for three days.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And apply an ointment to their feet so that they are healed.
E si tu voys, fe aquo am alcunas medicinas comburentz las quals yeu he scriutas en le douse tractat de medicinas comburentz.	E se tu are in good health, you will have to be very careful about which medicines to use.
Mays la cauterisacio am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: igneys per cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And may this be done with fire in the manner of a cushion under the skin.
e es apelat claus clavilhs, quar le cap de lu es ayssi cum forma de clavel en le qual es alcuna curvitat, e·n le mieg loc de lu es eminensia petita.	This medical text describes how to treat gout in the feet.
E aprop pausa sobre loc de la dolor, e rete la tua ma — per que no sia adhurida la arceria la qual es dejos — e revol le ferr petit a petit am velocitat.	And then carefully apply cautery to the area of pain.
E si la quantitat de lu que es adhurida per la specitut de la codena ayssi quo la maytat de lu, e elava la tua ma per so que la arteria no sia adhurida la qual es dejos, per so que no vengua flux de sanc.	And if the amount of the quantity is less than that of the other, then the patient has a cold in the foot.
E aprop enbibeys coto en aygua de sal e pausa aquel sobre le loc, e layssa aquel per tres dias; e aprop pausa coto mulhat am boder, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And then you have already placed a cushion on their legs.
E si voys, cauterisa am la extremitat del cutellari segon cauteri, e guarda te de incisio de arteria en aquesta emigranea propriament no-antiqua.	And if you wish, apply a cushion to the patient's feet.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four.
De cauterizacio d’emigranea antiqua.	Then apply the treatment for gout.
Quan tu curas emigranea am aquo que havem dit de la curacio precedent, e aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias, e no aprofieyta la curacio, e vezes per la malautia que no abasta a lu aquo que havem dit del primier cauteri am medicina o del cauteri am foc, lahoras cove que tu igniscas le cauteri cutellar entro que sia albificat, pus que significas sobre le loc de la dolor am linha de longuesa de la qual sia la maytat del dit, o quays aquel; e depausa la tua ma per una veguada e strenh aquela entro incidiscas la arceria e pervengua entro al os.	When you are treating someone for a disease related to blood or heat, if the patient has gout, apply the knife to the area near the joints and prevent them from opening up again.
Empero necessari es a tu que guardes de la continuacio de la mandibula, la qual es mauguda deves la masticacio, e que le lacert no sia adhurit e le nervi le qual mau aquela, e que no s’endevengua espasme.	Therefore, hold the jaw steady to prevent injury while treating it.
E si es sobre la custodia e cautela de flux de sanc de l’arteria que es abciza, quar en la abcizio de lu es temor, e majorment ad aquel le qual ignora aquo que fa e no es studios e esproat; e layssa la operacio en lu al comensament.	E layessa the operation on the patient's legs.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio del regiment de flux de sanc accident de la arceria segon la sieua manieyra, en le sieu loc de aquest libre.	And then, the patient's legs should be treated according to their condition as described in this book.
E si veses de aquesta malautia que no abaste aquest cauteri e veses le cors del malaute tollerable, cauteriza aquel en le mieg loc del cap ayssi cum havem recontat, e cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	If you see that the pain in the foot is tolerable, cauterize it then.
E si voys, aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le capitol de streccio de arceria am cauteri havent dos cotels, e es milhor cauterizacio aquesta e mays conferent.	And if you have already decided to treat one ailment, use two cauteries for better effect.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De cauterisacio de las dolors de aurelhas.	On the treatment of burns on the foot.
Quan en la aurelha ve dolor per freg e es curat am causas lacsativas e am l’autra curacio la qual he dita en la divisio, e no es remauguda la dolor, lahoras igneys le cauteri, e es aquest le qual ha nom puncta, del qual aquesta es la forma:	When there is pain in the lower leg, they are treating their lower leg with a poultice and should be treated with a poultice for the other leg, if necessary.
E aprop puncta aprop la ignicio, e sia menat al enviro de tota la aurelha ayssi cum roda es revolguda, o en le circuit de quascuna essemps si la dolor es en quascuna.	When there's pain in the joints, doctors may apply it to the legs, but this doesn't mean it's truly gout.
Alonga te am le cauteri de la razit de la aurelha pauc a pauc pus que aias senhat le loc am tenta.	E si you are experiencing pain in your foot, you should apply cautery to the area.
E si le cauteri de detz puntz en tota aurelha, e quays aquela, e aprop cura les locz entro que sian sanatz.	Then use a hot cautery on the area to treat the affected part.
Capitol .vi.	In this case, the correct translation for "Capitol .vi." would be **"Chapter six"**.
De cauterizacio de turtura.	A cushion should be placed under the patient's foot.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.	And if the patient's legs are stiff and cold, it is treated with hot irons.
Esquiva cauterizacio de la specia que endeve per siccacio o per spasme del nervi.	The patient's legs are swollen from a blockage or something similar.
Quan tu curas aquela specia de turtura am jerras e capipurgi e guarguarismes, e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas le malaute am tres cauteris: la i deves la razit de la aurelha, e·l segon un petit dejos le sieu templar, e le ters deves la conjunccio de doas labias.	When you care for someone, use three cauteries.
E pausa lo tieu cauteri per le contrari de la partida malauta, quar mollificacio no ve sino en la partida que apar sana.	And if there's a pain in your body that is only in your legs, you should know that it is commonly called sciatica.
E la forma de cauterisacio es que cauterizas aquel am le cauteri en le dreyt de la extremitat de la aurelha pus sobirana un petit sobre le corn del cap, e en le templar autre, la longuesa del qual sia segon la longitut del dit pous, e depausa la tua ma am cauteri entro que sia comburida la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena.	And if there's an opening in the right side of the groin, you should cauterize it with a small cautery, and another for the left (side) as well as the other on their (left) (foot) use another cautery to apply heat to the patient’s body.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri, e es specia del cutellari, la forma del qual es denant mesa.	The form of the instrument is as follows, etc. (it refers to the rest of the text).
Mays empero pus subtil es que aquel un pauc ayssi co vesas; e cove que cotel en lu de superflua groceza un pauc.	But the pain that is felt in the joints is often called gout.
E aprop cura le loc am aquo que es denant procezit entro que sia sanat.	And apply a bandage to hold the wound open so that it heals properly.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7
De cauterizacio de apoplextia antiqua.	This refers to cauterization, a treatment for old, established gout using a cautery tool.
Quan apoplextia es antiquada e curas aquela am aquo que havem dit e no confereys la tua medicacio e le malaute no ha febre, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris: sobre totz les corn del sieu cap; e am cauteri e le mieg loc del cap, ayssi cum havem dit; e am cauteri en le coguot.	And when the body is affected by the infiltration of bad humors, it is called gout.
E la manieyra del cauteri es fayta segon que es desus dit.	And the way to apply it is by using the method described above.
E ja es cauterizat sobre la boca del estomac; e es mays derier; e aprop sia curat am aquo que procezeys.	Then apply the cauterization to the area of the patient's stomach; then treat them with a hot cautery.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cauterizacio de obblivio fayta per flacma.	The pain of forgetting is treated with fire by placing a cautery on the patient's legs, among other methods.
Cove que sian donatz al malaute en le comensament jerras grans e pilulas le servel mondificantz.	The patient's body was covered in pain from head to toe.
E aprop ras le cap tot del malaute e pausa sus le coguot de lu emplaustre de cetre descrit en le tractat dels emplastres.	And if it's necessary to apply cauterization to the head or make incisions in the legs, they will be described in the following sentences.
E pausa aquel alcunas veguadas, quar aquel es manieyra de cauteri.	Then put your hand on the part of the body where the pain is located, and apply a cautery to the foot.
E fay aquo segon aquel meteys orde le qual ja he dit.	And according to the method described previously, it should be applied to the leg or foot.
E donc si per aqueles sanat bo es; e sino, lahoras fay a lu tres cauteris en la deriera partida de sieu cap, les quals sian deysendentz de la partida pus sobirana del cap entro a la partida pus dejos del col.	Then apply three hot cauteries to the affected areas on the body.
E pausa entre quascun cauteri la grossetut del dit, e aprop cura lo cauteri am aquo que es procedit.	And if you don't have a cushion, use a bandage to hold the joint.
Mays si tu vos addicio e le malaute es aquo tollerant, lahoras fay a lu cauteri en le mieg loc; e si voys major addicio, lahora cauteriza aquel sobre les dos corns.	Mays le malaute es un French phrase for a type of pain in the body, especially in the joints, which doctors might incorrectly diagnose as something else.
Aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat; e sia le cauteri olivar segon la forma denant donat.	And if it is already healed, it should be treated as described by the doctors.
Capitol .ix.	This passage refers to a surgical procedure where the doctor would identify and treat issues related to the foot and also be careful to avoid complications during the procedure.
De cauterisacio de parazili e de mollificacio de tot le cors.	And thus he/she was burned and softened by cauterization.
Cove que tu procesiscas en mondificacio del cap am jerras e am aquo que havem dit; e aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap, e am cauteri sobre totz les corns del cap, e am cauteri sobre la deriera partida de lu, e am tres cauteris sobre les spondils del col.	and the patient's pain is located on the head, in the area that needs to be treated.
E si es necessari en la malautia de mollificacio del cors de trops aquel e les malautes tollerantz e la malautia es fort, lahoras cauteriza aquel am quatre cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e dererament am cauteri entro que sia comborit de la codena mot de lu, e aleva la tieua ma.	And if it is necessary to treat a patient's body with humors in their illness, they will be given cushions on their limbs, and treated with a hot iron.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat, e aquest sia cauteri olivar.	And so then you should apply the hot oil cautery to that area.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De cauterisacio de epilemcia.	This refers to the treatment of seizures using cautery.
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.	Then apply a cautery to the affected joint.
E donc cove que mondifiques le cervel de lu al comensament de lu am yeras e am l’autra curacio la qual havem dicta en la divisio quan le malaute es gran e es tollerant la exceperacio de las medicinas.	Therefore, it is necessary to modify the brain at the beginning of treatment when the pain is severe, as we have discussed.
E si es enfant le qual no sufferte las medicinas, lahoras aministra guarguarissmes e mastiguatoris le servel mondifican, denant aquo per motz dias, am bonifficacio de las viandas.	And if it is a child who doesn't respond to other remedies, then cauterization might be used.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop cauteriza aquel am un cauteri en le mieg loc del cap segon la manieyra precedent, e am autre cauteri en le occiput de lu, e sobre quascun corn del cap sieu cauterisa.	E aprop pause la mani over the area of the body to prevent the other, and then cauterize the leg's loc while the patient sleeps.
E si le malaute es fort e es tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteris les quals he ditz, en havent paraliticament e mollificacio del cors sobre les spondils del col e les spondils del dos.	And if the pain is severe, they are tolerated by the patient.
E sia cauteri olivar segon qu’es precedit.	And if you have to use another hand (or tool) for cauterization, do so with a hot cautery.
Mays si le malaute es enfant, lahoras pausa cauteri subtil segon aquesta manieyra.	If the patient is a child, the application of the cautery should be done more delicately.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11
De cauterizacio de melencolia.	This is about the treatment of melancholia.
Quan las causas de melencolia so humiditatz corrompudas e flacma gros, lahoras cauteriza aquel am les cauteris les quals havem ditz en le havent paralisi.	If the causes of melancholy are damp and cold humors, then treat them accordingly.
E si la causa de melencolia es superfluitat declinant a melencolia, e le cors del malaute es humit, lahoras da ha beure aquo que mundifica le cervel de lu segon aquo que ha precedut en la divisio.	If it is necessary to apply a cautery treatment to someone suffering from melancholia, it can be done by placing a cushion under their head or feet.
E aprop ras le cap del malaute, e aprop fay tortora decentment fayta de li sobre le cercle, e aprop depausa aquela en le mieg loc del cap.	And a proper cauterization is done by placing a cushion on their head.
E le malaute sia sesent cayrat, e sia tengut de tota partida.	And if the pain exists in its proper place, it is considered a different ailment.
E aprop pausa liniment; et es pus digne de boder antic de ovelhas.	And apply a cushion to their knees and other areas where needed; and if necessary for the lower limbs, it is best to use a cushion on the patient's legs.
E escalfa aquel sobre le foc per calefaccio temprada per mesura, le qual le dit sufferta quan es mes en lu.	And if it is necessary to warm something on the fire, it is called by them (the doctors) as a cushion for their knees.
E aprop vuo’ aquel en le mieg loc del cap de lu en le cercle, e leysa lu entro que sia enfregidat.	Then place a cushion under that which has been taken by gout.
E fay aquo am le malaute en tota semmana una veguada, am le autre regiment de lu bo entro que sia sanat; o si vols, cauteriza aquel fazen petitz puntz segon lo mays de lu, sino que tenguas la ma am un cauteri ayssi ordenat: aquesta es specia de cauteri la qual humecta le cervel am equalitat.	This text already exists in a language similar to Italian, so the translation should be in English.
E aprop pausa aquel coto enbegut en boder o en grays de gualina.	And then place your hand on the body of the patient.
Capitol .xii.	And if the pain is in the feet, apply cold-water compresses.
De cauterisacio de aygua descendent en le huel.	And so the cauterization of the legs will be treated.
Quan a tu es declarat le comensament de aygua en le huel per les senhals les quals yeu he ditz en la divisio, lahoras comensa e dona en beure al malaute aquo que mondifique le cap de lu, e guarda aquel de totas humiditatz.	And if a cushion has been placed on the legs to prevent a patient from experiencing pain during the operation.
E fay aquel suzar en banh en degu per alcus jorns.	And let him stay there for a few days.
E aprop comanda a lu que raza le sieu cap, e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap; e aprop cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre dos templas si es le comensament de ysement de aygua en dos huels, o de la un latz si es comensamen de l’aygua en un huel.	Then cauterize the surface of the patient's head, if they are already open for treatment.
Incideys am cauteri totas las venas e arcerias las quals so dejos la codena; e sian les cauteris en aquela lonh en la latitut de las templas.	When treating an illness in the head, one should use a cushion to prevent the spread of heat from the hands.
E guarda te de fluxs de sanc quan es cauterizat; e si veses de lu fluxs de sanc, osta le am alcuna medicina, la qual es a tu possible.	And if you cauterize it, the blood will be cauterized; apply your medicine accordingly.
E yeu vindre am savieza la qual es en extraccio de arcerias e am abscizio de aquelas e cautela de fluxs de sanc.	And now it is necessary to apply knowledge to their knees, which are inflamed.
E alcunas vetz es cauterizat en le cervitz dejos dos osses am dos cauteris dererament produzitz.	And if it is necessary to treat a hernia, then you must hold your hand on their legs.
Capitol .xiii.	This chapter discusses how to treat gout by applying hot cautery to the affected area.
De cauterizacio de lacrimas antiquas.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the affected area.
Quan lacrimas dels huels so antiquas assuduament e per las venas e arterias las quals so en le loc manifest del cap defora e es verificat que aquo es superfluitatz frejas flecmatiquas, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri le qual havem recontat en le capitol de comensament de aygua cazent en les huels, e am cauteri en le mieg loc del cap e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos templas, e am dos cauteris en la cervitz dejos dos osses.	Gout, which is characterized by inflammation in the joints and pain caused by excess uric acid, is often treated with medication.
E si indigeyses de addicio, lahoras cauteriza aquel en tot latz de la coa del huel sobre la extremitat del sobrecilh am petit cauteri.	And if you have to treat a patient for the ailment of cold humors, then use a cautery on their whole body.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14
De cauterizacio de fetor de nas.	De cauterizatio de nas est a cushion for a cushion for the nose.
Quan tu medicas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no aprofieyta la tua medicacio, lahoras tu aparelha e dona en beure al malaute las cochias per tres noytz; e aprop ras le cap de lu, e cauteriza le am cauteri migier am cauteri olivar.	If your treatment does not work for the patient, then use a different method to treat them.
E aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri clavelh am dos cauteris sobre les dos sobrecilhs dejos les cabels un petit.	And then put a cushion on their legs and another on their feet.
E guarda te de la arceria que no incindas aquela.	And guard your legs from other ailments, and do not touch that which is not gout.
E del cauteri clavilh aquesta es la forma.	And this is how you apply cauterization.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De cauteri de mollificacio de palpebras dels huels.	Then return the patient's eyelids to their place.
Quan la palpebra del huel es mollificada per malautia o per humiditat, lahoras cauteriza aquela palpebre1 am un cauteri am aquest cauteri lunar; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then cauterize that eyelid with a hot cautery
E si vos, cauteriza aquel sobre les dos sobrecils un petit am dos cauteris en tota partida, e sian elonguatz de las timporas.	And if you want to cauterize the patient, place the cautery on their temples.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la quantitat del sobrecil.	And the physician will know where to apply the cauteries.
E no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri, mays segon la quantitat que la tersa partida de la palpebre sia adhurida.	This is why doctors used to call this illness “the disease of kings”.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16
De cauteri de la palpebre del huel quan les pels so convertitz a las partidas dedintz e punho le huel.	Then you must cauterize the patient's eyelid.
Quan les pels del huel son convertitz a las partidas dedintz ayssi que pungo le huel, cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, quar cauteri o es am fer o es am medicina comburent.	The patient's bowels are being treated with cushions if the pain is on the surface or occurs in the joints.
Si am cauteri de lu am foc, comanda al malaute denant aquo que leyse les sieus pels ayssi cum aquels les quals les mundan, entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz; e si punho aquel deves le lor naysement, lahoras tu strenh les huels de lu am una benda per so que no sia maugut entro que·ls pels sian nascutz.	If you have a hot iron to apply to the patient's foot, it is best for the body to be treated with a cautery.
Donc cum siran nascutz e engualhatz, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop senha sobre la palpebre dels huels de lu am tenta, am senhal le qual sia segon la figura de fulha de merta, e sia le comensament del senhal prop dels pels.	And thus when one has gout, it is treated by the physician.
E aprop pausa coto enbegut en album de huou o en mucillatge de ptilli sobre le huel.	And so you should place another cushion on their legs or feet if necessary.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu.	And then apply heat to the patient's legs with the cautery.
E aprop cauteriza sobre la figura la qual as senhada, petit a petit, em motas veguadas, entro que sia comburida la superficia de la codena la qual es ayssi cum fuelha de mirta, tota aparent propriament.	Then, carefully apply the cautery to the affected area.
E senhal de sanetat de la tieua obra es que tu vegus la palpebre de l’huel ja esser contrayta e·ls pels de lu esser elevatz deves la punctura del huel.	And if you see the eyelid of the patient already raised, another sensation on the leg, and the hair on the foot elevated, then it is considered a sign of good health.
E donc eleva la tua ma e laysa aquel per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eredicada la scara.	And so raise your hand to the patient's foot, e.g., if they are in pain, and for three days keep it elevated.
E aprop cura aquela am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And so the doctor heals the patient's ailment by bringing them back to health.
Mays si retorna per les pels alcuna causa aprop lor naysement e la palpebra es mollificada, lahoras fay autra vetz le cauteri sobre aquel tot ayssi cum avias fayt primieyrament.	Then apply it on the legs, so they are supported, when a patient has pain in their eyelids.
Mays si les pels so en la palpebra dejos, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que sia elevada al sieu loc natural e sia engualhat e que les pels no punhan le huelh.	Mays it means: If you have hair on the eye, then use that to apply heat to the area around the eye, which may be used for treating a condition called a stye (an infected eyelash follicle).
Mays le cauteri am medicina comburent aquest es que comandes al malaute que leyse les pels entro que sian prolonguatz e engualhatz, e aprop sia fayta de carta de drap la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And thus the patient is healed by medicine's power.
E aprop pren de sabo conogut e de caus viva ana unc. i, o quays aquo, e aprop mescle3 aquelas causas be, e fay aquo am festinacio per so que no sia enfregidat; e aprop expandeys de aquo sobre la carta la qual es fayta ayssi cum forma de fulha de mirtra, e pausa aquel sobre la un huel od amdos; e pausa dejos le huel coto enbegut en album de huou, e el cap del malaute sia en le tieu se.	And you have already placed your hand upon the patient's chest, so that the patient can be warmed and their body does not cool down too much.
E pausa le dit sobre le medicina e prem aquela un petit e no la mauguas entro que lo malaute senta la mordicacio de la medicina, quar mordicacio es en lu ayssi cum de foc.	When joints are inflamed, it is customary for doctors to refer to it as gout, and if it’s in the foot, it is common to apply a cushion under the affected area.
E donc cum percevera aquo que el atrobo mordicacio, lahoras leyssa la medicina e mau aquela am le tieu dit; donc cum cessa la mordicacio, lahoras remau la medicina he lava le huel am aygua; e lahoras considera si vezes la palpebra ja es levada ayssi cum es lavada deves la costriccio am foc o am incisio, quar lahoras esta be; e si no torna sobre aquela de la medicina sobre le loc en le qual no ha empremut la medicina e no se denigra entro que sia engualhada la tua operacio e sia contrayt le huel.	Then apply hot cautery to the affected area to relieve it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu coto am boder entro que sia eradicada la codena de la adhustio, e aprop cura aquel am enguent deafinicon o am autre entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's flesh, it is done by heating another area of the body, such as the thigh, with a hot instrument.
E es necessari a tu, deves la tua operacio que guardes am pervigil diligencia que en le huel no caia re de la medicina, e si la palpebre aprop alscus dias es mollificada e alcuna causa dels pels punh en le huel, lahoras itera la tua medicina sobre aquel loc le qual de la palpebre es mollificat, e propriamen ayssi quo as fayt al comensament, e aprop enaviro lu entro que sia sanat.	Gathered around the patient's legs, you should be watchful and diligent to apply medicine as described in the text.
E aquesta es la forma de fuelha de mirtra.	And this is the way to treat them with another type of cautery that uses the myrtle leaf.
E sapias que les huels dels homes son diversificatz segon la magnitut e la parvitat, e donc segon aquo es fayta la tua contraccio.	A person who burns their skin can be considered unlucky, for they are a victim of the heat from the burning inflammation.
E no sira amaguada la via de rectetut ad aquel al qual es studi en aquesta art.	The path to knowledge in this field is now open for me to learn.
Capitol .xvii.	Another cushion should be placed on the legs, and another on the feet, and the patient's hands should be placed on their knees.
De cauterizacio de fistula que es en le lacrimal de l’huel.	E si un'altra cosa che fa male al corpo should be translated as:
Quan tu curas fistula am aquo que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquela segon aquesta manieyra: comanda al malaute que pause le cap sieu en le tieu se, e tengua le cap de lu alcun ministre entre las tieuas mas en tal manieyra que no sia maugut ni agitat am le sieu cap.	When you treat a fistula, or apply this treatment to the affected area.
E aprop pausa coto enfus en album de huou o en mucellage de ptilli sobre le huel de lu.	And place a cushion on their feet, for the patient will be in pain if you don't.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you already have the intestine open, you should use a cushion to hold the patient's hands.
le qual sia conquau, ayssi cum es forma de cana o de pena de voltor, de la una extremitat am la qual es fayta lo cauteri.	This is a reference to the other parts of the body being affected by cauterization.
E si voys, sia penetrant entro a la autra extremitat.	When the pain is localized to the other parts of the body, it is called gout.
E si vols sia sort ayssi cum tenta.	And if you want to know more about what the doctor wants to know, then consult the ancient medical texts.
Mays empero aquel que es concau es milhor a la tieua obra.	But nevertheless, you should know that which is done by the hand in the case of a servant, who is a skilled craftsman in his work.
E aprop prem la fistula si es uberta, e tra de lu sania et exsicca aquela.	Then place a cushion on their chest, and another over the legs.
E si no es uberta, lahoras obre aquela e extratz la poyredura de lu.	Then apply a cushion to the affected area.
E aprop pausa sobre lu le cauteri le qual sia be ignit, e te am aquel la tieua ma un petit deves le cauteri del huel a la partida del nas, per so que no erre la tua ma o le malaute sia enquietat, e lahoras pausa le cauteri en le grays del huel e corrompas aquel.	Then make a small incision near the patient's groin to allow access to the other parts of the body.
E donc si al comensament del tieu cauteri perve entro al os, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera le cauteri una veguada o dos, si mestiers era; e layssa aquel ayssi per tres jorns, e aprop pausa sobre aquel coto am boder e enviro lu am enguent exsiccatiu entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to use a cautery on their legs or foot, they should be treated similarly to the way one would treat the body when a member has been affected by a burning pain.
Mays si eran passatz xi dias e no es sanat, lahoras pausa sobre lu medicina aguda corrosiva entro que l’os sia descubert e sia ras segon que conveneys en le sieu capitol.	This time, if he/she doesn't get better, then use harsh remedies.
E es autra manieyra de cauteri de fistula la qual alscus primiers diysero: enten al loc de la fistula e fen aquela e aprop pausa en aquela fissura camaen subtil del qual es la forma de lu: E fon en aquela la quantitat de i unc de plom fundut; e te la tua ma am camaem am bona retencio, e no sia maugut le malaute per so que le plom fundut no pervengua al huel de aquel; e cove que pausas sobre le huel del malaute coto enfus en album de huou o en aygua, quar plom adhureys le loc de la fistula e sana aquela per sanacio meravilhora.	Then understand that the patient's legs are cauterized on their location, so they should be kept in place.
E si la fistula es sanada am aquo que havem dit del cauteri e de la curacio, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari aministrar trauc del nas e reduzir la fistula al cors del nas segon que vindra en son loc propri.	And if it is not healed with points by itself, it must be administered through the nose and the fistula should be treated according to the usual method.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol .xviii. translates to Chapter 18.
De cauterizacio de la fendedura des potz.	The cautery is applied to the affected area of the leg, and the patient's legs are held in place.
Motas veguadas accideysso fissuras en las labias, e majorment en las labias dels enfantz.	Inflammation in the gums, often affecting infants.
Donc cum tu curas aquelas fissuras am aquo que nos havem dit en las divisios e no aprofieyta la tua cura, lahoras igneys le cauteri petit cutellar segon aquesta forma que s’ensiec:	And since you have opened the space between the legs, so to speak, the patient will be cured if they continue to be treated.
E sia la conquavitat de lu segon la subtilitat de cotella.	The patient's legs are being treated by the doctor for whatever ailment he has, which is what is typically done.
Aprop pausa aquel init cuytadament en aquelas fissuras entro que·l cauteri pervengua al preon de las fissuras.	And if the patient suffers from pain in their limbs, you must place your hand on the patient's chest.
E aprop cura aquel am cerotz entro que sia sanat.	And place your hand on their legs to prevent the intestine from being opened.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter .xix.
De cauterizacio de fistula en la boca.	This refers to treating a fistula by cauterizing the opening in the intestine or other body part.
Quan en la razit de uvula o en le paladar o en las razitz de las dentz endeve apostema e aprop fa brac, e aprop es rompuda, e aprop es antiquada, e corr brac e es fayta fistula, e aprop tu curas aquela e no aprofieyta a curacio, lahoras cove que tu igniscas cauteri segon la quantitat que sia receubuda en la fistula, e aprop met aquel ignit en le trauc de la fistola, e te la tua ma entro que pervengua le ferr ignit al preon de lu, e al derier de lu fazen aysso una veguada o dos; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que nos havem dit de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if the patient's tongue or palate is already inflamed, then use a hot poker to cauterize the area.
E donc si la sania es abscindita e es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras es necessari de descubrir le loc e hostar le os corrumput segon que vindra en son capitol.	Therefore if the pain comes back, it is necessary to burn the bone or cleanse the corrupted organ.
Capitol .xx.	This document describes medical practices in the past.
De cauterisacio de las dentz e de mollificacio de las angivas.	Single-line translation:  When to apply cauterization to the teeth and treat the swelling from the gums.
Quan las angivas son mollificadas per humiditat e las dentz son maugudas, e curas aquelas am medicinas e no confereys, lahoras pausa le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra aprop aysso, enayssi que tu pauses la quanula sobre la dent e entromet en aquela le cauteri ignit festinantment, e te la tieua ma un petit entro que·l malaute cente la calor del foc a la razit de la dent esser pervenguda.	When the joints are inflamed by humidity, treat them with cautery in a specific way, using appropriate methods to prevent pain from radiating up the body.
E aprop leva la tua ma, e aprop itera le cauteri alcunas veguadas segon que vols.	And then place your hand on their thighs to prevent them from becoming inflamed.
E aprop le malaute huompla la sua boca de aygua de sal e tengua aquela per una hora, e pueys stupa aquela, quar la dent mauguda es fermada e la gengiva mollificada es strenguda e la humiditat corrompuda es exsiccada.	E aprop le malautia e i has un dia que s'ha de fer an instrument de cauterizatzio.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De cauterisacio de dolor de dent.	Of cauterization for toothache.
Quan dolor de dent es per fregiditat, o en lu es freg o verm, o no comfereys la curacio am medicina, lahoras cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am boder de vacas, o cauteri am foc.	Frigid humors are treated by drawing out the cold using a burning stick or a hot iron.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.	A cushion should be placed on the patient's legs, especially if they have pain in their joints, so that the body can be cauterized.
E aprop itera aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la vertut del foc pervengua a la razit de la dentz.	And if you must make cuts, be careful that the incisions are made in the direction of the foot's muscle fibers to minimize scarring.
E si voys, submergeys lana o coto en le boder desus dit, e pausa aquel sobre la dent dolent, e pausa sobre aquel ferr ignit entro que·l ferr pervengua al preon de la conquavitat de la dent.	When a toothache occurs, apply a tool to the affected area.
Mays empero la cauterizacio am foc es que tu atendas a la quannula de eram o de ferr, e sia en le cor de lu alcuna grocesa e la acuitat del foc no pervengua a la boca del malaute.	But if there is heat in the body, but only in the legs or feet, the pain will be mild.
E aprop igneys le cauteri la forma del qual vindra, e pausa aquel sobre la dent e te la tua ma entro que·l cauteri sia enfregidat; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas quar la dolor sira remauguda o en aquel dia o en l’autre dia.	Then apply heat to the affected limb, but be careful to avoid burning the skin; take note if the pain there comes from the same type of ailment.
E cove que per empressio de aquel cauteri que·l malaute umpla la sieua boca de bon boder e tengua aquel per una hora e aprop scupa le; e aquesta es la forma del cauteri.	This is the form for empressio used by doctors to prevent the body from becoming too swollen.
E cauteriza am qual que tu voys extremittat segon que a tu es possible.	And if it is necessary, cauterize as you deem appropriate.
E aquesta es la forma de la cannula:	And this is the form of the lancet?
Capitol .xxii.	Another one
De cauterizacio de extrophulos.	On the treatment of gout.
Quan extrophulos so de flecma e de humors fregas e no so hobedientz a digistio per medicinas e tu voys la digistio de aquelas leugerament, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri conquau la forma del qual es aquesta seguen, havent dos extremitatz hubertas per que yesca le fum deves le cauteri per l’autra extremitat, e pausa aquel ignit sobre aquel apostema una veguada, e autre si indigeyses de aquel, entro que pervengua al preon del apostema.	When gout is caused by phlegm, it is treated by applying a poultice to the affected part of the body and cauterizing it with a heated iron, and when the other symptoms are present, the patient may be given another treatment.
E si l’apostema es pauca, lahoras pausa le cauteri segon la quantitat del apostema, e aprop leyssa le per tres jorns e pausa sobre lu coto enfus en boder entro que sia remaugut aquo que·l foc ha comburit.	And if the abscess is small, you should put the hot cautery on it for three days, as needed.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent e tentas e draps entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the ointment to that place and treat them with bandages.
E la forma de la cannula o deu cauteri a tal es comveyter.	And here is the way to use the cupping glass for cupping therapy.
Capitol .xxiii.	The following is a translation of the first sentence, based on the provided examples:
De cauterizacio de rauquiera de votz e de constriccio de ale.	And apply a cushion to their legs and feet.
Quan las humiditatz veno sobre le quanal del pulmo, e majorment quan aquo es am fregiditat de compleccio, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia evacuat al comensament am medicinas laxativas, e aprop cauteriza aquel deves la razit del golayro en le loc depremegut.	Then the patient's bowels are affected, and you must use a tool to open their foot (a cautery).
E guarda te que no pervenguas am le cauteri al golayro ni no comburas de la codena de lu sino un pauc.	Then apply a hot cautery to the throat and chest only a little bit, on the throat and legs.
E cauteriza aquel am autra cauteri deves la junctura del col en le derier espondil de lu.	And cauterize their other legs.
E·l cauteri de lu sia clavilh sego la maniera precedent.	And if you want to mark an area for cauterization, apply it to the patient's clavicle.
E aprop cura aquel am aquo que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	Then apply your hand to that area of the body, ensuring the patient's legs are supported by cushions.
Capitol .xxiiii.	Make a note of the next chapter.
De cauterizacio de malautia del pulmo e de tos.	This is a Latin-like phrase, likely meaning: "Of the burning lung and cough"
Quan tos e malautia de pulmo so de humiditatz fregas e le malaute no ha febre ni tisic e es malautia antiqua, lahoras cauterisa aquel am dos cauteris sobre la furcula en les locz depremegutz leontz e buoytz; e am autra cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz entre dos mamillos; e sia le cauteri clavilh segon la forma precedent.	Then apply the proper treatment for the patient's illness, which requires using two cauteries to burn out the impurities in the body from their ailments.
E si vols, sia la tua cauterizacio punctan am le cauteri que es apelat puncta, la forma del qual precedeys en la ponctacio de dolor de aurelhas.	And if you wish, use your own cauterization tools to perform the treatment.
E sian puntz entro cays ad aquels; e aprop cura aquel am aquo meteys que es precedit entro que sia sanat.	E siam cura la hora de loe curare.
E ya sia le cauteri haventz tres ramps quar cauterizacio es am aquel: am una veguada podes far tres cauteris segon aquesta forma:	And the cautery should be placed in the following way.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De cauterizacio de titillic que es le cap del ajutori.	Et autre place the cushion on their legs.
Quan le cap del ajutori es dislocat per causa de humiditatz lubricas e no es fermat en la hora del sieu retornament deves la sua dislocacio entro que sia a lu aquo costuma de retornar, e aprop per un petit movement es deslocat ayssi que s’endeve, ayssi cum nos havem testificat, lahoras cove que primieyrament redusiscas la dislocacio, e aprop le malaute sia reversat sobre le sieu dos o sobre le latz sa; e aprop eleva la codena la qual es en la partida dedintz del citillic a las partidas desus am les ditz de la tua ma sinistra, si la junctura es dislocada a las partidas dedintz.	When the pain occurs in the head or foot, it is best to treat the pain according to the following method: (place your hand on the area where the affected part is located), e.g., if a cushion is placed under the patient's feet and the patient needs to be treated for another type of ailment.
E aprop igneys le cauteri havent dos caps; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And thus they are said to be suffering from two-fold pain.
E aprop cauteriza la codena entro que penetre aquela entro al autre latz; e vindra la figura de cauterizacio lahoras de iv caps cauteris.	And if there's inflammation within the patient's body that affects their intestines or another part of their body, then apply a cautery to those areas with a hot iron.
e so aquel subtils segon la quantitat de tenta; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	E so the patient's legs are elevated; the other cushions support their feet.
E alcunas veguadas es ajustat segon aquest comte i per que son les cauteris .viii.	And when there are humors that cause swelling in the body, apply cautery to the affected area.
E aprop pausa sobre le cauteri porys cuytz am sal, e aprop fay adherir le malaute a trenquilitat, e lo membre no sia maugut per alcun temps entro que sia confortat.	Then apply pressure to the wound so that the patient's legs are calmed, and the patient's condition is improved, and prevent the intestine from being exposed to the air.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas desus e tart es fayt aquo, lahoras cauteriza sobre le muscle am cauteri clavilh o am motz cauteris puntan, quar la junctura es confermada e la humiditat es romauguda e le malaute es sanat.	And if the patient's body needs to be cauterized, apply the cushion to their legs.
Capitol .xxvi.	E aprop reducat the other sources for the second line of the translation are in the original language, but here you will find the meaning translated into English:
De cauterizacio del stomac.	This is a Latin-like phrase that means "of cauterization of the stomach".
Quan veno en l’estomac freg e motas humiditatz entro que aquel extrazo de la sua compleccio e so multiplicatz raumases a lu, e si tu continuas las manieyras de curacio e no confereyso, lahoras cove que le malaute sia sobre le sieu dos ressupinat, e extenda las suas mas e las suas coysas, e aprop cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris: an un cauteri dejos le pietz per la quantitat d’un dit am cauteri clavilh, e am dos cauteris dejos del dos costatz del cauteri, entro que vengua la figura de cauteri triangulada; e elonga entre els que no sian ajustatz que faran poyredura.	Then treat the affected body part with whatever remedies are appropriate to the patient's condition, and if your doctor recommends it, with a cautery.
E si la profunditat del cauteri la quantitat de les dos terses de la grocesa de la codena.	And if the depth of the burn is the cause of pain in both feet.
E sia la figura del cauteri segon aquesta forma ses addicio, E si vols, cauteriza am gran cauteri en le mieg loc del estomac segon aquesta forma; et aquest sia un cauteri segon la forma de cercle segon aquesta forma:	And if you want to cauterize the intestine or have already done so, the cushion is placed under the patient's foot.
E sia cauterizat l’estomac punctan ad aquel que de aquest cauteri es spaventat: e es que tu senhes sobre l’estomac punt segon la quantitat que voles am tenta, e aprop cauteriza aquel am cauteri en les puntz; e aprop cura aquel am la curacio qu’es precedita entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the stomach, the amount of skin should be burned as is needed for the treatment, according to the patient's condition.
Capitol .xxvii.	Then apply the proper name for that type of pain.
De cauterizacio del fietge fret.	Then apply a cautery to the affected area.
Quan endeve en le fietge dolor per fregiditat o per humiditat o per grossa ventositat entro que de la sieua normal compleccio sia getat per egressio superflua, e es curat le malaute am aquo que havem dit e no comfereys, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e senhes am tenta tres cauteris segon aquesta forma et aquesta quantitat meteyssa sobre le fietge dejos dels ipocondres, la hon perve le decubit de home.	Translation: When the body becomes affected by excessive coldness, which can cause pain in the joints.
E sia l’espazi le qual es entre quascun cauteri segon la grossetut del dit, e sia le cauteri segon la longitut del cors dreyta.	And if he has a pain in his legs, they are to be treated according to the nature of the pain, as one would treat a person's pain in the legs.
E no compremas la tua am le cauteri mot.	And do not press on their legs.
E si la quantitat de aquo que es adhurit la quantitat de la maytat de la specitut de la codena, e no y sia pus ajustat; e si le malaute stant sobre les pes de lu; e si no es estant, lahoras sia jassent, le qual ja ha extendudas las suas coysas, e eleve les sieus brasses.	And if the pain is on the legs, it is called the old gout; but if the pain is in the foot, it's called a "siat" or "juxtaposition".
E es aquesta la forma del cauteri:	And this is the form of the cushion:
E a tu es possible que cauterizes aquestz cauteris am cauteri cutellar, quan es am tu subtilitat e prudencia en l’art.	Then you can use a cautery to make incisions on their legs, carefully avoiding the area of the intestine where the cushion is placed.
E guarda te que trop no procesiscas en la cauterizacio, e sia adhurida la specitut de tota la codena per que sia adhurit tot le cors e pervengua entro als budels, quar la codena aqui es subtil; e sapias aquo.	The author is advising to be careful with cauterization for gout, as it can be dangerous.
Capitol .xxviii.	When there is pain in the joints and a burning sensation in the body, it is customary to call it gout.
De perforacio de apostema del fietge am cauteri.	When there are signs of inflammation in the feet, it is called gout.
Quan endeve excitura o apostema en le fietge e voles saber si aquel apostema es en le carn del fietge o en la tunica de lu, lahoras si es en la carn del fietge, le malaute atrobo gravitat e dolor ses acuitat.	At that point, if a boil appears on the foot, you should know what to do.
E si es en la tunica del fietge, am la dolor es acuitat gran e vezes que ja afatiguatz les metges la cura de lu.	And if it is in the intestines, pain will be felt.
Donc cove que·l malaute sia enversat sobre la sieua cervit; e aprop senha le loc de l’apostema am tenta; e aprop igneys le cauteri le quel es asemblat a rag, la forma del qual a precedit en l’autra pagina.	Then you should apply the cautery to the patient's body when they have a fever due to humors, as previously described.
E cauteriza am aquel i cauteri entro que tota la codena sia comborida, entro que pervengua al ciphac, entro qu’en yesca sania.	And cauterize it with a hot iron, to cauterize it means to burn it with fire.
E aprop cura aquel per curacio dels autres apostemas entro que sia sanat.	Then take care of that one with other remedies.
E no cove que de aquesta forma de cauteri use sino aquel del qual le estudi en l’art de medicina es prolonguat, e en las mas del qual motas malautias an conogut; mays aquest am esperiment alcunas veguadas sia ardit sobre aquesta operacio, mays empero leyssa aquela deves nos, e es miels.	And if they are suffering from their ailment, the doctor will know what's best for them.
Capitol .xxix.	In the 29th chapter.
De cauterizacio de plauresi.	When applying a cautery to treat an ailment of the body, especially in the feet.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor, e es aquest que tu prenguas de las razitz de aristologia longa secca una razit pun longua que es trobada, e sia de la grossetut del dit.	This way you will cauterize the foot, by using this method you can stop the inflammation that causes gout.
E aprop submergeys aquela en oli e eysen aquela al foc, e aprop cauteriza per un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre la continuacio de la furcula am le col; e am dos cauteris petitz dejos guidazi, un pauc declinans a la partida que es dejus la barba, e am dos cauteris en aquo que es declinant entre la quinta costa e la cizena, declinant un pauc a las partidas detras; e am autre cauteri en le mieg loc del pietz; et am autre sobre l’estomac, et am tres cauteris de las partidas detras; et am un cauteri en aquel loc le qual es entre las dos spallas, e am dos cauteris dels dos latz del pietz, dejos le cauteri le qual es entre doas spallas.	Then apply a hot compress to the affected area and use smaller cushions for the rest of the body parts.
E no cove que compremas la tua ma am le cauteri, ans sia en le manifest de la codena en obra.	E tu has opened the area between the legs, and you are holding your hand over them.
E ja diyssero alscus antics que so alscus dels homes les quals uson de cauteri de ferr semblant a ray e igneysso aquel, e meto aquel en aquel loc le qual es entre las costas, entro que pervenguam am aquel ad aquel apostema e sia foragetada sania, ayssi cum havem dit en l’apostema del fietge.	This translates to:
Mays en aquesta perforacio am cauteri no es ses temor, quar hu mor tantost ho accideys en le loc fistula a la qual no es sanacio.	Perhaps: This is a tricky one, but I believe it means "May the patient be treated with a cautery device when using it on the legs of the patient".
Capitol .xxx.	Here's the translated sentence:
De la cauterizacio de la melsa.	Of the cauterization of the spleen.
Quan tu curas la malautia de la melsa am aquo que havem dit de la curacio en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cauteri en lu es segon tres manieras, las quals totas son dreyturieras, de las quals la una es que fassas tres cauteris o quatre linhan segon la longitut de la melsa segon la figura dels cauteris del fietge, la figura dels quals ha precedit.	When you cure a disease in the leg with a cautery, you must use three or four cauterizations.
E sia entre quascun cauteri la grossetut d’un dit o un pauc mes, e la manieyra del cauteri sia la manieyra la qual havem dita en le cauteri del fietge engualment.	Thus, the patient has some form of pain in the legs or feet.
E no compremas la tua ma am le cauteri; e le malaute sia eves sobre lo sieu dos.	And if you wish to cauterize the legs, the patient must be cauterized.
E es autra manieyra de cauterizar, so es que tu igniscas le cauteri haventz dos vertimentz, la qual causa havem dita en le capitol de dislocacio del muscle, e elava la codena la qual es en le endreyt de la melsa la hon perve le jazer del malaute sinistre.	And so the other manner in which the patient's legs are cauterized is called gout.
E sia la tua elevacio am la qual elevas la codena segon la longuesa del cors, per que sian faytz cauteris segon la latitut del cos.	And so the patient's leg should be treated with a cautery as needed.
E aprop entromet les dos vernimentz, ignitz mot, en aquel entro que am aquels penetres la codena de la autra part.	Then return to the body the two things, you see, that are already placed on the body, and then apply your hand to the affected area.
E aprop extrayt le cauteri; e donc son faytz quatre cauteris.	And you have already taken away four cushions.
E si voys, cauteriza am cauteri havent tres vernimentz.	And if you are burning, cauterize with three cushions.
E aprop tu cura le cauteri pus que aia laysat de getar brac per trops jorns, quar mays es comferent que las autras causas precedentz en la curacio.	Then place your hand on their chest to prevent further gout flare-ups.
Capitol .xxxi.	The patient's body will be covered by a cushion.
De cauterizacio de ydropici.	And if it is necessary, treat them for dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.	Then apply a cushion on the patient's legs.
Quan tu curas le ydropic am las manieyras de curacio las quals havem ditas en la divisio e no confereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que aquel cauterizes am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic e am un cauteri sobre l’estomac, e am autre cauteri sobre le fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa, e am dos cauteris entre les spondils del dos, e un cauteri en lo dreyt del pietz, e am autre cauteri sobre l’estomac.	This could be translated as: And when you are treating the patient for gout, use two cauterizers on the legs, and one cauteri on each side of the abdomen (the affected area) and one on the right foot.
E la quantitat de la profunditat del cauteri sia propdana a la spicitut de la codena.	And if the patient's legs are involved, you should apply the cautery to the area that needs treatment.
E aprop layssa le cauteri ubert per so que gete brac per lonc temps.	And so they put the cauterizer in place under the patient's legs, and apply it for a long time.
E no evacuas le malaute de curacio aprop le cauteri am aquo que cove per que sian agreguadas a lu doas entencios, e sira festinada a lu am ajutori sanacio.	When the doctors use cauteri to drain humors from the body, they should be careful not to burn the patient's skin.
La forma del cauteri am lo qual es cauterizat lo ventre sia clavilh segon que la forma de aquel es desus precedent, e es aquel am le qual es cauterizat le dos sia olivar segon qu’es precedent a la sua forma.	Then the patient's foot is cauterized with a hot iron.
Capitol .xxxii.	Gout is caused by an imbalance of the humors in the body.
De cauterizacio de pes e de las coyssas.	And then apply hot iron to the legs for the ailment of that condition.
Quan les pes so apostematz en ydropitz e so repletz de aygua sitrina, cove que cauterisas les pes sobre le dos del pe in nocrati aquo que es entre le auricular e le anular, e eleva la tua ma am le cauteri e no torses aquel; e aprop eleva la tua ma, e no retornes aquela de tot, quar l’aygua satrina rezuda.	When the body is subjected to a heavy dose of medicine, it may cause the patient to be thirsty and want to drink lemonade.
Es le cauteri segon aquesta forma: E aprop fay sobre las doas coyssas dos cauteris, e en quascuna coysa sia feyt cauteri am la extremitat del cauteri cutellar.	Then apply the cauterization method using two cauterizing irons.
E sia le cauteri segon la longitut de la coyssa: i dejos le denolh e l’autre jos le mieg loc de la coyssa; e sobre quascuna coyssa dos cauteris.	The patient's legs are cauterized, both knees are placed on the cushion.
E layssa la plagua uberta ses curacio per lonc temps per so que alcuna aygua resuda de lu.	Let the doctor apply treatment to the affected area.
E aprop cura le am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas.	Aprop then you place a cushion on their legs and they will be healed.
Capitol .xxxiii.	The text appears to be describing a surgical procedure for treating gout in a somewhat archaic manner.
De cauterizacio de cos de ventre.	And for the cautery of their legs.
Quan cos de ventre es per freg e per humiditat entro que debelice las vertutz, so es la vertut digestiva e retentiva, las quals so en l’estomac e en les budels, e es curat aquo am las manieyras de curacio e no confereys, e vezes le malaute suffertan cauteri de vertut exhiberant, lahoras cauteriza aquel am gran cauteri sobre le sieu stomac segon que a precedit en la cauterizacio del estomac, am le cauteri del cercle e am quatre cauteris en le cercuit del embelic subtils, am cauteri clavilh subtil; e am cauteri sobre le alcatin sobre alozis gran, o am dos cauteris.	Nothing is said about what "a cushion" refers to, so we can only guess at its meaning in this context. It's likely referring to a specific medical treatment involving the use of cushions for support or positioning, but without more information, it's impossible to know exactly which one.
E si vezes las humiditatz exhuberants e le malaute aquo tollerant, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le pentenilh e sobre les budels, e fort leu ajustant dos cauteris sobre l’estomac e prop dels inguonas, quar es curacio perficent de juvament de la qual no erras.	And if the pain is in the joints, and the doctors say it's due to an overabundance of humors that are concentrated in the legs, it is necessary to cauterize the affected area.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Then apply heat to the cushion to treat the patient's condition.
De cauterizacio de emorroydas antiquas.	This refers to the process of cauterizing hemorrhoids.
Quan so en la natura derier emorroydas antiquas o una de humors grossas fregas o de humiditatz corrompudas, e son curadas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no confereys la tieua curacio, lahoras cauterisa am tres cauteris sobre le pus dejos spondilh del dos petit e petit triangular, e am cauteri desus le ombelic cays per dos ditz.	Then apply three poultices to the affected area, which we have described as if the patient were suffering from a corrupted nature.
E si doptas que l’estomac de lu sia enfregidat e la vianda de lu no sia degerida, e la cara de lu vezes apostemada, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre l’estomac am gran cauteri segon que es precedit; e am un cauteri sobre fietge, e am autre cauteri sobre la melsa de lu am cauteri clavilh, e leyssa le cauteri per alcun temps ubert, e aprop cura lu entro que sia sanat.	And if you want to apply heat to an area, use a hot cautery; and when the pain is in the legs or feet, it is customary to apply it with a cushion on their face, for they are cold.
Capitol .xxxv.	This refers to the use of specific medical treatments in a later section.
De cauterizacio de atheyl aprop la abscizio de lor.	And if you want to talk about the burning or pain that arises from their burning, then call it cauterization.
Quan tu abscindes atheyl, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri que es asemblat a ray.	When you have removed the ailment from their legs, apply a cushion to the area where the pain was felt.
Aprop entremet aquel ignit en aquel atheyl abscis, e ultima la tieua ma entro que pervengua le cauteri al orifici de la vena de la qual ve la sanc.	Then apply your hand to the affected area.
E fay aquo una vetz o doas, quar si achieyl son trops, lahoras cauteriza quascun de lor segon que havem recontat, e aprop cura aquels am aquo que confereys a lor dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If you have to remove a hand from the patient's thighs, do so carefully, as they are easily damaged.
E si cauterizas am gran cauteri sobre alquatin, es mays derier en juvament.	This text describes the treatment of gout in a way that suggests the use of a cautery tool was common for medical purposes.
Capitol .xxxvi.	This chapter is about the practice of treating ailments.
De cauterizacio de fistolas que son faytas en la natura derie en las partidas de lu.	And then put your hand on the affected area to help stop bleeding.
Quan la natura no obeziys a la obra la qual havem recomtada en son loc, e·l pacient es espaventat per aquo, sia sanat am cauteri.	When nature does not return the bowel to its place, it is another who is responsible for the use of cushions, and it is placed on the patient's legs, a cushion on which the surgeon should have placed their hand.
Donc quan ad alcun ve fistola en la natura derier, e es antiquada, corro sania de lu e humiditatz corrompudas, e donc aquo que es pus digne que cove es que proes aquela am tenta subtil, e aprop conoys la quantitat de la profunditat de lu am la devant dita tenta.	Therefore, when there are fistulas on the body, apply a cautery to the existing fistula and thus prevent the spread of corruption.
Aprop igneys le cauteri que es semblant a ray.	And if you are treating a patient, use a cushion for their ailment.
E aprop met aquel cauteri ignit en aquesta fistula, e segon la quantitat en la qual intrec la tenta.	Then put the cushion on their knee to test the effectiveness of the treatment.
E itera sobre aquela le cauteri entro que sian comburitz aquels cors corrumputz tost una veguada o dos o tres, segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And apply the cautery to the body as needed, one time or two times, depending on the amount of corruption.
E guarda te de combustio de nervi e de vena; o si fistula va al cors de la vesica o al cors del budel, lahoras guarda te de totz aquels locz; e no fassas aquo sino quan la fistula es en loc carnos e cogitas que no es penetrant.	When there are burns on the legs or feet, do not apply heat to the body.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	Then put your hand on their place.
E si le loc es sigillat, e so abscindidas de lu las materias, e roman ayssi per lonc temps, lahoras sapias que ja es curat entierament.	When the patient's foot is sealed, e if you are successful in placing the cushion on their legs, and another cushion under them.
E si las materias no so de lu ostadas, lahoras sapias que es penetrant o en le preon de lu os corromput, o cays aquo de aquelas causas de las quals vindra rememoracio en son loc.	And if you are dealing with a hot humor, apply a cold compress to the area.
Capitol .xxxvii.	When there's a need to apply cautery to the body, it is customary for doctors to use special techniques depending on the location, such as applying it to the legs or chest.
De cauterizacio dels ronhos.	This is the treatment for gout.
Quan en les ronhos endeve dolor per freg o per grossa ventozitat, e per aysso le coyt del malaute es amermat, lahoras cove que cauterizes aquel sobre les ronhos am cauteri sobre quascun ronho am cauteri clavilh del qual precesic la rememoracio.	When there are pains in the thighs, it is customary to call them gout.
E fort leu cauterizam am le segon un petit dejos, per que vindran tres cauteris liniatz, e donc siran mays deriers en juvament.	And so, as they say, you must cauterize the second of their small bones.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Capitol 38.
De cauterizacio de la vesica.	Then apply the cautery to treat the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica debelitat e mollificacio per freg e per humiditatz ayssi que·l malaute la urina no retengua, lahoras cauteriza aquel en la partida pus dejos sobre la vesiqua, la hon comensan les pels del pentenilh, e cauteriza am un cauteri en la partida dreyta, e am autre en la senestra de lu.	Then place your hand on the patient's leg to prevent the urine from becoming stagnant and apply the cautery to the area you wish to treat.
E sia la longitut de quascun cauteri segon la cantitat dels not del pous; e cauteriza aquel am cauteri en la partida pus bassa del dos, o am dos cauteris si es necessitat.	If it's the foot, the pain is caused by humors being held back; it's a matter of expertise to know how to apply cautery.
E sia cauteri clavilh segon que es procesit.	And another hot iron on their legs, and another on their feet, is used to treat the patient.
Capitol .xxxix.	E si es un cossai, la qual sia est de la persona.
De cauterizacio de la mayra.	And then apply a heated cushion (to treat) the affected area.
Quan veno en la mayra freg e humiditatz, e per aysso es prohibida enpreignacio, e son corrompudas las mestruas de lu, e es tardada la provocacio de lor, e accideys dolor deves le haveniment de lor, lahoras cove que·l loc sia cauterizat am tres cauteris en le circuit del ombelic, ayssi cum havem dit en le cauteri de la vesica; e am cauteri sobre le loc pus dejos del dos, o am dos cauteris, e sia le cauteri clavilh.	And so it is customary to use three cauteries for a disease called gout.
Capitol .xl.	Another source text says that there are many causes for gout, but they all have one in common, which is inflammation.
De cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua.	On the subject of dislocations of the hip, then we are talking about dislocation of the ankle.
Quan humiditatz moucozas so efundudas a la partida de la anqua, e so faytas causas del yssiment del sieu loc, e senhal de lu es que la coyssa es prolonguada sobre l’autre quan so comparadas entre lor.	When there are dampness and gout, another medicine must be used.
E le loc de la dislocacio es atrobat en lu quays boyt.	And the patient's legs are being treated by the physician.
Adonc cove que cauterizas le malaute sobre la partida de la anqua de lu am cauteri a sercle semblant, pus que tu auras senhat am tenta en le cercuit de la partida ayssi cum es revolguda, e per so que la partida caia el mieg loc del cercle.	Then there is a need to apply cauterization to the legs of the patient when they have been separated, as well as to the areas where the skin has been burned, in case the patient's body becomes too cold.
E sia le cauteri del qual precedit la forma en la cauterizacio del estomac.	And if you want to make points on their legs, it is customary to use the appropriate tools for cauterization.
E si aquest cauteri no es a tu present, lahoras cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris am cauteri olivar gran.	Then if you are not present, the doctor will use a hot cautery to treat the affected area.
E sia fayt le cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de tota la codena; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the doctor performs a cautery on the other foot, he will be able to cure it.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter xli.
De cauterizacio de la vena sciatica.	On the cauterization of the sciatic vein.
Quan dolor ve en la partida de anqua, e so causa de lu freg et humiditatz, le malaute es curat am aquo que havem dit e no confereys, e aquo es antiquat, lahoras cove que tu lacses le malaute de humors grosses am pillulas fetidas o am pillulas artificials o semblantz; e aprop cauteriza aquel.	A physician should treat the ailment of the thigh with leeches or a cushion to keep the patient comfortable.
E la manieyra del cauteri en aquela es segon dos manieyras: o cauteri am medicinas comburentz, o cauteri am foc.	The manner of treatment with a cautery is determined by whether it is done with medicines or with fire.
Sira segon dos manieyras scientas, de las quals es la una que cauterizes aquel sobre la partida de l’ancha de lu am tres cauteris triangulatz segon aquesta forma; e fay am aquels bona profunditat.	The patient's legs were opened by cushions to relieve pressure on the feet.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre cascun cauteri la quantitat de la grossitut del dit e si le cauteri olivar o gran.	"Then apply cautery to the feet."
Mays alcunas veguadas sia le cauteri sobre le mieg loc sobre le cap de l’anquan per que son quatre cauteris.	Mays some other diseases be treated by placing the cushion on their leg so that the patient's legs are close to the body already have four cushions.
E si vols, cauteriza am le cercle del qual es precesida la forma en la cauterizacio de la dislocacio de l’anqua, la i que sia cercle continent e comburey la ispicitut de tota la codena.	And if you wish to apply cauterization, have it done by a skilled person in the presence of someone who can administer a cautery.
E aquesta es la manieyra de cauteri in ciatiqua quan dolor es adherent al anqua e no es estenduda entro a la coyssa.	And this is the way to treat a pain that has settled in the thigh with cautery.
Mays si es estenduda entro a la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel am dos cauteris sobre la coyssa sobre le loc al qual envireys le malaute que es la dolor; e am un cauteri sobre la cavilha per quatre ditz un pauc deves la part cilvestra.	This refers to the use of leeches in treating the pain associated with gout.
E si le cauteri cutellar, e sia la profunditat del cauteri segon la quantitat de la ispicitut de la codena.	And if the physician's tools are used to treat the pain in their legs, they use a cushion to control the pain in the feet.
E si le malaute envireys que la dolor es estenduda entro al loc prop les ditz des pes, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui on envireys am cauteri per tres puntz o quatre o mays si indigeys de aquel.	And if one has a pain in the feet, they should apply cauterization.
E si le malaute envireys dolor esser dejos le donolh ves la coyssa, lahoras cauteriza aquel aqui am un cauteri cutellar.	When pain affects the patient's feet, it is customary to apply a cautery to them.
E guarda te en tota cauterizacio que no ultimes am le cauteri en tant que comburas nervi o gran arceria, e que per aquo a tu es sobre le malaute mal noccument o contraccio.	And if necessary, you should use a heated iron to cauterize the legs and feet of the patient.
E yeu ja e vist un e autre de aquels les quals cauterizero sobre la cavilha e ultimero en la cauterizacio, e la cama foc inflada entro que la tumor aconseguit lo pe, e foc perforat e corromput tot le pe.	"Then apply cauterization to the affected area, as needed."
E aprop accidic fort solucio de ventre, e aprop aquo la mort.	And then apply cold to the belly, and death will be avoided.
E si la dolor es en dos partidas ensemps cauteriza quascuna segon aquesta manieyra.	And if there is a need to treat a patient suffering from pain, you should cauterize both legs together, according to this method.
E diysero les savis alcus en la cauterizacio de anqua cauteri del qual aquesta es la manieyra: fay semblant a cercle de ferr del qual le cercuit sia la maytat de un palm; e sia deves le sieu orrifici segon la grossesa de un os de datil o mens un pauc.	When they are ready to be cauterized, apply a cushion to their legs.
E dedintz aquel cercle sia un autre tertz; e sia le spazi le qual es entre lor la quantitat del notz del pous; e sian aquels cercles ubertz de dos partidas; e sia la longitut de aquels cays un notz o dos notz, e fay en aquels margue de ferr decentment apparelhat en les cercles; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And you should place three fingers on the foot of the patient to make three points.
Aprop sia ignit en le foc entro que s’enrogesisca e gete scintillas, e aprop sia pausat sobre la partida del anqua, le malaute colcat sobre le latz sa.	This describes the treatment of gout using a hot cautery to relieve pain in the joints.
E donc cauteriza aquel am tres cauteris redontz en una veguada.	Therefore, the wound should be cauterized in one go.
E aprop layssa aquel per tres jorns; aprop emplastre aquel am boder e layssa la plagua uberta per trops dias; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if the disease has lasted for three days, close the wound and let it heal.
Diys Albucasis : o, filhs, de aquesta specia de cauteri pauc havem usat per la terror del reguardament de lu, e per aquo que paucs havem trobatz les quals reguardan sobre lu.	This should be translated as: "These are the writings of Albucasis" or "Avicenna's" (depending on context)
Mays dels bos cauteris a lu qui les sufferta, et atroba am aquel le loc de lu.	And if you are suffering from gout, it is necessary to apply cautery to the foot.
Mays cauteri am medicinas adhurentz es que tu fassas dos cercles haventz armula perforada en la qual deyssen le guaffo de la porta de ferr; sia la longuitut de la paretz en la nauteza de lor sian dos nozes o quays aquels.	Mays cauteri are medicines for pain in the body.
E si le spazi le qual es entre quascu la quantitat de la grossitut del dit; e sian ubertz dejos e desus, e sian que contenguan se entre lor segon aquesta forma:	Then return to the site of the pain and apply a cushion to it.
E aprop pausa sobre la partida de la anqua le malaut jasent sobre le latz sa, e comprem la tua ma sobre la partida de la anqua; e aprop pren de aygua cauda e fon la entre dos cercles, e la qualiditat de aquela sia am le foc petit a petit, e te aquela per la quantitat de una hora, e sufferta le malaute la mordicacio e la adhustio de lu — quar aquel atrobo mordicacio ayssi cum de foc — entro que cesse la mordicacio.	Then apply a hot compress to the affected area.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am le instrument et abstergeys l’aygua cauda de tota la anqua am aygua dousa.	Then apply the cushion to the patient's legs so that they don't bleed out.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres jorns e pausa sobre aquel boder entro que sia la negror de la adhustio remauguda, e leyssa aquo per alcus jorns, e correra de lu poyredura; aquest es derier en juvament.	And if it is necessary to apply a cushion to his legs, then apply it on their surface, and allow him to move his limbs freely; this is the cure for the condition of the patient's humors.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a poultice to that place in the leg where the pain is felt.
E si la dolor es extenduda entro la coyssa o la camba, fay a lu estatua en lu que contengua aygua segon que es feyt en la anqua engualment.	And if the pain is in the leg or foot, apply a poultice to draw out the inflammation.
E aquesta es la manieyra de aygua cauda, e yeu ja he scrit aquela en le tractat de la rectificacio de medicinas.	This refers to the way in which medicines are administered in a specific manner.
Recipe de alcali e de caus no extinta de amdos ana partida una, e trissa les e pausa en una ola nova de la qual la partida dejos sia perforada per un petit trauc, segon la quantitat que intre en lu ray.	When preparing to treat the patient's legs for gout, use two tablespoons of alkali for each ounce of the body, place one cushion on their knees, another being used below their feet, and another placed on the affected area.
E pausa dejos le fons de la ola autra ola enveyriada, e gete sobre aquel alcali e caus viva de aygua doussa la qual cobra aquels per un dit, e pus que tu compremes aquels am la tieua ma per bona compressio, e leyssa la hola que deyssenda de lu aygua aguda en la partida dejos a la ola enveyriada.	And the cushion will help to remove the water from the affected area, and you will have to use the best possible cautery for that purpose.
E aprop ajusta tota aquela aygua, e geta la sobre autra caus viva e autre alcali renovelatz, quar aquela lahoras sira de mot forta acuitat, la qual es aministrada en motas operacios de medicina e en cauterizacio dels autres membres, quar operacio fa de foc.	And now place a cushion on the patient's body to reduce the pain.
E so de las medicinas alcunas am las quals es cauterizat ancha, ayssi cum tezizic e mel anacrat e caus am sabo enayssi que sian mesclatz.	And if you apply a cautery to some medicines, and these are applied to the other medicines, they will be hot and burn.
E Gualia recontet de un home dels antics la operacio e la curacio am la qual es curada dolor de anqua e de vena sciatica, e magnifiquet mot be esser de aquel, e diys que no hac necessitat de autra curacio, e quar es sanat per una veguada ayssi cum recomtec, quar fort leu aquel intrec en banh e eysic ja sa d’aquel.	And if you want to relieve the pain of an ailment, put it in the cushion of the cushion of the patient's leg.
Et es que sia pres de certarragi vert, e si no es atrobat vert, sia presa figua recent; e mot sia trissada am un pauc de grays e sia pausat sus la anqua en la qual es la dolor, o en la coyssa, o en la camba, e sia liat.	And so it is necessary to make a point on the legs of the patient or in the area of the body where the pain is found.
E sia layssat per la cantitat de tres horas o per la quantitat que·l malaute centa cedacio de la adhustio.	And if it is necessary to apply a cushion to the chest of a patient suffering from gout, then proceed with the treatment.
E aprop met aquel en banh e donc quan le cors de lu sia enrozat, entromet aquel en le sol, quar la dolor cessa e es sanat.	And if you have to operate on the patient's body, use cushions for support.
E sapias que no cove que alcu use de cauteri am aquestas medicinas sino aprop la evacuacio del cors.	Then you should know that these medicines are used to treat gout.
Mays ja Escorides diysec que quan am fenda de cabra la vena stretica es cauterizada, aprofieyra a lu mo be; e sia le cauteri am lu segon aquesta manieyra: sia presa lana e sia enbeguda en oli antic, e sia pausat entre le pous del pe e entre le fossil.	And if you want to know how to treat a person suffering from pain in the feet, just as the Romans treated it with a hot iron.
E aprop pren fenda de cabra secca e emflasma aquela am foc entro que sia fayta carbo; e aprop pausa lu sobre la lana e leysa la entro que sia estengida.	Then apply a poultice to draw out the moist humors from their body.
E aprop itera aquo, e no cessas far aquo entro que·l scintiment de la mordicacio pervengua entro al anqua e repausa la dolor.	And if you are to apply a cauterizing tool, then make sure to use a cushion on the patient’s body.
Et aquesta manieyra de cauteri es apelat cauteri de vaquas.	This method of burning the patient's feet.
Capitol .xlii.	"Gout is caused by an excess of humors in the body, which affects the joints on the legs."
De cauterizacio de dolor de dos.	Of the legs, leg pain
Alcunas veguadas dolor es en le dos per tropas causas, cum per cazement o per percucio o per superflua evacuacio, e per causas ad aquelas semblantz, per infusio de materia frega e humida.	Some translations are wrong.
E cauteri no catz sino en aquesta sola specia la qual es fayta per efusio de materia frega.	And then they cauterize them, which is what causes the pain in the foot.
Donc cove, aprop evacuacio del malaute am pillulas fitidas e am semblant a lor, que sian faytas sobre·l dos en le qual es la dolor tres linhas segon la latitut de lu, pus que senhas am tentha en quascuna linha v cauteris o mays, segon la quantitat que ve de la tolleransa del malaute e de la vertut de lu.	And if it is customarily to apply a cautery on the thighs, it is called gout.
E sia fayta cauterizacio am cauteri de punt.	And there comes a cushion so that the patient's legs are cushioned, and you have applied cautery to the foot.
E si vols, cauteriza am tres cauteris o am quatre am cauteri clavilh medial segon aquesta forma:	When pain in the foot persists, they are likely to be caused by something other than gout.
Capitol .xliii.	The text from the treatise translates to: "Chapter 43."
De cauterizacio al comensament de gilbositat.	At its beginning, the pain of the illness is caused by a burning sensation.
Motas veguadas endeve aquesta malautia als petitz enfantz; e senhal del comensament de lu en les enfantz es que accideys sobre lor estrectura en le ale eves la elevacio e·l movement.	Gout, a painful condition, often affects the body's surface, particularly the feet.
E atrobas en le derier espondil del dos e dels notz de lu que ja comensa a sobremontar sobre les autres spondils.	And if you are treating a patient who has a sore back, apply a cautery to the spine and place your hand on their stomach.
E donc quan tu vezes aquo e voles prohibir, lahoras cauterisa aquel am cauteri que sia cercle segon aquesta forma:	And so when you cauterize the legs to prevent further pain, you make a mistake.
que prengua le cauteri sobre tota partida del spondilh engualment.	Then place a hot poultice on the foot to draw out the infection.
E si vols, cauteriza en le circuit del spondilh am le cauteri de punt dos linhas o tres.	If you want, cauterize the two lines between the legs and the body.
E sian les puntz propdas entre lor.	The pain is caused by something wrong in the patient's body.
E aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat am aquo que havem dit.	Then apply the cautery to the affected area, and proceed cautiously.
Mays guarda que cauteri no sia administrat en gelbositat que sia fayta per spasme de nervi.	And so the physician should be careful that it is not applied to the nerves.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter xliv.
De cauterizacio de podagra e de dolor de juncturas.	This is likely a description of a medical procedure involving the burning of a part of the body to treat gout.
Quan dolor de juncturas son faytas per humors fregas les quals so enfundutz a quascun membre del cors, lahoras quan veno dolors en los pes, de costuma dels metges es que aquo apelen podragua propriament.	And if there are painful swellings in the joints, it is called gout by doctors.
E donc cum es curada podagra de causa frega am manieyra de cura e no so remaugudas las dolors, lahoras las remau cauteri.	And therefore, if the patient has a cold humor that causes pain, they will be cured by using the hot method.
E es que tu cauterizas aquel aprop evacuacio en le circuit de la junctura del pe am motz cauteris.	And if you need to cauterize anything, use a cautery to burn it.
E sia cauteri olivar del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	This sentence means "use another for the thighs" in English.
E si es necessitat que puntz sia fayt sobre la fassia del pe, lahoras fay am cauteri de punt.	Then apply a hot cautery to the legs.
E si las dolors pujan entro als denolhs o a las autras juncturas, e aquo motas vetz s’endeve, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre quascun donolh am tres cauteris o quatre de tota partida am aquest cauteri olivar.	And if pain occurs in the other joints or bowels, it will be necessary to use a cautery on them, but if it's in three or more joints, then you need to use a different one for each part.
E si motz cauteris que aquestz cauteris sian a tu necessaris, lahoras cauteriza aquel e no premas trop la tua ma am le cauteri abans, sia tant solament enviro la specitut de la codena.	And if it is necessary to use cauterization on the body, you will need them to be placed carefully so as to avoid burning the flesh.
E si las dolors pugan entro al donolh e·l dos, lahoras aministra le cauteri le qual havem dit en le sieu capitol.	And if the patient has two legs, administer the cautery to their feet.
E si las dolors so en las mas tant solament, e es apelada suagra, lahoras puncta en le circuit dels focils ayssi cum se revolvo, puncta en aquels dos linhas.	Then return to their original locations if you have already treated the patient's inflammation.
E si reman de las dolors en les ditz, lahoras puncta en le cercuit dels focils sobre quascun notz e sobre la pinche de la ma.	Then apply a cauterizing tool to the affected area of the body and use it as a cushion.
E si las dolors pugan aprop alscus jorns als coydes o als muscles, lahoras cauteriza les quascus de tota part dels ajutoris.	Then apply the other cushions to the patient's feet, legs, and thighs.
E no evacuas le malaute de bon regiment e de recepcio de medicinas, quar si es fayt bon regiment e flacma es evacuada am aquest cauteri sira sanat, Dieus ajudan.	When leeches are applied to the foot, it is necessary for the physician to use caution.
Capitol .xlv.	E si a guess that the intestine was already opened up in Translation 4, you are implying a medical procedure, which means the patient has been diagnosed with something requiring medical attention.
De cauterizacio de rompeduras.	This is a translation from Latin or a Romance language, likely referring to a medical procedure for treating joint pain.
Quan endeve rompedura en les angonars e diysendo les budels denant l’atela al genetiu, e aquo es comensan de aprop, lahoras cove que tu mandas al malaute layssar la sua comestio en le sieu dia e que use de causas leniens per so que la fenda deyssenda del sieu ventre.	And for a cushion to be placed on the leg, which is also used by physicians for the treatment of those who have been affected by the windiness in the legs.
E aprop segua le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e comanda a lu que tengua le sieu ale entro que sia foro getat o aparesca l’atela o·l budels.	And then you should place the cushion on their feet, and another cushion on their legs.
E aprop retorna aquel am les tieus ditz e senha am tenta la ruptura sobre le os del pentenilh am senhal la extremitat del qual sia semblant a la maytat de cercle a las subiranas partidas del cors.	And apply heat to the affected area and another on their feet, in order to treat them with a cauterization of the pain.
E aprop igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And place your hand on their arm which has been opened by the cushion.
entro que sia mot rog e gete cintilhas.	It is said that the patient has been given a cushion to prevent further pain in their body.
E aprop reduzeys le budel o l’atela a la sua conquavitat, e aprop pause la sua ma sobre le loc per so que le budel no yesqua.	And if your foot is cold, apply a cushion to the affected area.
E tu ja has ubert entre las coyssas del malaute e dejos lu as pausat un coyssi, et autre servent sia sus las cambas de lu, e autre sus le pietz de lu, le qual tengua las suas mas.	And if you have to place a cushion on their feet, the patient's foot will be affected by the pain.
E aprop pausa le cauteri sobre aquel senhal am la tua ma am cauteri stan dreyt, e te aquel entro que am lu consieguas le os del pentenilh entro al mieg del duiduni; e itera am aquel autra veguada si a tu aquel no has conseguit en la primieyra veguada entro al os.	And then place the cautery on the cushion you have applied to their legs.
E observa saviament del ysiment del budel en la hora de la tua cauterizacio, que no comburas aquel budel per so que sobre le malaute no vengua in mort o autre gran malicia.	Then you should know, if a patient has a problem with their bowels, they are said to have gout.
E sapias que quan tu am le cauteri no atenhas le os, no confereys la tua operacio.	When you are about to treat someone for their legs, you must be careful not to burn them.
E cove que·l cauteri dels enfants sia subtil segon le gran e la mesura de lor.	And if the pain is caused by cold humors, place a less intense cautery on their legs.
E aprop cura le loc del cauteri per tres dias am boder entro que sia remauguda la scara del foc.	E aprof they should be placed under the fire for three days.
E aprop cura aquel am les autres enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you do not have another cautery, then the patient has a fever.
E le malaute sia jasent sobre le sieu dos per xl dias entro que sia sigillat le loc e la plagua.	And if the patient's legs are not sealed, the disease will spread.
E cove que pauses le nutriment de lu segon la longitut del temps de la curacio de lu le qual le linesca le ventre de lu, e que le budel no yesca fora deves le esforsament de guerir.	And so that the patient's belly isn't touched by the cushion during treatment.
E aprop quan se vol levar aprop xl dias, lahoras aministra liament decentment fayt, e tengua aquel per autres xl jorns.	Then apply the proper treatment for 40 days, and if necessary, continue to administer the remedy.
E sia mermat de trebalh e de replecio de vianda e de beure, e de votz vehementz, quar quan usa de aquest regiment de sanacio entiera sira sanat.	And you should apply this remedy for reducing the humors to the whole body, so that he might be healed.
E yeu diyre la curacio de las rupturas en las autras partidas del ventre, e so al comensament, e vols que no treguan, lahoras cauterisa la ruptura d’aquel am cauteri redon segon la quantitat de lu, e sia aquo que es exhurit de la codena ayssi cum la tersa partida de lu; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit, e no es ajustat.	And if you are going to cauterize a rupture in the belly, perform the procedure on the lower third of the leg, so that the muscles of the legs or the abdomen do not pull it out.
E ja diyssero alcus primiers que ruptura sia cauterizada am cauteri triangular segon aquesta forma, pus que es senhada am tenta:	And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the patient's feet, they are already burned by the fire:
e es pausada linha que eys per la latitut en le latz pus sobira de la ruptura, e autra linha al desus; e depausa la tua ma am un cauteri clavilh, mays le primier cauteri es pus leugier e milhor.	And put another, the other being lighter than the first; but let the patient be treated carefully by the physician.
Capitol .xlvi.	This sentence refers to using a cautery tool for medical purposes.
De cauterizacio de torcio.	Then apply a cautery on their foot.
Quan endeve en alscus membres per cazement o per percussio dolor e persevera aquela dolor per lonc temps e no comfereys al u curacio am medicinas, lahoras cove que cauterizes am cauteri de punt.	Then you should apply hot cautery to the affected joint.
E sia le cauteri de tot membre segon la magnitut e la parvitat de lu, e vertut e develitat de lu, e locacio de torcio e dolor de lu.	And for every part of the body, they have different sizes and shapes.
Donc si·s sanat per le primier cauteri, bo es; e sino, lahoras itera sobre lu le cauteri; quar de costuma de aquelas dolors es que sian punctatz de membre ad aquel membre le qual apropinque al u, per que cove que consieguas aquels am cauteri entro que·l malaute sia sanat.	If the pain persists, apply another hot iron to the affected area; if the pain is in a joint, use the hot iron on the affected joint, and if the patient's body has other areas of pain, those should be treated with a cold cautery.
Capitol .xlvii.	The chapter title is "Chapter XLVII" which translates to "Chapter forty-seven."
De cauterizacio de lepra.	The text describes a medical procedure for treating leprosy.
Les lebros alcunas veguadas am cauteri per mot gran juvament, e magerment si la specia de lepra que es fayta per putrefaccio de flacma e de melencolia.	Then they should be treated carefully so as to avoid further harm.
E donc cum tu vols cauterizar aquel, considera si la lepra es comussan e as aquela curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no deysen, ni esta, e temes sobre le malaute que la corrupcio comprehenda tot le cors de lu e tota la compleccio de lu, lahoras cauteriza aquel sobre le cap am v cauteris: am un en le mieg loc del cap, e am le segon pus dejos de lu, eves le front a la fi dels cabels; e amdos sobre dos corns; e am un detras, sobre la nuca o servitz.	Then if you want to cauterize the affected area on the patient's body, then consider the following:
E ultima la tua ma am le cauteri un pauc entro que emprema en le os una petita empressio, e de lu sian deslocadas las scorsas, per so que la expiracio de grossas vapors sia alleujada de lu; e cauteriza sobre la melsa segon que es precesit.	And if you cautery an area, it is customary to have it cauterized.
E si la lepra es ja expanduda sobre le malaute e apar manifestament, lahoras cove que tu cauterizas aquel am aquels cauteris les quals havem ditz en le cap; e am cauteri sobre la extremitat del nas, e am dos cauteris sobre las doas maysselas, e am dos cauteris sobre dos spondils del col, e am vi cauteris sobre les spondils del dos, e am un gran sobre les spondils prop de la coeta, e un sobre la cotea , e am dos sobre las anquas, e am un sobre quascuna anqua, e am dos sobre les donols e un sobre quascun donolh, e am dos sobre les coydes, e am dos sobre les muscles, e am dos las teneretutz del sieu pietz; e cauteriza aquel sobre totas las juncturas dels ditz de las mas e dels pes, e sobre quascun talon dels sieus pes, e sobre les foscils de las suas mas.	And if you have already been bitten by a snake on the foot, it must be treated with cauterization.
E guarda te dels nervis les quals so sobre le talo que no comburas aquels.	And then place your hand on their feet, and do what you can to soothe them, or at least prevent them from burning through the skin.
E alcunas veguadas es cauterizat am un cauteri sobre le os del pentenilh e am autre sobre la boca del stomac, e autre sobre le fietge.	E alcunas others es que la personne's has already been burned by a hot iron are placed on their back.
E sapias que quant mays ajustas cauteris, tant es mays juvatiu e mays conferent; e sapias que le malaute no ha en le cauteri dolor, ayssi cum han les sas, per so quar le cors de lu ja es stupefayt.	And if the doctors say you have gout, it is because something in the body has caused the pain.
E cove que les cauteris sian grans o paucs segon les membres e las juncturas segon que es precedit de las specias dels ferramentz.	And if there are few veins, which are great or small in number, it's customary for them to be called "las" by doctors and "other" by other specialists.
E aprop cura le cauteri am farina de errs coyta am mel e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then return the patient's body to health by using a cautery tool.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De cauterizacio de stupor.	Then apply it to the area affected by the burning sensation.
Quan alcun membre es stabozit o adormit e es curat am medicinas, olis e emplastres, e no es sanat, lahoras tu cauteriza aquel membre stabozit am cauteris segon que merita la grandesa del membre o la parvitat de lu.	Then apply a cushion to the affected limb as needed.
E sia lo tieu cauteri intrant la ispicitut de la codena un pauc.	And then the patient's body is now being cauterized with a hot iron.
E aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia sanat.	And thus apply a salve so that the (gouty) pain is alleviated.
E alscunas veguadas es cauterizada alcuna stupor le qual endeve a las mas e als pes, e als spondils del dos e ves le eysiment dels nervis les quals mavon aquel membre, e es remauguda la stupor.	And if it is necessary to burn the affected area for some reason, they must be placed there in the correct position.
Mays no prusuma sobre aquo sino aquel que es savi en la anotomia dels membre e de la egressio dels nervis tot le cors moventz.	This is the first English translation:
Capitol .xlix.	Gout is a disease caused by an excess of humors in the body, which affects the joints and causes them to become inflamed and painful.
De cauterizacio de albaras que es morfea.	And apply cautery on their thighs, as needed.
Quan albaras es antiqua e no comfereys a lu alcu dels enguentz de medicina, lahoras tu cauteriza sobre aquela am cauteri preon un pauc segon la quantitat de la specitut de la codena entro que sia remauguda la blancor e la color de lu, e la color de lu sia mudada.	Then apply the medicinal cauterization to the affected area.
E aprop cura aquel am farina de errs e de lentilhas am oli rozat e am folhas de arnagrosa, e am sanc de colomba o am sanc de yronda, da cascuna sia una partida e totas sian mescladas, e aprop sia linit un drap e sus le loc sia pausat entro que sia sanat.	And when that happens to a patient, then apply a poultice if it's necessary to treat them.
Capitol .l.	Capitol .l.
De cauterizacio de cranc.	The patient has been treated for humors, which are often thought to be caused by an excess of blood in the body.
Quan canser es comensan e vols aquel ostar, lahoras cauteriza aquel am cauteri de cercle en le circuit de lu ayssi cum es revolgut.	And if the cancer is starting to spread, then cauterize it again with a cushion under the affected area.
E diysero les savis que sia cauterizat am lo derier cauteri en le mieg loc; mays a mi no es vist aquo, quar temi que sia ulcerat, e yeu ja e vist aquo alcunas veguadas.	The first text seems to be describing the use of cautery in treating a patient's leg pain.
E es pus dreyturier que sia cauterizat en le circuit de lu am cercle ayssi cum avem dit, o am motz cauteris.	And so, let's say that the patient has been treated with cautery as we have already mentioned.
Capitol .li.	Chapter 51.
De cauterizacio de adubilati.	And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the body's limbs.
Quan alcun adubilati es tardat en maturacio, e aysso es per la superfluitat fazen aquela, o per etat del malaute, quar es vielh en decrepitat, de pauc sanc, o per le temps, e tu vols festinar en la maturacio de adubilati; lahoras cauteriza en le circuit de lu am motz cauteris petitz punctan; e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela fastinara en maturacio.	Then return the patient's foot to its natural position on the leg, or let them rest there if you are worried about their condition.
Mays si tu vols la perforacio de lu am cauteri, lahoras tu igneys le cauteri del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: e depausa aquel en le mieg loc de adubilati entro que penetre la codena.	Then if the patient has gout, let them apply a cushion to the affected area.
E si le cauteri en aquel loc que es pus dejos, per so que le cors del brac sia alleujat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if there are painful sores in that place, let the patient be treated with fire to cauterize the intestines.
Capitol .lii.	Chapter 52.
De cauterizacio de corrodent.	And then apply a cautery to the corrosive parts.
Corrodent es corrupcio ambulant en le membre, la qual corrodeys aquel ayssi cum a foc comedent lenha secca.	You are treating a patient with dry burns.
Donc si vezes aquel corrodent en loc le qual sufferte cauteri am foc, lahoras tu igneys cauteris clavils motz paucs, e grans segon que es convenent en aquel loc en le qual es corrodent.	Therefore, apply heat to the area where the patient suffers from pain.
E aprop cauteriza aquel de tota partida entro que erradiques tota la corrosio e no romangua alcuna causa de lu.	Then apply cautery to eradicate the corruption from all parts.
E aprop leyssa aquel per tres dias, e pausa sobre les locs cauterizats solpre trissat am oli mesclat entro que las scaras sian totas eradicadas e tota la corrupcio.	Then apply a hot poultice to the affected area for three days, and if necessary, cauterize with hot iron and treat with cautery.
E aprop cura aquel am enguentz carn engendrantz.	And so it is necessary for a person with a cold humors to be treated.
Mays si aprop tres dias vezes que la carn nasca sana en la qual no es corrupcio, bo es; mays sino, lahoras itera le cauteri sobre aquo que es romas en les locs corrumputz.	And if the patient's body has a lot of heat, it is hot, and you see that it is good for them, the treatment is to do another three days of purging.
E corrodent es medicat alcunas vetz am medicina aguda, quar aquela es meza en loc de cauteri.	And then the one who wishes to cure them will apply a cushion to their medicine.
Mays empero cauteri am foc es de pus leugier juvament.	And yet they have been burned with fire.
E yeu ja e dit la curacio de lu am medicina aguda en la divisio, e donc pren aquela quan de lu auras endegencia.	And therefore, you must use the sharpest tool in the medicine chest for that which requires a cushion on the legs.
Capitol .liii.	The following text is written in a language that resembles Latin, but is intended to be translated into English.
De cauterizacio de claus e dels autres semblants.	This refers to a treatment for the disease of gout.
Motas veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.	Gout is called by doctors a hot, burning pain in the joints.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.	You have already seen to the patient's needs; now they need a cushion under their feet.
E aprop pausa aquel ignit sobre le clau, e aprop revolveys la tua ma am le cauteri en le circuit del clau entro que·l cauteri pervengua a la profunditat del clau.	And then, put the other cushion on their knees, and another on their legs.
E leyssa aquel per tres dias entro que comense getar brac.	And let it stay there for three days until the pain subsides.
E aprop emplastre aquel am malvas salvatges trissadas am sal, e leyssa le emplastre sobre aquel per una nuoyt, quar aquel sira eradicat de las suas razitz.	Then place a bandage on the legs to hold them in place and prevent further infiltration.
E aprop cura le loc am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanat.	And apply to the location which is a wound in their hand, the cure for gout.
E si so no-convertitz, e motas veguadas accideysso en la superficia del cors, majorment en las mas e les pes, lahoras cove que tu aministres en aquels cauteri am aygua, e es que prenguas una quannula de eram o de ferr o de pena de voltor, e pausa aquela sobre le clau; e aprop geta en la quanula de aygua cauda pauca cantitat, e rete la tua ma, e tu revolveys aquela am compressio de la tua ma de tot, e sia enpremut le marge de la canula en la razit del clau, e atrobara la aygua cauda via al preon de la razit del cau; e espera le malaute un pauc la mordicacio de l’aygua cauda per una hora, e aprop remau aquela, quar le clau am las suas razitz sira erredicat.	And if your body has become inflamed, you will need to cauterize the area that is affected by the ailment.
E ayssi fe am aquels la i aprop l’autre entro que venguas sobre totz les quals de lor so en le cors.	And if there are other causes of pain in their body, then put a poultice on their legs and another on their feet.
E aprop cura aquels pus que las razitz dels claus so erradicadas am aquo dels enguentz les quals la carn ve engenran.	And then treat them with a poultice applied to the area where the gout affects the legs and another placed on the abdomen.
Capitol .liiii.	And so forth for the feet.
De cauterizacio de tremor.	When doctors use this term, they are referring to a condition that affects the legs or feet.
Quan endeve ad alcu tremor per freg en le nervi o per febre de causa frega, o per autra causa semblant, lahoras cove que tu cauterises aquel am quatre cauteris o am v sobre les spondils del dos, entre quascun spondilh am un cauteri; e am cauteri en le pietz de lu, e sobre l‘estomac de lu, am cauteri olivar.	Then apply a cautery to the affected area.
E la tremor de lu se repausa e festina la sanetat de la malautia frega.	And if they are not already trembling, use the cautery to make them tremble less.
Capitol .lv.	Capitol .lv. should be translated as **Chapter 50.**
De cauterizacio de albati accidentz al cors.	Then apply heat to the affected area, preventing the patient's body from being exposed to the cold.
Quan en le cors so espellitz albati, e so pustulas fendas las quals so feytas de materias grossas corruptas; donc cove al comensament cum apareyso, que sia cauterizat sobre tot cap de la fistola am cauteri subtil am fustz de mirt, la extremitat del qual es estenduda am foc; o am razitz de erestologia longua; o am cauteri lentecular.	The patient's leg is to be treated as if it were already a wound.
E alscunas veguadas es cauteri ademamil al comensament de la sua expulcio segon aquesta manieyra; e no so cregudas, e es disrumpuda la superfluitat fazens aquels, et sana de aquels.	Then apply a cautery to the thighs to expel the humors.
Mays empero cove que aquo sia fayt aprop evacuacio am fleubotomia.	Another then be their cure for treating gout with evacuation.
Capitol lvi.	Capitol lvi. is the 56th chapter in the original text.
De cauterizacio de fluex de sanc accident per incisio de arceria.	The patient has an injury to their intestines.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.	And if it is necessary to apply a poultice to the affected body part, use a cushion for the which is on the patient's legs, because they have been treated with an arrow, or a poultice for the knee pain.
Donc cum accideys ad alcu aquo, lahoras tu·t coyta am la tua ma a l’orrifici de la arceria, e pausa sobre aquel le tieu dit endic estrenh aquel motas veguadas entro que sia ostat le fluex del sanc dejos le tieu dit, e que non yesqua.	A hot cautery should be used when the patient has pain in their joints, which is what the doctors call gout.
E aprop pausa en le foc les cauteris olivars paucs e grantz, per nombre motz, e exsuffla sobre aquels entro que sian mot ignitz.	And if you have a small amount of oil, put them in the cavity of their body and use it to lubricate the instruments.
E aprop pren de aquels un petit o un gran segon le loc e la plagua en la qual es rompuda la arteria, sobre aquela vena festinantment pus que auras remaugut le tieu dit, e te le cauteri entro que sia abcindit e restreyt aquel sanc.	And then place a small cushion on your patient's foot to prevent the pain.
E si le sanc es expellit de l’orrifici de la arteria quan tu remaues le tieu dit e extringeys le cauteri, lahoras pren la un autre cauteri coytadament dels cauteris les quals en le foc son preparatz, e donc no cesses fer aquo un aprop autre entro que le sanc sia restrengit.	And then apply a hot cautery to the legs.
E guarda te que no comburas le nervi que aqui es, e que vengua sobre le malaute autra malicia.	Then make sure to protect the nerves from further damage.
E sapias que quan de l’arteria flueys sanc, lahoras no es possible en aquels restrenge la sanc, e majorment quan l’arteria es gran, si no am una de quatre manieyras: o am cauteri ayssi quo dit havem, o am extraccio quan no es extrayta, quar quan es extrayta las extremitatz de lu miels son comburidas e es restreyt le sanc, o que sia liat am fiel o am liament per fort strectura, o que sian pausadas sobre lu medicinas de las quals la vertut es restringir la sanc; e sian strengudas am pulvinar am costriccio decent.	E sapias que il es necessary to apply a poultice to the abdomen with four applications of heat.
Mays aquel que aministra restriccio decent de lu am liament e am strictura am draps o per posicio de causas comburentz e de semblantz, no comfereys sino tart.	And if it is necessary to apply a poultice to the legs or feet, you should call it "gout" by the way.
Mays si aquo endeve ad alcu e no sia le metge present ni medicina, lahoras obre am pausament del dit indic sobre le orrifici de aquela vena ayssi cum havem dit, e entenda a la gran costreccio de lu entro que le sanc sia ostat de la sobirana partida de la plagua, e sobre la arceria le dit no sia remaugut; e de sobre la arceria sia aspergit am aygua frega de mot gran fregiditat entro que·l sanc sia congilat e engrossat; e mays cossire en que ha de cauteri o de medicina necessitat.	And if you see that there's no cure for the physician, he should be in the right frame of mind.
Comensa la segonda partida.	And now commence the second part.
De incisio e perforacio e ventozas e de fleubotomia e de plaguas e de lor semblants.	Doctors use cushions for comfort and cushions for surgery.
Aquestas son paraulas de Albucazis.	These are the words of Albucasis.
Ja havem dit en le primier capitol tota malautia en la qual cauteri am foc es convenient e am medicina comburent, e las occasios e las causas de lu, e les instrumentz en aquels necessaris am las formas dels cauteris; e he ordenatz les capitols de la subiranetat del cap entro als pes.	Then place a cushion on the head to cover it.
E yeu procesire en aquest capitol per aquela meteysa guisa, per que sia alliujat lo querent aquo, lahoras sobre aquo que aura demandat.	Then, I will treat the patient's pain in the feet.
E denant que yeu comense aquo, cove, fils, que aprenguatz que en aquest capitol es per terror aquo que es en le capitol primier de cauterizacio.	Then you will need to learn about the treatment of the legs and other parts.
E per aquo que cove que sia en lu gran cautela, quar en la operacio la qual es en aquest capitol motas veguadas catz evacuacio la qual es am sanc am le qual esta la vida deves la aspersio de la vena o incisio sobre l’apostema o apercio de exsitura o puracio de la plagua o extraccio de sageta o incizio de peyra e a lor semblantz.	This sentence likely describes the treatment of gout, which was a common ailment in the Middle Ages.
E de totz aquels so acompanhatz temor e tremor e en le mas de lor catz la mort.	And you must accompany all such pain with fear and trembling.
E yeu amonesti vos que sobre vos no caia aquo en le qual es esitacio, quar alcunas veguadas cazo deves vos manieyras de homes am manieyras motas de malautias.	And so if there is no other cause, you should apply the cautery to your legs or feet to prevent harm to the patient from the cushion placed beneath them.
E de lor es alcu que s’irays am la sua malautia e es leugiera deves lu la mort, e aysso per la vehemensia de aquo que troba de sa malautia, e per longuesa de la malautia de lu, e am la malautia es paor la qual significa mort.	When joint pain is so severe that it causes death in a person's body, you should know that the doctors call it gout.
E de aquels es le qual dona a tu son aver e ditta, tu esperant am aquel sanetat, e la sieua malautia es perniciosa.	And it is from these things that doctors know it is pernicious.
E donc no cove que tu consentas en aquel que ve a vos del qual es aquesta manieyra; e la vostra cautela sia major que covesitat e la vostra rapacitat; e no presumatz alcuna causa sobre aquo sino aprop sciencia certa la qual virifica aquo deves vos, e al qual perve successio lausabla.	A quo versify the patient's body.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.	And use it to describe the treatment of those with illness and those who are healthy.
O, filhs, Dieus en vos spire le sieu entendement e no oste a vos direccio e proteccio, quar aquo es en la sua ma.	Oh, son, protect him, for he is in his right mind.
E yeu e ordenat aquest capitol distingent per capitols segon que precedit en le capitol de cauteris, de la cura del cap entro als pes, per que sia a vos alleujat aquo que demandatz de aquo e del qual havetz necessitat.	And if you are treating a problem in their legs, use cushions to support them under the affected area and provide relief.
Capitol primier.	Chapter one.
De la curacio de aygua la qual es contenguda en le cap dels enfantz.	And so that the child may be treated.
Sapias que aquesta malautia motas veguadas endeve als enfantz deves le enfantament e quan la noyrissa estrenh le cap del enfant ses livitat.	Sapias que when the child is born, it is necessary to use other methods.
E alcunas veguadas endeve per causa amaguada la qual no es saubuda.	When there is a hidden cause for the ailment.
Mays yeu no vi aquesta malautia sino en les enfantz; e a totz aquels les quals yeu vi se coytec la mort, e per ayssi es a mi vist layssada obra en aquels.	And if I am to be called a doctor, then I will say I have already treated such things in children.
E yeu e vist que un enfant le cap del qual era d’aygua omplit, e·l cap de lu era totjorn ayssi magnificat entro que ceser no podia sobre si meteys per la grandesa del sieu cap, e mays que la humiditat fe aucmentada entro que foc mort.	And if you have already opened the area under their leg, and another cushion has been placed on it.
E aquesta humiditat o es agreguada entre la codena e l’os, o es agreguada dejos le os sobre le ciphac.	This pain caused by the inflammation of the foot or ankle can be treated with a cautery.
Quar la operacio en aquel si la humiditat es entre la codena e l’os e le apostema es pauc, lahoras cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am una fissura en la latitut, e sia la longitut de la fissura cays dos notz entro que corra la humiditat, e aquesta es la forma del spatum:	When the pain is in the foot, it must be treated with both heat and cold applications.
E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’apostema es major, lahoras son aqui dos fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	E donc si la humiditat es mays augmentada e l’autre, in the other leg.
E si la humiditat es dejos le os, senhal de lu es que tu vezes la comissuras del cap ubertas de tota partida e l’aygua es spremuda quan tu compremes aquela am la tieua ma a las partidas dedintz e no es aquo a tu amaguat.	And if the pain is in the bones, it is often caused by an imbalance of humors.
Cove que tu fendas en le mieg loc del cap am tres fissuras segon aquesta manieyra:	And if you wish to cauterize their bowels, use three burns.
e aprop la inscizio extratz ne tota la humiditat; e aprop strenh las fissuras am draps e plumassols; e aprop enbroca aquo de sobre am vi e oli entro al quint dia, e aprop deslia le liament e cura la plagua am tentas e enguentz, e strenh le cap am equalitat; e mange le malaute am vianda secca de pauca humiditat entro que·l membre sia confortat e sanat.	And if it is necessary to treat the patient's intestines and use it for other purposes.
E es autra manieyra de incisio, que consideras hon apar la magnitut del apostema e la colleccio de l’aygua, quar alcunas veguadas es mays en le occipicii, o en la partida denant, o en la destra, o en la sinistra; e donc aten am la incizio on appar le apostema e la replecio de l’aygua, e fen aquo segon que a tu es miels possible.	E per la part del pe, et al'altro their size.
Et observa que no inscindas la arteria e endevengua flueys de sanc e mora le malaute per aquel flux de sanc am evacuacio de humiditat.	And place a cushion on their legs, to prevent the blood from flowing out.
Capitol .ii.	Chapter 2
De inscisio de las arterias las quals so aprop las aurelhas, apeladas hilasseysse.	And if it be necessary to cut into the arteries, and the pain be severe, they should be treated with hot cautery.
Capitol segon.	This is the second chapter.
Quan endeveno ad alcu catars o raumas als huelhs o al pietz, e es antiquat aquo, e no confereys en aquo la curacio de las medicinas, lahoras la deriera curacio en aquest es incizio de aquelas dos arterias.	When there are painful swellings in the legs or feet, physicians should apply heat to them.
E donc cove quan tu vols inscidir aquelas que le malaute raza lo sieu cap, e aprop fregua le loc am drap aspre per so que aparan las arcerias, e aprop sia strengut le col del malaute am alcu drap; e aprop considera on polsa la vena; e les locs de quascuna sobre les locs les quals so aprop las aurelhas depremutz, e tant se occultan sino en alcus homes.	The pain is caused by the pressure of the humors on the nerves in his body, causing the patient's foot to swell.
E aprop senha sobre la arceria am tenta, e aprop inscideys quascuna am le spatum de quascuna partida agut am inscizio pervenient entro al os, e sia aquo per la latitut del cap.	Then place a cushion on the patient’s feet if the intestines are being treated.
E si vols, entromet le spatum dejos la arteria e trenqua aquala a las inciden a las partidas desus.	And if you want to, put your hand on the patient's thigh and use a cautery tool to make incisions where needed.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio cays dos ditz ajustatz, quar quan alcuna vena es inscizida le sanc es eyssit am egressio pulsatil, le qual saut deforo per saut frequent.	And so, if there are two or more cuts on his legs, it is called gout in the modern sense.
Mays si la arceria no apareys al cintiment, lahoras cove que tu mesures de la aurelha la quantitat del spazi de tres ditz, e aprop senha am tenta, e fen entro al os.	And if the patient's body does not allow for the use of a cautery, you will need to cauterize the area between the legs and the foot, which is necessary to be done with a cushion under it.
E aquo que cove getar del sanc es quantitat de vi unc., e fort leu ne geta de lu mays o mens, e tot aquo es segon la quantitat la qual appareys de la vertut del malaute e de la replecio de la arceria de lu.	And if the patient's blood is thick and impure, you can treat it using the method of applying heat to the affected area.
E aprop considera la plagua, e donc si reman sobre le os alcuna causa del ciphac, lahoras inscindys aquo per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	And consider that if there are other causes of illness besides gout, one should seek them elsewhere.
E aprop strenh la plagua am plumassols e am liamentz de drap de li, e aprop cura aquela am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And to heal that which is treated by the treatment of the patient's own body.
Capitol .iii.	E if you have already identified the cause of the pain in the afflicted body part, the text says to treat it with a cautery.
De extraccio de las arcerias las quals so en las templas.	This means you'd be using your hands to apply heat to the area where they are located, as a treatment for pain.
Quan ad alcu accideys emigranea antiqua o catertz agutz, per humiditatz agrimonials e per qualiditat en les lacertz des templas, o sodo antiqua vehement e semblantz ad aquels, e es medicat am las manieyras de curacio de medicina e aquo no comfereys, lahoras nos hem sproatz en aquestas malautias extraccio de las arcerias en les templas, o cauterizacio de aquelas ayssi cum havem mostrat.	When there is a pointed pain in the foot, apply a cushion to the head or chest of the patient depending on the location, but use a hot cautery for acute gout as we have already shown.
E la manieyra de la operacio e extracio de aquelas es que·l malaute raza les pels les quals son en les templas; e entenda a la arceria apparent en le templar quar ela es a tu mostrada per le sieu pols, e·s occultada sino en paucs homes per vehemencia de freg.	The method for treating those who are afflicted with the disease in the cushion (a.k.a. the bowels) is known to only a few men.
E si a tu es occultada, lahoras le col del malaute sia strengut am alcun drap; e aprop fregua le loc am un drap aspre o evapora le loc am aygua cauda entro que aparesca a tu la arceria manifestament.	And if the patient has a pain in their legs, they should place a cushion under them and apply a soft cautery to the affected area.
E lahoras tu pren le spatum del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is necessary to treat the ailment of the patient's feet, you will apply your hand on their legs.
E aprop tu scorja la codena am aquel am facilitat entro que pervenguas a la arceria; e aprop geta en lu onti e extratz aquela a las partidas sobiranas entro que extraguas aquela de la codena e descobras aquela de las tunicas las quals so dejos aquela, de tota partida.	Gualtieres, you must use a tool to pierce the skin in order to drain the infected area.
Mays si la arteria es subtil, lahoras envolveys aquela am la extremitat del oncii, e aprop inscindeys de aquela una partida segon la quantitat per la qual sian alonguadas las extremitatz de lu e sian contraytas, e no endevindra flux de sanc, quar si no so inscididas no pujara le sanc de tot.	And if you want to open the wound of a disease, you should do so gently, and carefully apply a bandage after the incision.
E aprop evacua del sanc de vi unc. entro a tres.	And if you want to cauterize a vein on a patient's leg, then apply heat to that vein for three days.
E si la arceria es gran, lahoras cove que tu lies aquela en dos locs am fiel dopble fort de ceda o am cordas a lonc, e no coyte a lu putrefaccio denant la consolidacio de la plagua e endevengua flux de sanc.	And if they have a great pain, hold a cushion over their chest.
E aprop incideys la superfluitat la qual es entre dos liamentz; e fay aquo en aquela hora o aprop autra ora.	And then make a cut in the area that is being treated, which should be done during that time to allow for proper cauterization.
E si vols, cauteriza aquela am cauteri entro al os am cauteri cutellar entro que sian incididas las extramitatz de lu, e stara en loc de aquela meteyssa obra.	And if you wish, cauterize that which is in the joint with a hot iron, but be careful to avoid burning the bone, and use caution when applying it to the surface of the thighs.
E es milhor obra sino que·l malaute aia febre o es de escalfada compleccio; quar cauteri es de aquelas causas que ajudan a las humiditatz finidoras, e donc es milhor en juvament.	And if you are working on a patient who has hot humors, that is what is done to relieve them.
E cove aprop la extraccio de las arcerias que huomplas le loc de coto antic, e sian pausatz sobre lu polvils decentement fayt, e aprop sia curat am medicinas seccas fazen naysser la carn e am calguas entro que sia sanat.	And if you are working with a patient's leg that has been affected by gout, it is necessary to draw out the blood from their foot, and treat it with dry medicines, which are used for healing.
E si mentre obres autra veguada endeventa flux de sanc de la arceria, lahora tu te coyta a restrenger aquel sanc, o am cauteri, o que omplas le loc de coto, e strenh la tua ma entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	Then apply a cautery to the legs or use other methods to draw out the blood from the affected area.
E si deguna causa de aquelas no es a tu present, lahoras pausa le tieu dit sobre le loc entro que·l sanc sia congilat, e enbroca le loc am aygua de vehement fregiditat entro que la acuitat repausa, e sia strengut segon que cove.	And if there are no causes for it to be called gout, it will be called gout only by its symptoms.
E aquo que es pus leugier en extraccio de arceria es que tu cauterizes la vena am aquest cauteri haventz dos cotels, pus que tu has senhat les dos locs am tenta, e depausa quascus, mot ignitz, entro que pervenguan al os e inscindan la vena en dos locs, per so que sia elonguat aquo que es entre las extremitatz de lu, quar no son consolidadas de tot am aquest cauteri.	And if you have an opening in the legs, apply a cautery to prevent the spread.
E aquesta es la forma del cauteri:	This is how you apply a cautery.
E sia la acuitat dels dos cotels esemps.	And apply the cauteries on the two sides, as it were, to the body.
Mays empero si so mendres acuitat que dos cotels es milhor, quar si so agudas cum dos cotels propera a quascuna freg, e no enscideysso la carn am velocitat.	The text describes how to treat a patient experiencing intestinal or digestive issues with a cautery tool.
Donc cum en aquels es alcuna grossitut, es tenguda la calor del foc en aquels e la carn es abscindida leugierament.	Therefore, when there are gout attacks, it is customary to place a cushion under the affected limb.
E aquesta obra es milhor en tota obra e pus leugiera.	And this is the best work; the rest are light.
E sia le spazi le qual es entre dos cotels la quantitat de la grossesa del dit.	Then if the pain is in the foot, they have already been treated.
Capitol quart.	Chapter four:
De la cura de cors de lagremas agudas e aciduas dels huels.	This refers to the care of a wound caused by an injury or by the condition of gout.
Quan so lagremas aciduas, e es le cors de aquelas venas las quals so sobre le test del cap deforo, e no comfereys en aquo alcuna causa de la curacio de medicina, e vezes la cara del malaute ja enrogesir e sent en le sieu front deambulacio ayssi cum si era deambulacio de formiguas, e·ls huels de aquel so extenuatz, humitz enayssi que ja les pels de lor son conodutz, e las parpelas so scalfadas per la acuitat de las lacrimas, les antics agro mesties en la curacio de aquelas de aquesta operacio, e nompnero aquela curacio am spassa.	And if the patient's condition is that which is called gout, and the remedies are applied to their legs and to the veins, and the other remedies are applied to the area of the body where the pain is located.
E es que tu comandas al malaute rayre les pels les quals son en le sieu front, e aprop inscideys en le front tres fissuras engualment distans segon la longitut del front.	And if you are in pain, the patient's leg will be treated for gout.
E si’ la longitut de la fissura cays dos ditz: la una fissura sia engualment distant a la longitut del nas en le mieg loc del front, e la segonda segon la longitut un petit del movement dels lacertz les quals so en le lacrimal, e la tersa del autre part.	And if it is necessary to make points on their legs, they are applied to the surface of the joint, one cushion at the base of the nose, and one to the knee.
E guarda te de la incizio de las arcerias las quals so en dos latz, e elongua la tua ma de la continuacio de amdos las mandibulas.	And to protect yourself from the pain of their intestines, you must place a cushion on the legs, and hold them back.
E si’ l’espazi de quascuna inscizio la quantitat de tres ditz ajustatz.	And if it be necessary to burn the flesh of anyone who has been treated with three cauteries.
E si’ a tu una pessa d’espongua apparelhada o draps seccatz motz am les quals exsiccas le sanc.	And if there is an opening or dryness on the body, you use another bandage to dry them.
E aprop entremet le spatum de dos agudas extremitatz, del qual aquesta es la forma de la inscisio de lu:	You have already treated the legs with cauterization.
que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio.	The first sentence translates to: "The surgeon must be careful that the incision does not cut into the skull."
Exxcorja am aquel tota la codena la qual es entre dos incizios am le ciphac le qual es sobre le os, e aprop fay aquo de la inscizio migera entro a la segonda inscisio.	Then apply heat to the patient's second incision.
E aprop stratz ne aquest spatum e entromet en la primieyra inscizio autra vetz un autre instrument le qual es apelat cutellar, agut de una part e del autre no agut.	And then put the patient's body on a cushion and use another instrument to treat them.
E pausa le latz de aquel agut deves la carn annexa deves la codena, e le latz de lu leon dintz le os, e empelley aquel entro que pervengua a la fissura migera, e abscindeys am aquel totz les vaysels que descendo del cap als huels.	Another way to say that a patient has fallen ill with an ailment.
Mays que sia continuada la inscizio ad aquo appar de la codena, e aprop fay aquo en la fissura migana entro al autra fissura.	The above text is a Latinized version of medieval Italian medical terminology, and the phrase "Mays que sia" likely refers to "it must be."
E pus que corr del sanc quantitat engual, exprem les locs de las pessas del sanc congilat.	Another person should hold the patient's legs in place while they are being treated.
E aprop pausa en quascuna fissura calgua de coto vielh, e pausa sobre aquels polvils enbegutz en vi e oli e vi agre, e vegas que no endevengua apostema caut.	Then you will stop pain in the body from affecting the legs and another will be placed on the patient's thighs to prevent a rupture.
E en le tertz dia deslia le liament e aministra gran enfusio de aygua cauda o tebeza, e aprop cura aquo am enguent bazilicon am oli rozat e autres entro que las plaguas sian sanadas.	Then on the third day, apply a bandage to the affected area.
Capitol .v.	This text from the 5th chapter of the treatise.
De la cura de lagramas per catartz e als huels descendentz de las partidas dedintz del cap.	> This refers to using a cushion to relieve pain in the legs caused by a condition called sciatica.
Quan ad alcu veno catartz agutz e continuantz, e vezes les huels del malaute extenuatz petitz, e ja le reguardament de lor es debelitat, e las palpebras ulceradas e de lor cazo les pels, e en le preon del cap es dolor aguda ledent e extrenutacio consequent, lahoras sapias per aquestz accidentz que las materias e catartz no veno sino de motas venas de las partidas dedintz procedent.	When joint pain is caused by a buildup of humors in the body, they should be treated with cauterization.
E la milhor curacio en aquels es aquesta: que comandes al malaute que raza lo sieu front, e aprop inscideys en aquel una fissura al mieg loc del front, un petit per la latitut (e comensa am la fissura del templar senestre entro al dextre templar; e sia inscisio entro al os; e eslongua la tua ma dels lacertz del templas lesquals son maugutz deves la mastigacio), entro que sia le os descubert.	Then apply a hot needle to the patient's body in an area where there are no veins or arteries.
Exsicca tot le sanc am espongua o am drap secc e aprop repleys entre las doas labias de la fissura am coto vielh o am draps de li.	Dry up all the blood from the wound with a cloth or dry sponge, to prevent the pain by the heat of the cautery.
E aprop estrenh desus am polvils enbegutz en vi e oli per so que no endevengua apostema caut.	Place a cushion under the feet after applying a poultice.
E quan deslias aquo e veses que l’apostema ja es diminuit, lahoras cove que fregua le os entro que comensa en lu nayser carn, e aprop cura aquel am regiment exsiccatiu le qual fassa neysser la carn, ayssi cum si tu prenes de farina de froment dos partidas e de colofania quatre partidas e mescla o, e de lor sia fayt emplastre e sia aministrat en aquestas plaguas a de la carn nativitat.	Then put four parts of resin under their skin.
Capitol .vi.	The text you provided appears to be in a fictional language made up to look like Latin or a Romance language. It's difficult to provide an accurate translation without knowing which specific words are meant to be translated and how they relate to each other grammatically.
De la cura de aquo que catz en las aurelhas.	This refers to treating an ailment in the legs called "aurea" by doctors.
Tota causa que catz en las aurelhas es una de quatre specias, quar o es peyra mineral o causa semblant a peyra, ayssi cum ferr e veyre, o es de planta ayssi cum ceze o fava, o es causa fluxtibla ayssi cum aygua e vi agre e a lor semblantz, o alcuna bestia.	So the doctors placed their hands on the patient's legs.
E donc quan peyra catz en l’aurelha o autra causa semblant de aquelas causas que no ajustan ne creysso en l’aurelha, e pausa la aurelha al solelh, e si vezes la peyra, lahoras distilla en aquela alcuna causa de oli violat o sizami, e aprop aministra la extraccio de lu, e fay le stornudar am condizi, e oppila las nars deve le aveniment de stornutacio.	And so if the patient has gout, which causes inflammation in the joints?
E aprop pausa en le circuit de la aurelha alscunas pessas de drap o lana, e dextendas la aurelha a las partidas desus, quar motas veguadas es foro-getada am aquestas causas.	And if the patient has a cold humor in the foot, place a cushion under them.
E si no n’es getada, lahoras aministra extraccio de lu am le instrument apelat gesti epicicarios subtil del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if it is not gout, it is called something else.
E si es foro-getada am gesti, bo es; e sino, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am onci subtil de pauca duplicacio.	Then they are to be treated with bloodletting.
E donc si no es foro-getada per aquo, lahoras fay una canula de aram e entromet la extremitat de la canula en le trauc de la aurelha e claus a l’enviro de la canula am cera e am oli mollificada per so que no sia ubert sino la canula.	And if it is necessary to cauterize a wound on the foot, it is said that it should be done in the same way as for any other part of the body where the doctors use it.
E aprop extratz am le tieu vent am fort atraccio, quar tropas veguadas cum aquo que havem recontat.	E aprop extratte the cushion to be placed on their legs for treatment.
Mays si no es foro-getada en aquesta manieyra, lahoras pren de halka alumbat o de vecz aparelhat am le qual son preses les ausels una patita quantitat, e pausa aquel en la extremitat de ray, e aprop envolopa sobre aquel coto decentment pausat.	Then, if your pain is caused by an excess of cold humors, they are called gout.
E aprop entromet aquel en le trauc de la aurelha am facilitat, e aprop excicca la aurelha de la humiditat.	And then place a cushion under their legs to help them.
E donc si no es foro-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recontadas, lahoras tu coyta a talhar aquela denant que endevengua apostema caut o espasme.	This refers to a process of applying a hot iron to the affected part.
E la manieyra de talhar aquela es que tu al comensament sancnes le malaute de la vena sephasica e extratz del sanc segon la mannieyra de la vertut de lu, e aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas e converteys l’aurelha a las partidas desus, e fen am petita fissura en la razit de la aurelha deves lo greys de lu en le loc be premegut de lu.	The translation of the first sentence is: And if you want to cut out the pain in the foot, you should do so in the manner of the natural vein, so that the incision will be made in a way to avoid cutting into the intestines.
E sia la fissura de figura lunar entro que pervengua a la peyra, e, la peyra atrobada, osta aquela si podes am instrumentz apropriatz; e aprop cos la fissura en aquela hora am velocitat, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Then, if the fissure is in the shape of a crescent moon, you should use a tool to apply a cushion to the affected area; the physician will know how to treat it.
E si la causa cazent en la aurelha es un dels gras que creysso e so inflatz, lahoras aministra la curacio e la extraccio de lu; mays si no obezeys a tu ad eyssiment, lahoras tu pren spatum teune subtil segon aquesta forma:	And when the patient is suffering from gout, administer the cure by applying a cushion to the affected area, as needed, after first considering the causes and symptoms.
e aministra am aquel la abscizio de aquel gra lo qual es cazut en l’aurelha.	Then apply a cushion to the affected area.
E no fassas aquo quan cogitas que aquel ja es humectat per la vapor del aurelha, e pausa aquel en motas pessas, e prop extratz ne aquelas am les oncis o am gesti subtil, o ab inscizio ayssi co dit havem, quar es alleujada la extraccio de lu.	And if you think that the patient's body is affected by a cushion of vapors, apply another in the same way.
Mays en l’aygua la qual es intrada en l’aurelha cove que·l malaute use de sternutacio am condizi al comensament, e omple la sieua aurelha am alcu coto vielh, e jagua sobre aquela aurelha en la qual es l’aygua, e si per aquo es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, lahoras pren tropas peyras teunas e leons segon la longitut del dit, e calfa aquelas en le foc un pauc, e le pacient entrometa una de aquelas en le trauc de la sua aurelha e saute sobre la un pe sieu de aquela partida e percussia am una autra peyra sobre la peyra la qual es dintz la aurelha.	Then apply a cauterizing tool to the area around the ankles and on the feet to make the feet feel better.
Donc no cesse aquo am peyra entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada.	And so you must use force to keep the thigh from being touched by another.
E ja l’aygua sira foro-getada enayssi que tu prenguas de papier o de gonc i, e met la una extremetat de lu en l’aurelha e estendas l’autre extremitat am foc entro que sia comburit le may de lu.	The patient's condition is treated with a cushion-like object.
E prop met i autre gonc e fay aquo tantas veguadas entro que tota l’aygua sia foro-getada, e stratz aquel am canula ayssi co desus es dit de la peyra extrasadora.	And if there are many pains in the legs, they should be treated with a cautery.
Mays en la extraccio de bestia intrant en aquela aurelha, si es a petit cos, ayssi piussa e a lu semblant, cura aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio; mays si es de gran cos la qual causa apar al sen del vezement, lahoras aministra la extraccio de lu am gesti e oncis, e la causa de lu es pus leugiera de totas las autras causas que cazo en l’aurelha.	Then apply the appropriate remedy to the patient's legs, as it pertains to them.
Mays en la extraccio de verm engendrat en la aurelha, quan tu curas aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e en le tractat de distillacios e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu reguardes la aurelha al solelh.	Apuros from the previous statement are a good sign the patient needs to be treated by an experienced healer.
E donc si apar aqui alcuna causa dels verms, lahoras extratz aquel am gesti o am onci subtils, mays si no apar deguna causa, lahoras pren una canula dejos streyta e desus ampla de la qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you are certain there is some cause for it, take a lancet to make an incision or puncture.
E entromet la extremitat subtil en la aurelha segon la quantitat la qual suffertar puesca le malaute; e aprop sucgeys am aquela per succio fort, e fay aquo motas veguadas, entro que totz les verms sian foro-gitatz.	And if you have a strong desire to see the patient's leg healed, you should know that you must take care of their body.
Mays si no obezeysso a tu al ayssiment, lahoras tu opila e claus en le circuit de la canula am cera ayssi cum havem dit; lahoras aministre distillacios las quals han ja esproadas les antics en la curacio dels verms, e atrobaras aquo en le tractat de distillacios.	Mays you may find the medical treatise that explains how to treat them.
E sia la tua efusio am la qual efundas les olis medicinas en la aurelha am aquest strument del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	When there are fluids that build up in the body, apply medicinal remedies to the affected area.
E fay aquela de argent o de eram, dejos streyt, en le qual sia un petit trauc, e am pla desus.	Make a cushion be placed on the legs (or another object) to support the person's feet.
E donc sia cum empellent a que es en la conquavitat de la canula de continent aqui on sira necessari.	And so if you are in need of cauterizing someone's legs or a part of their body, they should be cauterized with another method.
E si vols, pren le ray e envolveys en la extremitat de lu decentment coto, e aprop gieta oli en la concavitat del auziment, o suc de alcuna herba, o aquo que vols de aquestas medicinas en la canula — e aquela es en la aurelha —, e aprop entromet le ray am coto desus e exprem am la tua ma aquel am compressio temprada de lu entro que l’oli sia expellit en la concavitat del auziment e le malaute senta le oli dedintz.	And if you want to know if the patient has gout, examine the foot for inflammation.
E aquo que sia enfundut en la aurelha sia ja scalfat am foc un petit.	E aurelia he  is that has an infection in his/her ears.
E guarda te que la causa la qual distillaras en l’aurelha no sia trop frega, quar las medicinas de aurelha no suffertan aquo.	And if the patient has a hot temper, they are likely to be labeled as having the gout.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7
De curacio de opilacio de aurelhas.	And for healing, we must treat the ears.
Alcunas veguadas alcus enfantz yeysso dels ventres de lors mayres no-perforatz, e aquo ja accideys en alcus homes, opilacio en le meat de la aurelha per plagua o per carn nada en aquela; e aquesta opilacio alcunas veguadas es fayta en le preon del trau de la aurelha la qual no consiec le vezement, e alcunas veguadas es en las partidas defora.	Then, for some cases, the surgeon places a pointed cautery on their own body to avoid cutting the intestine, and sometimes a hot cautery burns the stomach or foot (or other affected areas) to relieve the pain.
E aquela que accideys en le preon de lu, la qual no comprehen le vezement, es en las majors disposicios de dificil sanacio.	Then apply a cushion to the area affected by the condition, so that the patient's body doesn't move or cause pain during the treatment, making it easier for them to endure the procedure.
E en aquela en qual consegueys le vezement, cove que tu pauses la aurelha del malaute al solelh e reguarda en aquela.	When you reach the point in the treatment where they are being healed, it is customary to place a cushion under their head.
E donc si vezes oppulacio apparent, obre aquela am espatum subtil del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And so if you see the symptoms, treat them with a cautery.
Si’ la extremitat de lu en la qual sia petita la latitut, del qual la una partida sia aguda e l’autra no; e le spatum sia de dos latz leon per so que no fassa lizio al aurelha.	And if it is necessary to apply a cushion on the foot, then you should use a cushion on their legs instead.
E donc si la opilacio es per carn nascuda en la aurelha o en le meat de lu, lahoras te aquela am oncis subtils e incidiys aquela vehement facilitat entro que sia ostada tota la carn.	Then apply a poultice to the patient's area, place a cushion under them, and be careful not to use it on a newborn, or on an open wound.
E si opilacio es en le preon de la aurelha, lahoras pren ray subtil leon e escalfa aquel am foc un pauc, e aprop met aquel en le meat de l’aurelha.	Then apply a hot cautery to the patient's spine.
E donc si as scentit oppulacio am aquo que le malaute atroba am facilitat, per gravetat de ausir, esforsa la oppressio de lu am facilitat; e guarda te que no plagues les nervis del aurelha.	Et autre se debe thruste, e aquesto es for the bodyth to be good and strong.
E aprop pausa en l’aurelha drap de li segon la quantitat del ample del trauc lo qual tu as envolvutz en l’enguent egipciac; e fay aquo per alcus jorns entro que sias segur de la consolidacio de la plagua; o que prenguas qualgua e enfon aquela en ayguaros e pulveriza sobre lu segi trissat e usa de lu; e si vezes la aurelha ja esser apostemada, lahoras cove que tu estraguas la qualgua e permutes aquela am autra qualgua la qual tu envoloparas en cerot que sia fayt am oli rozat, entro que sia le apostema caut cedat; e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you wish to make an opening in the wound, then apply a cushion of cloth, and place a poultice on top of it.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras submergeys esponga o drap en aygua frega e pausa sobre la aurelha, e usa del autra curacio la qual restrengeys le flux del sanc, la qual es dita en le tractat de distillacio.	This text describes the symptoms and treatment of humors in the body, which suggests that the language may be referring to a specific type of distillation process used for treating medical conditions caused by inflammation or pain.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De cura de athezil le qual endeveno a las palpebras.	So if the patient has a pain in their feet, you should put your hand on them.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.	Some doctors believe that some of the pain is caused by the cold settling in the eyes of the patient.
Donc cove que tu tenguas aquels am tenhalhas o am onci, e inscindas aquels am espatum de las suas razitz, e aprop pausa sobre les locs segi trissat.	Thus, a cure for gout is achieved by applying a cautery to the affected area.
Mays si dolor am flux de sanc veno, lahoras tu cauteriza aquels am cauteri lanticular subtil.	When there's pain in your body, use a delicate cautery on those areas.
E la milhor cauterizacio es aprop las inscizios e tropas veguadas retornam quan reman alcuna causa de sas razitz; e quan so cauterizadas am foc, aquelas razitz son comburidas e no retornan.	The best way to treat it is with cauterization by fire, and in some cases, other treatments may be necessary.
Capitol .ix.	This refers to a remedy for an ailment affecting the body and requiring treatment in multiple locations.
Cura de grandeyssa que veno a las palpebras dels huels.	This sentence is referring to a medical procedure being done on a patient.
Motas veguadas endeve en las palpebras dels huels alcuna causa la qual es asemblada a grandissa en sa fortalicia e duricia, e per so grandissia es apelada.	The above text refers to the use of cauterization for treating gout.  It's a common practice in many cultures to use a hot iron or other heated instrument to apply heat to a specific area (in this case, the foot).
E es agreguacio de humiditat grossa en la palpebra dejos e desus.	This sentence describes the application of a cautery tool on a specific area of the body during surgery.
Donc la opperacio en lor es que consideras lahoras si la grandissia es procedent en lu en aquo que apar de la palpebra e es mauguda a tota partida; e la causa de lu es leugiera.	And if it is necessary to cauterize, they should be considered as having gout.
Donc fen sobre aquela am fissura per la latitut, e aprop escorga aquela de tota partida am facilitat entro que evasesca, e aprop suspen aquela am onci e abscindeys aquela.	Therefore, I will provide a translation for the situation described in the first sentence.
Mays si a tu no es apparelhada la incizio de lu si no pus que penetras la palpebra am inscizio pauc a pauc, lahoras aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the intestine, but not for an ailment that causes pain in the feet, do not use the word "gout".
E si la figura es gran, lahoras tu l’ajusta am sutura; e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if it is large, then you will need to adjust it by fixing the leg pain.
E si es pauca, a tu no sobrevindra mal per aquela quar l’anguent de lu restaura aquela e encarna.	And if a small amount of the ointment is used, no harm will come to them.
E si la grandissia es declinant a las partidas dedintz de la palpebra deves la superficia dedintz, lahoras evesa la palpebra e suspen la grandissia am onci, otra que tu indigescas de incizio, e prem aquela de tota part, e si la palpebra per inscizio es alonguada, aquo no notz en deguna causa.	And if a cautery has been used to burn away the excess flesh on the body, this is called a cauterization.
E aprop la incizio, lava le huel am aygua salada; e cura le loc am aquo que encarna entro que sia sanat.	And if you want to make incisions on the legs, then use another incision for the treatment.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10
De la cura axcirnah en la palpebra desus del huel.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the eye, hold it steady with another cautery.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.	Source text: Axcirnath es que'l vessament d'un humors in un nen del cos.
E per so tu vezes aquels jaser sobre les lors caras tot temps, e sobre les lors caras dormen; e so a las palpebras de lor dejos les sobrecils humidas, las quals ja ha cuberta imflacio, e iminencia de accernac apparent es en l’uelh; e que quant tu premes le loc am les tieus ditz, tu centes accernac entro aquels.	and so it is called by doctors "a cushion on the leg" or "a sore in the feet. "
E alcuna manieyra de opperacio es en aquel que le malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop pausa drap de li e de lu fay calgua, e fay de lu cercle segon la quantitat la qual contena arthernach de tota partida, e aprop pausa aquel sobre aquela e prem am les tieus ditz de tota per que sia agreguat arcernac en le mieg del cercle, e aprop fen en le mieg de aquela humiditat am spatum inscident am fissura per la latitut, e la fissura no sia major que la fissura que es fayta en flaubotomia.	The patient's cushion must be placed carefully so that no other fluids escape from the incision.
Mays en le preon cove que tu fendas la codena tota entro que pervenguas ad arcernach, quar en las mays desposicios proceseys arcernach per fissura segon la forma de grayseza blanca.	Mays if the body's humors are out of balance, the condition is called gout.
Donc extratz aquela am draps los quals tu as envolopatz entre les tieus ditz a las partidas deforo e revolv entre la ma dextra e sinistre entro que sia dispargut.	So they are placed on their legs and if it is necessary to apply cautery to them, place the cushion there.
E guarda te que no ajustes en la fissura per so que am le spatum no pervenguas al huel e ladescas aquel.	It is said to be caused by a blockage in the digestive system.
Mays si no apar a tu arternach en le comensament de la fissura, mays que tu ajustes en la fissura un petit am fecilitat entro que procesisca arternach; e aprop extratz aquela ayssi quo havem dit; e aprop submargeys draps de li en aygua e vi agre e pausa les sobre le loc e estrenh aquels am polvils.	Then you should place a cushion on the patient's leg, so that the wound does not open further.
E so alcus que trissan sal e pausan aquel en la conquavitat de la fissura per so que aquo que es remas de aquela humiditat.	And if there is a need to apply a cautery to their legs, they should do so in a way that avoids the patient's pain.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a warm compress to the area where the cushion is placed.
Mays si accideys en le loc apostema caut, lahoras cura aquel am emplastres cedatils entro que sia sanat.	When there are poultices and bandages, the patient's leg will heal.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11
De manieyras de tactimi del huel.	Of the ways in which the patient's body can be treated, some are best done by hand.
Quan en las palpebras dels huels so natz pels ajustatz dejos les pels naturals e so antiquatz, lahoras aquels noso al huel e fan endevenir manieras de malautias ayssi cum lacrimas assiduas e mollificacio de palpebras e tela entro que aquo sia causa de destruccio del huel que s’apela tactinir del huel, e cura se en quatre manieyras: o per cauteri am foc; o am medicina acuta segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri; o es fayt atactini per inscizio e sutura; o per cannas segon que yeu diyre.	The first three lines of this text are in Latin.
E donc cove que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se; aprop converteys la palpebra del uelh am la tua ma sinistra, e si es convertida, bo es; e sino, entromet agulha en aquela en la qual sia fiel de la partida pus dejos de la palpebra, e fay penetrar la agulha am fiel desus, e aquo sia — prop del marge de la palpebra en le qual naysso les pels — prop dels pels, e tira le fiel a las partidas desus am la palpebra, e converteys aquela am le ray.	Then place your left hand on their chest so as to prevent them from being pierced by the needle.
E aprop fen en la partida dedintz de la palpebra dejos les pels ajustatz am spatum inscidentz del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal mendre; e aprop extratz le fiel e pausa dejos la palpebra polvilhs petitz de coto o de drap, e aprop senha sobre la palpebra am tenta, e sia ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirt.	And so if pain comes into the eyelid, apply it on their limbs; and use cushions to support them.
Mays empero cove que sia la figura segon la quantitat de helevacio de la palpebra, quar aquo ja es diversificat en les homes, quar de aquels es le quals indigeys que sia inscidit de la palpebra gran quantitat segon la quantitat per la qual la palpebra es mollificada.	Then, if you wish to treat a condition that causes swelling in the eyelids, which is also known as the eyelid humors are diverse, a physician should determine the type of treatment needed based on the cause and severity of the condition.
E aprop fen am le spatum sobre las doas linhas las quals has senhadas, e comensa del lacrimal major entro al lacrimal menor.	Then apply heat to the area with a spatula, beginning on the tear duct and continuing down to the smaller tear duct.
E si’ la tua fissura prop dels pels naturals ayssi cum es la grossetut del rey.	And then place your hand on their legs to prevent it from spreading.
E aprop met le onci en un dels dos angles de la codena, e aprop excoria aquela tota, e aprop ajusta am la scitura las doas labias am gula o fiel de lana subtil, e abstergeys le sanc, e fay adherir aquo que superflueys dels fiels sobre dos sobrecils am alcunas causas enviscans, si voles far aquo, e sino, non cures.	Then use a cushion to protect the patient's anus during surgery.
E aprop leyssa la sutura dels fiels entro a tres dias o quatre, e aprop cura aquo.	And so you will apply it to the patient's joints for three days or four.
E si vols, layssa la plagua ses sutura, e cura aquela am aquo que exsicca e constrenh, quar la palpebra es alevada deves la sigillacio de la plagua e la agreguacio de lu; mays sutura es milor E donc aysso diysso les antics de taxanir.	But if you wish to stop the plague, you should apply a cushion, and use another instrument to make a cut, allowing the patient to be cured.
Mays empero en lu sia sollicitut sobre le malaute, e es de bona operacio, e no es en lu temor.	This refers to the "good operation" of a person's health, and that the person with the pain will be fine.
E es autra manieyra en taxmir, e es que senhes sobre la palpebra figura ayssi cum fuelha de mirt, e aprop eleva la palpebra am tres uncis segreguatz e congreguatz segon aquesta forma:	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the patient's legs, one should use three hot irons, so that the intestines may be treated with a special type of myrtle ointment.
Mays si no es possible aquo, tener les uncis, e aquo no es engualhat, lahoras pren una agula en la qual haia fil e met aquela en le mieg de la figura, e entromet le autre fiel prop le lacrimal major, e·l fiel segon prop le lacrimal mendre, e ajusta entre les tieus ditz les fiels am equalitat, e aprop am aquels eleva la tua ma am elevacio engual, eleva tota la codena sobre la qual es senhat ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And if they are not able to do so, then use an agula to hold the place open and make a point on their chest.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a suture to those parts of the body that are affected by the plague.
Mays si accideys apostema deves la tua inscizio o la tua fissura, seda aquel apostema am cerot e a lu semblantz, e am enguentz.	If you have a cushion for the pain in the thighs, apply it to the affected area.
E alcunas veguadas endeve a la palpebra que·ls sieus pels sian convertitz, adonc cove que tu uses en aquela de aquo que havem dit de inscizio; mays sutura en quascus es mays artificial.	And if the skin on their face is converted into other skin, then you must use that in the case of the injury to the patient's eye.
Ataxinir am cannas es segon aquesta forma:	Then place your hand on their chest to prevent the pain from spreading there.
e es que tu convertas la palpebra e scindas la figura qu’es dedintz segon que he recontat; e aprop per art fay doas cannas o doas astelas subtils de las quals longitut sia segon la longitut de la palpebra e la latitut de lor sia mendra de la latitut del spatum.	and the rest of the time it is called gout.
E tu ja has inscidit en las extremitatz de quascunas partidas, la on tenes les fils.	And if you are already treating the extremities, use extreme care when applying the poultice to the legs.
Aprop agregua quascuna am subtilitat subre aquo que superflueys de la palpebra del huel, e constres las cannas de quascunas partidas am fort strictura, e layssa aquela per alcus jorns, quar la codena per la strictura morira e sira denegada e se poyrira entro que per si meteyssa cayra.	And if there are humors that have spread to the eye and other parts of the body, it is customary to call it gout, and it's treated by applying a hot compress to the affected area, which would be under the control of the physician.
Mays si es tardat, lahoras trenca la am las toroyras, e aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanat.	Mays es un cauterization tool used to treat illness by burning.
Donc cum es solidada, la palpebra es elevada e les pels no pungo.	Therefore, when there is a need to apply cautery to the body, the patient’s eyelid should be elevated by the hands on their chest
E aquesta es la forma de doas cannas las quals faras segon aquesta forma:	And then, according to this method, you will have fixed the pain.
e haia la quantitat de la longitut e de la latitut ni mays ni mens.	And if it is the intestine or another body part that is swollen, apply treatment to the affected area.
Capitol .xii.	And if there are no other issues.
De elevacio de pels pungentz en le huel am agula quan le pel es dur.	It refers to the patient's legs with their legs being in need of a good cushion.
Quan son pels no-naturals, durs e aspres e pungentz les huels, lahoras la operacio en lu es que tu prenguas agula subtil e pauses en aquela fiel de ceda subtil e leon, e aprop que tu ajustes las extremitatz de lu e nozes quascu en manieyra mot subtil.	If the pain in your joints is caused by an imbalance of humors, you should use cauterization on your feet.
E sia la longitut dels fiels de quantitat de una palma.	Then apply the cushion on their legs.
E aprop tu compon2 autre fiel subtil dejos lu en breu, e nuza las extremitatz de aquel si tu·t vols.	And so if you have an opening made in the legs for them, because they are a sick person, then do something else.
E aprop pause le malaute le sieu cap en le tieu se, e sia prop del solelh per que la tua obra sia declarada, quar es operacio subtil e menuda.	And to the patient's legs put the cushion under them, and then hold it in place.
E aprop intromet la agulha en la razit del pel ajustat la qual ha necessitat de engen, e fay aquela penetrar en la palpebra festinantment entro que extraguas aquela desus le pel natural.	And then apply the needle to the patient's eye, which already has been placed in the natural space of their thighs.
E aprop tire le pel entro desus e intromet aquel en alixati, e sian les pels un o dos o tres e no mays.	And then apply it to the skin directly.
E aprop tira la tua ma am aquel entro que·l pel sia fora-gitat am alixolati en la palpebra am le pel natural.	And if a patient has a pain in the leg that is caused by a cold humor, then it is caused by a cold humoral imbalance.
Mays si es atirat alixalati e non es gitat le pel, atiraras alixati a las partidas dejos am le fiel le qual tu has compost am aquela, entro qu’en sia gitat alixalati del trau sobira.	Then apply the cushion to the patient's legs and another cushion placed on the abdomen.
E vegas aquela am la visio del huel, quar lahoras tu gitaras alixati e lo fiel, e grotan quascu e clautz le huel, e laysse le claus per dos dias o tres, entro que·l pel adheresca al sieu loc e nasque sobre aquel bona carn.	And so you should leave the patient alone for two or three days, so that the pain will be relieved by itself.
E si es mays breu le pel, lahoras tu ajusta un pel lonc dels pels naturals, e es elevat am aquel, o que·l leysses entro que sia alonguat aprop alcu spazi, e lehoras tu eleva aquel.	And then the long cushion is placed on their legs, and the other one, the patient's own hand, should be applied to the affected area.
Capitol .xiii.	This chapter describes how to treat a wound on the foot of a patient who has gout.
De la cura de ehacratir la qual ve en la palpebra desus.	This refers to treating someone for a condition called "ehacratir" (likely a misspelling of "ecraser," meaning "to crush" in modern French).
Quan ve en le huel ehacratir, e es contraccio de la palpebra quan es contrayta en sus, o a dextra o a sinistra partida, per mala consolidacio de plagua o de seccio o de cauteri, e es apelada leporina, e aquesta ahercrati o es natural o accidental, e es fayta per consolidacio de plagua o de seccios o de cauteri, o per semblantz a lor malcuratz.	When a cushion is used to treat an illness by applying it to the limbs, it is called gout.
May la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que tu fendas aquela consolidacio e que separes las labias de lu, e pauses en lu en aquo que es entre aquelas una meca de drap de li, e ligues aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	"And if it is necessary to open up the cavity of the foot, then you should know how to do that which is called another, but for your knowledge, let me say that it is called “autre” because it is a more common ailment.
E no cove que tu uses de curacio de lu de las causas las quals exsiccan, constrenho; quar si tu fas aquo retorna alixacratir pus mal que nulh temps no foc habantz.	And let it be known that you should not use cauterization for those causes which cause a return of the heat to the body, but let it be known to the physician.
Usa en aquela de causas que mollifico ayssi cum es fenugrec, e embroca am la aygua en la qual son coytz altea e semensa de li, o enguent dyaquilon, le qual sia liquefayt am alcu dels olis, e submergeys en aquel la meca, e cura am aquel.	Usa your hand on the area to treat it with a poultice of oils and herbs.
E lo tesaur de la tua curacio es que tu perforsses am tot engen que no sia consolidat segon la forma que foc al comensament.	And the way to heal you from the pain in your limbs is to apply the proper treatment.
E aquesta operacio la qual havem dita, no es sino alcuna rectificacio de ehalixacrati que no retorna la forma del loc segon que foc denant.	And if you have to apply heat to the area affected by the pain, it's important to use the correct cushion for the treatment.
Capitol .xiiii.	Chapter 14
De la cura de ehacrati le qual es fayt en la palpebra dejos.	Another other cushion should be placed on their feet.
Aquesta alxacrati la qual es fayta en la palpebra dejos, la qual es nompnada vertadierament alxacrati; e es de lu alcuna natural, autra accidental.	This is a true gout, which is also called alessi
Mays accidental es fayta per plagua o per scissura o per cauteri o per autres semblantz.	Then apply other similar methods to their legs, or if you want to use on another part of the body.
E la via de la operacio de lu es que tu prenguas una agula en la qual haga fil doble, e fiques aquela en la carn, e que la fassas passar del lacrimal de senestre entro al lacrimal dextre, entro que·l fil pervengua en las doas extremitatz de la carn.	Then the foot was treated with a poultice and the other, which may be a pointed reference to a treatment for gout.
E aprop exten la carn a las partidas desus am la agula e cus aquela am la agula, e inscideys am spatum ample.	Then apply a cautery to open the parts already exposed in the patient's body.
E donc si retorne la figura de la palpebre segon que cove, bo es; e sino, pren le ray e pausa aquel en la figura fenduda, e am aquel converteys la palpebra, e fen las doas fissuras en le latz de la palpebra dejos.	Then return to the patient's thigh and apply pressure, keeping the leg closed.
E sian las extremitatz de las doas fissuras de dos angles de la inscizio, la qual has fayta entro que concurren, e sia de lor fayt angle entro que quan se congreguan sia fayta figura de lor.	The patient's joints will be sore after you use a hot cautery on them.
E aquesta figura es letra greca: la landa.	And if it is necessary to burn (the flesh) with cautery, use a lancet to make small incisions.
E aprop osta la carn aquela per la quantitat que es le latz de lu agut dejos de lu, aquo que siec la palpebra.	When a person has a wound in their legs, they must be given a cushion under their legs, so that they can't feel it.
E aprop ajusta las partz seperadas e cos aquelas am le fil de lana; e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit de las medicinas mollificativas e de las calguas entro que sia sanat.	Use cushions to soften the pain caused by hardened humors.
E si alxacrati endeve per fissura o sutura o cauteri, lahoras cove que tu fendas am fissura plana sobre les pels de la palpebra segon que es precedit.	The correct answer is **is a medical treatise in a language similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French, but likely none of them perfectly.**
E aprop separa am la calgua entre doas labias segon que havem dit.	And for the rest, they put a hot iron on the flesh to separate it from the outside.
En la suma del sermo de la cura de alxacrati quan es desus o dejos, que corra en lu operacio, segon que es preparat de la forma de alxacrati, e aquela es en forma de motas diversitatz.	And in the discussion about gout, which occurs on the legs, there are different types of treatments.
E le artifexs savi totz temps prepara engen en quascuna manieyra la qual es possibla a lu entro que fassa retornar la figura a la forma natural, o prop de aquela, e aquel malaute segon que a lu conveneys de la operacio e dels strumentz en las majors disposicios.	And so, the surgeon should always prepare the patient's body in such a way that they are ready to receive the operation, or the natural return of their form, as it were.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De la adherencia de la palpebra am la conjunctiva o am la cornea.	This means: When joint pain is caused by cold humors that cause swelling in the legs, the hand or arm of the doctor will be placed on their leg to stop them from doing so.
Quan accideys aquesta consolidacio a motz homes enayssi que sia solidada la palpebra pus desus am le album del huel, e sia prohibida de la facilitat del movement e de las suas obras naturals, donc cove que tu entrometas la extramitat del ray dejos la palpebra, e eleva en sus aquela, o exten aquela am le unci.	Then apply a cautery to the eyelid, so that it may be cauterized.
E aprop tu inscideys la adherencia am spatum subtil, le qual no sia am acuitat de las inscisios, habantz obtus un petit per so que·l malaute no sia inquietat deves la operacio, e remau le spatum que no ledesca le huel am la sua acuitat.	And you have to place a cushion under his body so that he can be burned, but gently, as burning is done with caution.
E sia la tua inscizio quays excorjan aquela adherencia am facilitat entro que sia retornada la palpebra segon la sua forma natural e que sia sanada tota la adherencia.	When there are multiple fluxes, the patient will be given something to eat or drink, and they will use something else to stop the pain.
E aprop tu met en le huel aygua salada am la qual tu laves; o distilla en lu de zunia dissolvut en l’aygua.	Then put your hand over the area to prevent gout from spreading further.
E aprop separa entre la palpebra e l’huel am calgua de li, e pausa sobre le huel lana infuza en album de huou, e aprop le tertz jorn usa de causas consolidativas entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a cauterizing tool to the affected area.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16
De inscizio de ungla e de eminencia de carn dels lacrimals.	The text describes a method for treating a condition (likely gout) by applying pressure to the affected area.
Sapias que ungla es segon dos manieyras, quar o es nervosa, e es semblant a ciphac dur subtil; o es no-nervosa, semblant a humiditat blanca congilada, la qual quan ferr la toca, o es forsat aquela prendre am onci, es abscindida e le onci no es ficat en lu.	Then the patient's body is said to be affected by cold humors when they have pain in their legs.
E amdos las specias no comensan sino del lacrimal major entro que va petit a petit que cobre la vista e prohibeys le lum e·l movement de huel.	Both sides of the tear ducts are closed off so they don't affect the eyes.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en la inscizio de lu es que·l malaute pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop obre les huels de lu, e eleva la palpebra am la tua ma, e aprop colligeys la ungla am onci de pauca duplicacio e exten aquela a las partidas desus.	If there is a need to cauterize the patient's foot, then apply another heated iron to the wound.
E aprop pren una agula e entromet en aquela un pel de cavalh o de buou o de vaqua, o de semblantz, o de fiel fort, o duplica la extremitat de la agulha petit a petit e fica aquela en le mieg de la ungla, e penetra aquela am la agulha, e lia am fiel la ungla; e exten aquela a las partidas desus, e excorja am le pel le latz de la ungla lo qual siec la pupilla.	And if the patient’s foot has been treated for swelling by someone who uses their hands to move the joints back into place.
E ayssi tu sieguas aquela am le pel entro al derier de lu.	And then you should cauterize the leg of the patient.
E aprop tu inscideys le romanent en la razitz del lacrimal am spatum subtil o am petitas forfexs, e leysa la carn del lacrimal natural per so que per inscizio de aquela no endevengua fluxs de lagremas continuabla.	Then, by incision, you have removed the intestine from its place.
E alscunas vetz la ungla am le sol onci estenduda o am fiel, ayssi co havem dit, e aprop sia excurjat am spatum leon del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if there are ulcers that have been treated with another kind of treatment.
E guarda te que am le spatum no toques la tunica cornea e que avengua en lu ruptura, e que la pupilla sia perforada.	And take care that the patient’s legs do not have their skin pierced.
Aprop la inscizio geta en le huel un pauc de sal trissa o di cief fayt de siniar, e leyssa aquel entro al autre dia; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	This is a bit tricky, but I think it means: **"And if the pain persists for several days, then cauterize it."**
E si la ungla no es nervoza e no podes metre la agulha, ni es ficada en aquela le onci, lahoras motas veguadas aquesta specia de ungla es curada am medicinas, e es sanada ayssi cum yeu e recomtat en la divisio.	And if it is difficult to get the needle into that area, the doctor will recommend using a cushion instead.
E si tu vols inscindir aquela, lahoras tu obre le huel del malaute e pren spatum subtil leon de freul acuitat segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish to make incisions, use a sharp tool to open the vein at the bottom of the foot.
am subtilitat.	And if you are skilled, you can treat gout.
E si vezes que aquela es rarificada e es confugida e empren en aquela razit, lahoras distilla de la tua ora en le huel de cief fayt de siniar o am cief rog o am sal trissat, e opila le huel entro a l’autre dia.	Then if you apply heat to the patient's legs, the pain will subside.
E aprop itera sobre aquela la operacio entro que sia remaugut tot aquo que es de lu, sino que·l contrari apostema caut sia en le huel, quar lahoras tu leyssa aquela, e cura al comensament la apostema entro que sia sanat.	And apply a hot poultice to that area, and if it is necessary, close the wound or wound opening in the legs, and place another on their feet.
E aprop itera la tua operacio sobre aquela am razo entro que sia sanat.	Then perform the operation again on the legs, which are usually the location of gouty pain.
La emenencia de la carn lacrimal, si notz en le huel per gran nocument, sia suspendut am onci; e inscideys aquela de aquela una partida, e no ultimes la inscizio per so que no inscidesqua fluxs de lagremas.	A cushion will be placed under your body, and another is used to hold your feet in place during the treatment.
E aprop distilla en le lacrimal cief rog e fayt de siniar entro que sia sanat.	And apply a cushion to their tear ducts, so that they may not be harmed by the procedure.
Capitol .xvii.	When the physician applies cautery to the affected area, apply a cushion to protect their legs from pain.
De inscizio de alguazardenic e de aquo que es nascut de carn ajustada en le huel.	And so apply the cautery to their legs, as needed.
Alcunas veguadas en les huels de alcus es nascuda carn roga, e es sobre-pausada entro que cobre la pupilla, o apropinqua o estrenh sobre las palpebras e fort leu comprem las palpebras a las partidas deforo e es assemblada a roza de balaustra.	The patient's body should be covered during cauterization to prevent pain from spreading through the body.
Mays la operacio en lu es que·l malaute pausa le sieu cap en le tieu se; e aprop obre les huels de aquel e colligeys tota aquela carn am oncis convenientz ad aquo, e te aquo am una forcep o am cesti; e aprop inscindiys la carn el comensament entro que tot sia finit am le encisori, e guarda te del huel que no ledescas aquel deves la tua operacio.	This is the first text in the language of the patient's condition.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscides aquelas o am espatum le qual nos havem recomtat en la inscizio de la ungla, o am petitas forfexs am las quals es colligit ascebel segon que vindra la forma de lu aprop aquest capitol.	And let it be understood that you have placed the cushion on the patient's leg.
Donc cum es complida la tua inscizio e es remauguda tota aquela carn, lahoras omple le huel de sal trissa, o destilla en lu polvera roga e semblantz a lu de las medicinas corrossivas, e pausa sobre le huel deforo coto am album de huou entro que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	When you have finished applying the cushion to the foot, place your hand over the area for which you are using the cushion so that the patient will feel relief.
E si roman alcuna causa de alguardenici e es senhoragat sanc caut, e temes apostema caut, lahoras leyssa le huel e cura aquela apostema am aquo que ceda aquela apostema, e aprop itera sobre aquel am operacio entro que sia sanat, e semblantment fay en la carn ajustada la qual accideys en le huel de aquesta especia.	And if it is necessary to apply heat to the body, the doctor's use of cautery is customary for this.
Mays empero tu cove que alienes tota curacio del huel freul per via natural o per via accidental, obran am ferr, e no metas la tua ma en alcuna de aquestas operacios entro que veges que aquel membre sia suffertant aquela operacio.	Then apply heat to the legs, but always ensure that the affected area is treated naturally or by other means first.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol .xviii. Capitalis, e.g., "Chapter 18."
De colleccio de sabel en le huel.	On the subject of collecting knowledge from the patient's body, they are to be explained by their own proper cause.
Sabel so venas rogas las quals son testudas sobre le huel e prohibeysso al vesement la sua operacio, e develican le huel am longitut de dias.	When the body is stiff from illness, it is difficult to move freely.
Donc necessari es al comensament que tu consideres si le huel en le qual es sabel es fort e en lu no es autra malautia que sabel, lahoras tu colligeys aquel sabel.	Therefore, you must first understand the nature of the ailment before treating gout in the foot.
E es que tu comandes al malaute que pause le sieu cap en le tieu se, e aprop suspen aquelas venas am un onci o am dos segon la tua prudencia; e sia aquel onci de subtil duplicacio segon aquesta forma:	And place your hand over the patient's body to make sure it stays in place.
o so dos oncis gradantment en un cos segon aquesta forma:	And thus you have two parts of the body to consider.
E aprop sian colligidas aquelas venas am forses subtils, am subtilitat, e abstergeys le sanc hora aprop hora, entro que vegas aquelas venas esser remaugudas del huel e sian revolgudas.	Then carefully cauterize the patient's veins.
E guarda te que tu no ledes le huel am las extremitatz del spatum; e si’ la tua operacio en le miegjorn denant le solelh, e sias mot ferm en la tua operacio que no inscidas sino aquelas venas.	And if you have applied cautery to the veins of the foot, do not use it on the other veins.
E quan tu auras complitz, lahoras tu distilla en le huel cief vert o rog per que am sa acuitat corrodesca aquo que es remaugut del sabel.	And then you should apply a poultice to cure the patient's illness.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible colligeys tot en aquela hora, e lahoras tu emplastra tot am aquo que cede la dolor de lu, e leyssa lu per alcus dias entro que sia sedada la dolor de lu e que sia asegurat de apostema caut.	Then place a cushion on which to rest the affected area when you have drawn out the inflammation.
E aprop itera sobre lu segon que la mateyssa manieyra entro que sia sanat.	And then place a second cushion under their legs, and apply pressure to them.
E aquesta es la forma de las forfexs:	And this is the form in which the body is affected by gout.
Capitol .xix.	Chapter .xix.
De reduccio de arizati al nas.	A little bit of blood will come out from the leg when you reduce it.
Quan tu curas arisati am cauteri o am medicina aguda comburent segon que es precedida la narracio de lu e no es sanat, lahoras no es engen en lu sino que fendas sobre le apostema deves la maturitat de lu, e que extraguas tota la humiditat la qual es en lu e·l poyre entro que sia descubert le os.	And if you cure it (the ailment) with a hot iron, it is necessary to place another cushion on it so that the other members are not burned.
E donc cum es descubert le os e vezes en lu corrupcio o negror, lahoras tu ratz lu am un sturment del qual aquesta es la forma:	Therefore, when the bone is exposed and has inflammation or pain, use a cushion to elevate the leg.
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).	And if the foot needs to be treated, apply it carefully, as if it were your own hand you were treating (another use case for the phrase "it's a subtle ailment").
E pausa aquel sobre le loc corrumput del os, e aprop revolveys aquel entre les tieus ditz, e prem la tua ma petit a petit entro que sapias que aquela corropcio es rasa.	And then, place a cushion on the bone or area that has been affected by the cold humors.
E aquo sia fayt alcunas veguadas, e aprop restaura le loc am causas exsiccativas e stipticas.	And then apply the cauterizing tools to treat them.
Donc si·l loc es consolidat e es en lu nascuda bona carn e es abscindit le cors de la sania e roman per xl dias, e no es renovat e no es apostemat e no accideys en lu accident, lahoras tu sapias que es sanat.	And if the pain persists for 40 days, the patient should be considered to have a serious ailment, possibly requiring medical attention.
E sino, lahoras no es en lu engen sino reduzir la fissura a la forma del nas, e segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu descuebras de segon os am ferr o am medicina acuta, e cum sira descubert le os, lahoras tu pren tribo segon aquesta forma:	And if you can't find them, the cushion will be used to show where the pain is located on the leg.
Sia la extramitat de lu ferr triangulada, e·l fust de lu sia prim extenuat entro a la extremitat ayssi cum vezes assi.	The feet are often affected by cold humors, but cauterization should be used carefully.
E aprop pausa aquel sobre le os, e sia aquel prop del lacrimal; e alongua la tua ma un pauc del huel, e aprop revol la tua ma am le tribo entro que penetre tot le os, e aquel sente le malaute per asso que atroba vent yssir per so quan te la sua ma.	Then, place a cushion on the patient's tear ducts to alleviate pain.
Donc lahoras restaura le loc am medicinas stipticas exsiccantz ayssi cum t’e eyssenhat.	Therefore, if the gout attacks are treated with a cauterizing instrument, that is what they do when the disease is in the feet.
Donc cum nays la carn e·l loc es endurazit, lahoras la materia la qual effundia a las partidas deforo retorna al nas, donc aquo es pus leugier sobre le malaute.	Therefore, because the flesh of the body is hardened, one can apply a cushion to the affected area.
Capitol .xx.	Nothing in the provided text suggests that the original meaning should be translated literally.
De reduccio de la eminencia del huel.	And then apply a cushion to the affected area.
Quan le huel emineys am la sua totalitat e no accideys en le vezement nocument ni diminuacio, lahoras cove que laxas le malaute, e aprop que·l segues, e aprop que pausas ventozas en le cervitz ses scarificacio e succa per bona succaccio; e aprop pausa sobre le huel liniment le qual sia fayt de acatra e aloe e enses e sarcocolla, e aprop strenh le emplaustre sobre le huel am motz polvils.	And when joint pain is treated, it is customary to place a cushion under the patient, and to continue applying cushions to the patient's body so that there are no complications or injury.
E la manieyra dels polvils es que prenguas draps de li leons motz, e quascun drap sia duplicat en quatre plecs; e fay de aquels motz.	Then fold the cushion in four folds under the patient's legs.
E aprop pausa aquels la un sobre le autre segon la quantitat de la qual ha le huel necessitat.	Then place a cushion under them, and apply your hand to their legs.
E aprop strenh sobre aquels am drap dur am fort strictura; e itera las ventosas am succio ses scarificacio; e aprop osta las ventosas e leyssa le huel streyt le dia e la nueyt.	And apply hot cupping on their legs; another method for the thighs.
Mays si entretant le liguament es mollificat, lahoras cove que sia mot streyt.	Then apply a bandage to the joint and hold it straight.
E aprop osta le liament aprop le dia e la nueyt ayssi cum havem dit.	And then if it is necessary to use a cushion under their legs as they are mentioned to be used.
E si vezes le huel ja esser redusit, bo es, e sino, lahoras itera le emplastre am les polvils e la strictura e las ventosas entro que sia sanat.	If the pain persists in the legs, cushion it and use heat to relieve it.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De la inscizio de la eminencia de la tunica uvea.	Then place a cushion under their thighs, if they are to be treated.
Quan endeve disrupcio en la tunica uvea, e aprop es eminent e procezeys fora las palpebras ayssi cum un gra de rasim, e es orrazada la forma de home per aquo, e vols aquo inscidir, lahoras la operacio en lu es ayssi cum havem recomtat, que tu entrometas la agula en la razitz de la uvea de la partida dejos en la partida desus, e aprop met la agula autra en la qual sia fil doble de la part del lacrimal, e fay aquela penetrar e leyssa la primieyra agula segon la sua disposicio; e aprop inscideys le loc del fiel doble e leva am aquel la partida de la uvea en le circuit de la agula, e strenh aquela mot.	This appears to be a description of a medical procedure, possibly for treating an injury or illness.
E aprop extratz la agula e pausa sobre le huel lana infusa en album de huou e leyssa entro que cayha le fil am la uva.	Then place another cushion on the foot to prevent further bleeding.
E aprop cura le huel am aquo que conforte aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And by using cushions, the pain in the legs may be soothed.
E alcunas veguadas aduna de tota partida am cercle de drap entro le huel ajuste eminencia gran, e aprop sia perforat am le spatum subtil que vengua al preon del huel, e corra la humiditat albuginea, e descen le huel e intra tantost.	And if the humors are heated, the patient's hands should be kept warm with a cloth.
E aprop strenh entro que sia sanat.	Let the patient's bowels be covered, and another be placed on their legs.
Capitol .xxii.	Another hand could be placed on the chest or thighs of the patient.
De curacio de alconati.	This is about the treatment of their wounds.
Aquesta malautia que es apelada alconati no es sino sania la qual es ajustada en le huel semblant a aygua dessendent e no es aquela.	This illness is called gout, and it affects the body in specific ways.
Mays la manieyra del obrar en ela es que fasses le malaute sezer sobre la sela aparelada e dreyta, e aprop pren le cap sieu en las tuas mas de doas partz e mau aquel entro que veias la sania pervenir a las partidas dejos, e aprop sia siccada e no descenda, e sia ostat le lum, e·l malaute veia las causas ayssi cum vezia.	And so you treat the patient's illness by applying a cushion to the affected area, and you use it as a remedy for the ailment.
E si no descendra en jos, sapias que es aygua.	And if it doesn't descend below, apply a cautery to them, and apply your hand to the area below the other.
Mays si no es preparat le descendement a la sania am aquo que havem dit, lahoras fay le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e aprop pren spatum subtil e fen am aquel sobre le pannicol cernent un petit deves la continuacio de la conjunctiva am la tunica cornea en la corona (entro al loc vuet), entro que sia fora-getada la sania.	Mays is a good thing to know.
Donc cum es fora-getada, lahoras tu distilla en le huel aygua cauda en la qual has mesclat mel o aygua en la qual ja has bulit fenugrec e mel.	And so if you have already opened the area affected by the illness, you should use hot water to treat it.
E aprop sia curat am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	And if it is treated, then it should be healed.
Capitol .xxii.	Another hand is placed on the patient's chest, preventing them from moving.
De la curacio de la aygua descendent del huel.	This refers to the treatment or cure of the ailment.
Ja havem dit las specias de la aygua en la divisio e qual conveneys a perforar am sermo declarant, lahoras aquel segon la sanetat.	Now you must apply your knowledge to the treatment of the patient's ailments.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas sobre un cayrat e lia le sieu huel sa, lu mot stringent.	Then you will apply a cautery to the foot's location to reduce inflammation.
E aprop pausa prop de la palpebra del sieu huel la tua ma senestra, si le huel en le qual es l’aygua es le huel senestra; o am la tua ma dreyta, si le huel es le dextre.	And if the pain is in the left eye, it is best to use the left hand; if the pain is elsewhere in the body, then the right.
E aprop am la tua ma dextra pren almagda, si le huel es senestre; o am la tua ma senestra, si le huel es de dreyt.	and then the other side of the body is treated in the same way.
E aprop pausa la extremitat de almagda prop de la corona per la grossesa del ray en le album del huel de part del mendre lacrimal, e aprop enpelleys almagda am vertut e revol la tua ma am aquel.	And if the body's pain is relieved by the doctor's touch, place your hand on the patient's limb to help.
E aprop penetre en le album del huel e sentas que almagda ja es pervenguda a causa vueda.	Then place your hand on the foot to prevent further infiltration by the joint pain.
E cove que sia la masura del cami de almagda al preon la mesura del spazi le qual es de la pupilla entro a la fi de la negror, e es la corona del huel; quar tu veyras am aquel pupilla am la visio de l’huel per la clartat de la tunica cornea.	The first line translates to:
E aprop pausa almagda entro al loc en le qual es l’aygua, e aprop tu la atira en jos una veguada aprop autra, e donc si la aygua descen tantost, lahoras vetz le malaute aquo sobre le qual huebre la sua vista tantost, e almagda en le sieu huel.	And if the pain persists, use a poultice on the affected area.
E aprop repausa se un pauc; donc si la aygua es descenduda, lahoras tu depausa aquela autre veguada abantz que almagda ne sia getada.	Therefore, if you have made a few punctures, then place another cushion on their legs to prevent the inflammation from spreading.
E donc quan es sicada e no descen, lahoras tu extrat almagda am facilitat, e revol am aquel la tua ma pauc a pauc, e aprop dissolveys en l’aygua un petit de sal clara de gemma e am aquela lava le huel dedintz; e aprop pausa fora le huel coto o stopa o lana infusa en oli rozat e album de huou e ligua am aquo le huel sa.	And thus, you will know when a patient has been affected by the illness.
Mays nos e aquels que so de nostre temps pause sobre aquel comi trissat am album de huou.	The patient suffers from gout in his foot.
E si no obezeys a tu almagda al intrament de l’huel per la sua duricia — quar es alcu dels homes del qual le huel es dur mot —, lahoras cove que prenguas le spatum le qual es nompnat alberid del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if you are not obese, or your body's humors are unbalanced, use these methods to treat it.
E donc perfora am aquel aquela conjunctura, e no ultimes la tua ma en le trauc, e no es si no que fassas via ad almagda loc subtil.	And therefore, you should apply a poultice to that which is the cause of pain in the joint, and keep it closed by placing your hand on top.
E aprop entromet almagda segon que havem dit.	And then apply the cautery accordingly.
E deves le compliment de la tua obra, sia preparat al malaute dormitori descentment fayt en le qual dorma sobre le sieu dos en mayson tenebrosa, e sia prohibit de totz movementz .	When it comes to the patient's body, apply a cushion and prepare for its use by using a hot cautery.
E pausa en la natura de lu aquo per que sia linida la sua natura, e no maugua le sieu cap a la partida dreyta ni senestra de tot.	And if one needs to stop the flow of blood from the body, then apply a cautery to the affected area.
E sia le liament segon la sua disposicio entro al tertz dia.	And for the patient who has not yet been treated for their condition, it should be applied to the third day.
E aprop deslia aquel en aquela maysso tenebrosa e exproha la freol vista, e fay li vezer alcunas causas, e aprop retorna le liament entro al dia .vii.	Then apply the other cushion to their legs, and another one to their body, and hold the opening of the wound closed.
E no cove que fassas aquo en la hora de las curacios o tantost aprop la infusio.	And then apply the hot iron to the affected area, if necessary, to treat the inflammation.
Habantz cove que tu alienes aquo per so quar la aygua puega leugierament per gran e vehement de reguardament.	And if you have already opened the space between the thighs, use light cautery there.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que deslias le huel denant le vii dia, e rectifica aquel am aquo que ceda apostema.	And if an abscess appears in the body, it is treated by cauterizing it.
Lahoras tu absol la vista de lu e pausa sobre la cara de lu oral per le qual sia regit le vezement de lu dejos lu per alcus dias, lu existent en la mayszo tenebrosa.	When the pain is severe, they should place a cautery on the face and a cushion between their thighs.
E aprop sia gitat de aquela mayzo gradantment e conversa8 en las suas causas.	And the doctor will know what to do about the rest of their treatment.
E sapias que in alchatea no es excusat le discipol de visio alcunas veguadas, e lahoras tu sias ardit sobre la operacio.	The disciple is not exempt from the operation if it is necessary to cauterize the skin or use leeches.
E ja es pervengut a nos de alcu de aquels les quals so al Artach , e alcu disse que fayt foc en al Ayrac magdaam perforat am le qual es succada la aygua.	And so has already been applied to the body of the patient, and if you want to make a burn on their thigh, they should be burned
Mays empero yeu non e vist degu en la nostra terra le qual haia perfeyt aquo, ni e aquo legit en alcu dels libres dels antics; e es possible que aquo sia novel.	And perhaps you have never seen a cushion be used for a joint pain treatment.
E aquestas so las formas de las specias de magdaan per que sia sobre aquelas aquel le qual ignora aquelas:	And these are the types of illnesses caused by the imbalance of humors.
E sian faytas de eram o de ferr propriament, e sian las extramitatz de lor am aquesta subtilitat triangulada, la extremitat aguda ayssi cum aquela es la forma.	When the patient's legs are open, they are placed on their back, so that the body part may be treated by the physician.
Capitol .xxiv.	Capitol .xxiv. translates to **Chapter 24**.
De la curacio de carn nada en le nas.	Then, apply a bandage to the wound.
Quan en le nas so nascudas carns diversas ajustadas de las quals es alcuna causa la qual es assemblada a scorpio de motz pes, o a polip peys; e aquesta malautia es apelada polipus quar es a semblansa de aquel peys representat.	This describes other ailments that resemble scorpion-like growths in the nose or polyps; this disease resembles a swelling or growth in the nose, which may be due to a variety of causes.
E de lu es carn cancrosa, lapadea, de fusca color; e de lu es que es carn leon no de color fusca.	And if the patient has flesh that is cancerous, it is a condition where the flesh is inflamed and red; if it is pale in color, it is a sign of a different nature, such as a tumor or abscess.
Donc en aquela que es en aquestas carns leon no fraudulenta ni cancroza, cove que fassas le malaute sezer entre las tuas mas e posat al solelh, e huebre las nars de lu, e picoys le tieu onci en aquelas carns.	Therefore, if you want to do something about the pain in the patient's body.
E aprop extrat aquela a las partidas deforo, e aprop inscindeys aquo que has comprehendut de aquelas am spatum agut subtil de la una partida entro que sapias que tota la carn ja es ostada; que si roman de lu deguna causa de la qual la abscisio es possibla, lahoras tu ratz aquo am la un dels estrumentz subtils am facilitat entro que de lu romangua denguna causa.	When there's a need to reduce pain in the foot, apply pressure on the area where the pain is.
Mays si senhoreja am sanc o accida apostema caut, lahoras tu pausa a lu aquo que cove; o es dels apostemas malignes, lahoras tu coyta e cauteriza aquel entro que sia abscindit sanc e sian ostadas las cavas totas.	This is a sign of illness, put your hand on their foot and apply a treatment to the leg and another to the affected areas.
E aprop sia getatz en le nas aprop la inscizio vi agre e aygua o vi.	And then place something in the cavity near the nose.
Mays si le nas es ubert e de lu procezeys humiditat entro al palat, lahoras sapias que ja es sanat.	Mays si le nas are you already have been treated for a while and still feel pain in the sinuses.
Mays si la humiditat no penetra segon que cove, lahoras tu sapias que dedintz lu es carn nada en los pus sobiras osses de las nars als quals non es pervengut abscizio.	And if the humour does not flow as it should, then it is called gout by physicians, and it is what they say they have to do with their body.
Donc lahoras cove que entromitas fiel de li al qual sia alcuna grosseza, e nuza en lu motz nuzes, e pausa entre quascun nutz la quantitat del dit o mens, e engene le malaute e entromet una extremitat del fiel en le nars am lo ray o am autra causa la qual es a lu possibla.	A person suffering from swelling or pain in the joints is treated for that condition by doctors who are experienced in dealing with such things, which is known as treating a case of gout.
E pus que aquo aura fayt, que atire le sieu odorament entro que pervengua a las canals de las nars, e sia eyssit sobre le sieu golayro, quar tropas veguadas le semblant ad aquesta accio fan les enfantz a las scolas, e es leugiera causa ad aquel que ho vol far.	E then put your hand on the patient's foot, so that the painful inflammation does not extend to the rest of the body.
E aprop pausa las dos extramitatz del fiel, una extremitat que iesca sobre le nas et l’autra que romangua en le nas, e aprop aministra serratura de carn am les nuzes que so en le fiel, e fay aquo entro que sapias que las carn ja so am les nuzes del fiel.	Here comes the translation of the first line: This is a bit tricky, but it seems to be describing a medical procedure.
E aprop extratz le fiel, e pausa en le nas aprop la abstraccio del sanc una calgua , e fay aquo per tres dias o mays entro que l’enguent corrodo tot aquo que es romas de las carns.	And if it is necessary to remove the venom from the flesh:
E aprop en la fi de la causa, pausa en le nas una canula de plom per alscus jorns entro que sia sanat.	Then apply a cushion to the affected area for treatment.
Mays si endigeys de curacio que exsique, usa de aquela.	Then use a hot cushion for treatment.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument a capipurge fazedor am le qual son distillatz olis e medicinas en le nars:	E aquesta lu purgantz ye'n tengas de los met:
E fay aquo de argent o de eram, la qual sia semblant a una petita lampesa uberta, ayssi cum petita conqua, e le meat semblantment.	And if the metal is silver or gold, it is called a silver or gold-like inflammation.
E si vols, fay una canula clausa ayssi cum cana, e la cancula del estrument a capipurge fazedor e sia plana, descuberta; a la qual sia manubre en lo derier de lu, am le qual tenguas aquela quan escaufas en lu oli o aquo que tu vols dels sucs e de las causas suctiblas.	If you are burning anything that's hot, use a canula to make a hole in the body of the patient, and apply the cautery there.
E aquestz capipurgi es precios: recipe de enforbi de castor, de balayra blanc, de giengiebre, e piletre de safra, de pebre lonc, de escafragia, de epetum de spic ana unc. vi cumfizeys am suc de bleda e de caul, e sian faytas pillulas, e sia destemprada una pillula am aygua tebeza, e sia gitat en las nars del malaute jasent envers.	And this is how this remedy is made: with a mixture of castor oil, camphor, ginger, and saffron.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De theyls natz en las extramitatz del nas.	And if you see a red mark on the face near the eye, then call that a tear.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.	They are putting a poultice on the legs of the patient.
E per aquo cove que tu inscidas aquel en le comensament de la apparissio de lu, e erediques tot aquel.	And if you wish to know how to make a cushion for the foot, you should use your hand to apply it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc o cauteri o medicina comburent la qual estia en loc de lu.	And if it is necessary, apply a poultice to it.
Mays si es tardada la sua inscizio entro que sia magnificat, lahoras considera si es lapificat, dur, de fusca color e de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr quar es apostema crancos; quar motas veguadas ad aquel que inscideys aquesta apostema endeve per lu granda malicia sobre aquel le qual aquel havia.	Then, if the pain is caused by other things besides the cold humors, the patient should be treated for those.
E si le apostema es de leon tocament e no es de fosca color, e vezes que inscizio es possibla en tot aquel, lahoras evacua le malaute e inscideys aquel senes temor, e cura le loc am aquo que exsique e costrenh entro que sia sanat.	When applying a cautery to the affected area, it is customary to use a cushion on their chest to prevent pain.
Capitol .xxvi.	E aprop reduce la partz del metges e jus li ha de dir.
De sutura del nas e de las labias e de la aurelha quan la continuitat es dissolvuda per plagua o per semblantz.	And if there is a wound on the nose or lips, hold the patient's hands to prevent them from being touched.
Sapias que quan accideys solucio de continuitat en una de aquestas cartillages, pauc confereys en aquela operacio sino en alcus homes.	You know that in this case, only a few people are involved in such an operation.
Donc cove, quan endeve ad alcu alcuna causa de aquelas, que consideres si es plagua fresca am le sieu sanc, e lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if the plague is present in the patient, treat them with a cushion under their chest and another on the legs, and then apply it to the wound if it is in the area of the thigh.
E si las labias de solucio de continuitat so ja separadas, e quascuna es fayta sana, lahoras cove que tu excorjes quascuna partida de la sua codena apparent entro que n’iesca sanc.	And if the joints are already separated, they may be treated with a poultice and cauterization.
E aprop ajusta las doas labias am sutura e strenh aquelas, e sobre aquelas pulveriza sanc de drago e enses trissat, e pausa sobre la polvera una pessa de emplaustra diafinicon, o de alcu autre dels emplastres consolidatius, e leyssa aquel liat per dos jorns o per tres, e aprop deslia aquel e permuta aquel emplaustre e leyssa aquel entro que·ls fiels per si sian abscinditz, e aprop cura am enguent entro que sia sanat.	Adjust the two lairs of the patient's body, and place on them a bandage and apply a poultice to the affected area.
Mays la manieyra de la sutura es que tu agregues la solucio de continuitat o am agulhas ayssi cum havem recomtat en la sutura del ventre, o agregua la solucio de continuitat am fiel ayssi cum a tu e fayt saber.	When the patient has a cushion under their thighs, a surgeon can be used to sew up the wound.
Capitol .xxvii.	Then apply the appropriate cautery to the affected area.
De extraccio de aquela causas que veno en las doas labias en las partidas dedintz.	When bloodletting is needed on your legs, use a cushion to protect them.
Motas veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.	The pain affects some people's hands more severely than others, and there are many variations in the severity of symptoms.
Donc cove que tu convertas las labias e fendas quascuna de aquelas duricias de tota part, e aprop la abscizio umpliscas le loc de sagi trissat entro que·l sanc sia restrengut, e aprop sia lavat am vi agre e sia curat le loc am aquo que es stipticitat, entro que sia sanat.	And so that you may know that if you have an injury to the foot or other parts, it is best to cauterize the wound, applying a cushion to the thighs and another to the area around the wound.
Capitol .xxviii.	**Capitol .xxviii.  is translated as Chapter 28.**
De inscizio de la carn ajustada en las gengivas.	"This means that the gums are swollen."
Granre de veguadas nays sobre la gengiva carn ajustada la qual les antics apelero albulus, adonc cove que tu suspendas aquela am onci o que tenguas aquela am las forfecs e inscidas aquela deves la sua razit, e leyssas la sania correr o le sanc.	A large number of doctors used to think that pain in the feet was caused by the humors already being present in the body.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc sagi trissat o autra polveras stipticas o excicativas.	And then apply a poultice to the area.
E si aquela carn retorna, lahoras inscideys aquela segundariament, e cauterisa aquela, quar aprop le cauteri no retornara.	Then cauterize that flesh, and if necessary, use a cushion to prevent you from injuring a second area.
Capitol .xxix.	In the xxixth chapter.
De razo de dentz am ferr.	Then apply a cushion to their teeth.
Quan en la superficia de las dentz de las partidas dedintz e de las de foro e entre las gingivas so ajustadas escorsas aspras, legas, e alcunas veguadas son de nigradas e son faytas citrinas o vertz entro que a la gingiva ve per aquo corrupcio e son faytas las dentz legas.	When you are working on the teeth on the surface of the body, they should be treated by a dentist, otherwise known as a dental surgeon.
E donc cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute entre las tuas mas e pausar le cap de lu en le tieu se, e ratz las dents en las quals apareysso aquelas escorsas e causas semblantz arena entro que de lor no romangua deguna causa, e aquo fay de la negror e de la citrinitat e de las autras entro que sian mondificadas.	And then place a cushion under the patient's legs and apply heat to their body.
Donc si es ostat aquo que es en aquelas del comensament de la razio, bo es; e sino, lahoras tu itera la razio sobre aquelas al autra dia e al segon e al tertz entro que vengua al derier stament en aquo que tu vols.	If you have a cushion under your arms, you should apply it to the affected area.
E sapias que las dentz han necessitat de motz rezoris de diversas formas e de motas figuras segon que es preparat a la tua operacio.	And you know that the patient's teeth are the ones that are treated by them as they are accustomed to using a cushion for their feet.
E per so quar le razori am le qual la dent es raza de la partida dedintz es autre del razori am le qual es ras entre las dentz segon autras formas, e aquestas formas de razoris sian deves tu preparadas las quals veyras tantost:	E per cushion the intestines or other organs that are protruding from the body.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol .xxx. is the Latin-based translation for the following text:
D’eradicacio de dentz.	On the eradication of teeth.
Cove que tu cures la dent de la sua dolor am tot engen e tardes en tota eradicacio de lu, quar no es denguna causa que suplisqua la veguada de lu quan es eradicada, quar es sustancia sublima entro que es excusacio en la eradicacio de lu.	When the intestines are being treated for pain by removing them, it was a sign that you are a skilled doctor.
Mays cove quan le malaute es forsat aquela dent eradicar, que fermament deves tu sia certificat quala es la dent dolent, quar motas veguadas la dolor descep le malaute e cuga que sia en dent sana, e tu eradicas aquela e aprop la dolor no cessa entro que la dent malauta e dolent sia eradicada, quar nos ja havem vist aquo per operacio dels barbies.	When the tooth extraction is complete, you should apply a cushion to the affected area.
Donc cum deves tu es sertificat qual es la dent dolent, e que o sabes be, lahoras cove que tu scarifiques en le circuit de la dent am spatum en le qual sia alcuna vertut, entro que sia dissolvut de la dent de la gingiva de tota partida, e aprop mau aquel am les tieus ditz, o am forfexs subtils al comensament petit a petit entro que aquela concucesquas.	And if you have to pull teeth, start by making small incisions around the tooth and then place a cushion under your hand so the intestine doesn’t come out.
E aprop alogua en lu fortz tenalhas grans per bona loquacio o estuptura fort, e pausa le cap del malaute entre les tieus denolhs que be le tengues que no·s maugua, e aprop tratz la dent segon rectitut en manieyra que no trenques aquela, ni al malaute major dolor no dones.	And if you wish to cauterize the leg or the bowels.
E donc si no es foro-getat, lahoras pren un de aquels instrumentz, e met aquel dejos lu de tota part am facilitat e esforsa la remocio de lu ayssi que es feyt al comensament.	And thus if there is no other way to heal, it's customary for doctors to use a hot iron to remove something from the patient's body.
Mays si la dent es trauquada o corrosa, lahoras cove que tu comples de drap aquel trauc e estrenguas aquel am la extremitat de ray subtil per so que no sia trinquada en la hora de la tua constriccio sobre aquela am tenalas.	This sentence describes the use of a cushion in treating a toothache.
E cove que tu obres exquesitament am scarificacio en le circuit de tota part de la gingiva e guarda mot la tua fortaleza que no trenques aquela e romangua partida de lu, e retorne sobre le malaute per la malicia que sia majo que la primieyra dolor de lu.	And if you have to work hard on the patient's gums because of pain.
E guarda te que no fassas aquo que fan alscus ignorantz barbiers en lor fistinacio e audacia sobre la eradicacio de lor, ses que no aministran aquo que nos havem recomtat; quar motas veguadas fan venir sobre les homes malautias grans las quals son pus dificils que sian trinquadas, e las razitz de lor remaugudas totas, o alcunas de aquelas, o que extrayguas aquela am alcus osses de la mandigula ayssi cum motas veguadas havem testificat.	And if you are treating someone for an ailment that prevents them from riding their horse in ignorance.
E aprop la eradicacio de lu sia lavada la boca am vi caut o vi agre am sal.	And if the patient needs to be treated with cauterization, then do so by applying a cushion to their legs.
E si endeve fluxs de sanc per aysso, ayssi cum motas veguadas endeve, lahoras trissa alcuna quantitat de zegi e aspergeys sobre la plagua, e si no confereys aquel zegi, cauteriza.	Then apply heat to the affected area, and the body will be warmed by the application of the cushion.
La forma de las forceps e tenalas subtils am las quals es mauguda la dent al comensament sia de longua extramitat, de breu manubre e gros, per so que no sian doblatz quan am aquels deves obrar.	When using forceps or tongs on the feet, be careful not to damage the skin or cause further harm.
E sian ayssi cum vezes de gros manubre entro que quan estrenhas am aquelas no sian dobladas, sian breus extramitatz.	And if you are going to use the fire on them, good for the other servant.
E sian faytas de ferr de India descentment faytas de dreytas extramitatz, e en las extramitatz de aquelas sian dentz de las quals las unas intron en las autras e estrenhan per constriccio descent fort, e alscunas veguadas las extramitatz de aquelas sian la forma del bec d’un auzel le qual ha nom ciconia, so es guanta, e son de fort constriccio.	And if they are experiencing pain from the use of tools or weapons from India.
Capitol .xxxi.	Of the pain that can be caused by the humors you should know how to treat it.
De erradicacio de dentz e d‘estraccio dels osses de las mandibulas trincadas.	And if you have to remove a tooth or extract bones from a fractured jaw.
Quan deves la eradicacio de dent le qual es trinquat roman alcuna causa, lahoras cove que tu pauses sobre le loc coto am boder per un jorn o per dos entro que·l loc sia mollificat; e aprop entromet algesti o tenalhas las extramitatz de las quals so asembladas al bec de un auzel apelat ciconia o guanta, la forma de las forceps:	When you pull out a tooth, if it is one that has been pulled out, the patient will need to be in a state of controlled pain.
Las extramitatz de lor sian faytas dedintz ayssi cum lima o alfagi.	When they have pain in their legs.
E si no obediys a tu a eyssiment am aquestas forceps o tenalas, lahoras cove que tu caves sobre la razit e descrobas tota la carn e entrometas le instrument le qual ha nom atali, so es palanca petita del qual la forma es aquesta:	And if you don't have good control of the patient's pain with forceps, you can use these tools to help them.
E sia de breu extremitat grossa un petit, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And if your small intestine or bowels are inflamed, apply heat to the affected area.
Donc si per aquo la razit es foro-getada, bo es; e sino, ajuda te am aquestz autres instrument dels quals aquestas son las formas: la forma del primier instrument es de triangulada extramitat en la qual sia alcuna grossesa:	And if you have already opened the place where the pain is.
La forma del segon instrument es que sia de triangulada e de pus subtil extremitat.	Then make sure the second instrument is triangular and very fine.
E ja so ajudatz am aquest instrument havent dos ramps del qual aquesta es la forma aprop la seguent:	And then there are two assistants who stand by each side of the patient, ready to assist.
e am autres instrumentz les quals precidero en rasura de dentz; quar juvament es fayt am aquest instrument le qual es asemblat a onci gran, e aquesta es la forma:	And if the patient's teeth are affected by other ailments, these are the tools used to treat them.
de la triangulada extremitat torta o curta, la qual sia alcuna grossesa, e no sia enbegut per so que no sia trinquat.	And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the affected area.
E otra sapias que·ls instrumentz de las dentz motz so e semblantment les autres instruments.	And then you apply cauteri to other parts of the body, as well.
Mays le artifexs savi e subtil en l’art, atroba per si mateys segon aquo que a lu significa la operacio e las malautias diversas; quar son de las malautias a las quals les antics no diysero ni pausero propri instrument, per las formas de diversas specias.	The ancients believed that the type of illness was indicated by the location of the pain.
Mays si es trinquat l’os de la mandibula o dels autres osses de la boca, o si poyreys, lahoras sia pes curat sobre aquel en son loc am aquo que es a lu convenient dels instrumentz e de las forceps las quals havem dit en la extraccio de las razitz de las dentz, e ajuda te am gesti del qual aquesta es la forma:	Then when the foot has been made to be pierced or another on their legs, these are the instruments that are used for them: a knife for cutting, and forceps for holding the bone in place so that it will not move during extraction.
E sia en lu alcuna grosseza petit a petit, e sia instringida o tenguda am la boca per que no evasesca o fuga entro que l’os de tot sia foro-getat; e aprop restaura le loc am medicinas convenientz ad aquo.	And so that the swelling in the foot subsides, apply a bandage after cauterization.
Mays si en l’os es petita poyredura, lahoras ratz aquel de aquela poyredura e de la sua negror, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if someone suffers from a disease caused by humors being out of balance, then it is a good idea to use hot needles on them in order to cure the illness.
Capitol .xxxii.	Gout is caused by an imbalance of humors in the body, particularly when the patient's legs are affected.
De la cura de las dentz eminentz sobre las autras.	And from the treatment of the teeth, the patient will be treated by others.
Quan las dentz so eminentz no segon lor cors natural per aquelas la forma es laga, e majorment quan endeve a las femnas, e majorment a las piuselas venerablas; donc cove que tu consideras: si dent es nada aprop autra dent, e no es possibla sarradura ni linament de lu, lahoras radica aquela; mays que no sia annexa am autra dent, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am aquest instrument del qual aquesta es la forma; e es semblant a morr de porc, e sia feyt de ferr de India de extramitat mot aguda.	Then burn the affected area should they have no other ailment, but if they do, call for a doctor, who will be able to tell you what to do.
E sia la tua inscizio am la qual inscideyses aquela en trops dias per la duricia de la dent, e que no sia comauguda autra de las dentz.	E que tua another day to apply their hands on the patient's teeth.
E si es dent eminent expausat a limadura, lahoras lima aquel am lima de ferr de India del qual aquesta es la forma:	Translation 4: When the pain is caused by a stone or bone that protrudes from the body, we must remove the stone or by a tool.
E sia tot de ferr de India e·l margua eysament; e sia de motz menutz puntz ayssi cum lima am la qual son faytas agulhas, am la qual la dent sia limada pauc a pauc en motz dias am fecilitat, per so que no sia autra dent comauguda e caga.	Then place your hand on the patient's feet to prevent pain from spreading to other parts of the body.
E aprop lineys aquela en la fi, e ratz aquela am alscus razoris.	And then the body, and the soul of the body is healed, and the person is given a cushion to place under them.
E si es dent del qual una partida es trinquada e lideys la lengua, lahoras cove que tu limescas aquel entro que l’aspretat de aquela fraccio sia ostada e engualhada, e sia aplenada per so que la lengua no ledesca ni la paraula no corrumpa.	And you should treat the tongue with another type of cautery so that the other part of the body can be healed.
Capitol .xxxiii.	And if it is necessary to treat the pain caused by a physician.
De restauracio de dentz maugudas am fiel de aur o de argent.	Then apply the gold or silver ointment to their legs already affected by the condition.
Quan accideys a las dentz devant concussio e remossio per percussio o per cazament, e le malaute no pot strenher sobre aquo que manga, e tu has curat aquel am medicinas stipticas, e no ha valgut la tua curacio, lahoras per so que no cagan es engen en aquelas que sian strengudas am fiel de aur e no de argent, quar argent se fa vert e aprop se poyreys aprop alscus dias, mays aur nul temps no es mudat.	And if the patient has a wound on the knee or other such parts of the body they are treated with cauterization by a doctor who knows the proper way to apply it.
E sia le fiel en tal subtilitat e grocesa segon la quantitat que puesca entrar entre las dentz; e la forma de la reccio es que prenguas le fiel e pren lo doble de lu entre doas dentz sanas, e aprop que cresques am doas tortuositatz del fiel entre doas maugudas, o si’ una o motas, entro que pervengua la tela a la dent sana del autra partida.	and apply the cautery to the affected joint(s) using a hot needle.
E aprop itera le teyssiment entro a la partida de la qual comenciest, e strenh la tua ma am facilitat e savieza entro que no sia mauguda.	Apply leysment to the affected area, if necessary.
E sia la tua striccio am la qual strenhas le fiel deves las razitz de las dentz que no evasesca.	And so you must apply a cushion to their foot that will prevent the pain from spreading.
E aprop inscindeys las extramitatz del fiel superfluens am las forceps o tosoyras, e agregua aquelas en quascun loc am gesti, e converteys aquelas e las occulta entre la dent sana e la dent mauguda, per so que no fassa lesio a la lengua.	The patient's body is treated by applying forceps to hold them in place and use of a hot cautery to remove the excess humors.
E aprop leyssa aquela ayssi streyta cum roman.	And place a cushion on their legs.
Mays si es desliada o rumpuda, strenh aquela o aquelas am autra fiel en tal manieyra en tot son temps.	And you have to be careful with the foot so that it does not become swollen or ruptured.
E aquesta es la forma de las dentz e la figura de la rectacio de doas dentz sanas e de doas maugudas, ayssi cum vezes aquestas liadas:	And if you see two humors from the same person, then put your hand on their head and say "This is the way to do it."
E quan se fa que retorno una dent o doas aprop le cazement de quascuna en lors locs, e sian recrescutz ayssi cum havem recomtat, e que remauguan.	And then they are burned by the cauterization.
E no fa aquo sino bo artifexs e savi.	And so, it is called gout if the pain occurs in the legs.
E alcunas veguadas es aptat alcuna causa dels osses de vaca, e es fayt de lor ayssi cum forma de dent, e es pausada en loc en le qual defayl la dent, e es strengit ayssi cum havem dit, e reman e serveys am aquel per lonc temps.	And if a member is affected by a pain caused by cold humors, and that pain is in their foot, then they are said to have the gout.
Capitol .xxxiv.	Then apply the poultice or cautery to the affected area on their feet.
De inscizio del liament le qual ve en la lengua e prohibeys loquela.	And from the ligament which is connected to their feet by the tongue.
Aquest liguament le qual ve dejos la lengua alcunas veguadas o es natural am le qual hom nays, o accidental e accideys per plagua la qual ja es consolidada.	This sentence appears to be about ligaments and their potential role in causing pain.
E la operacio en lu es que huobres la boca del malaute, le sieu cap existent en le tieu se; e eleva la sieua lengua, e aprop inscideys aquel liament nervos segon la latitut entro que sia solvuda la lengua de la sua recencio.	Let the patient be treated with cauterization for the treatment of their condition.
Mays si en aquela es alcuna duricia o denodacio, e aquo es stat per consolidacio de plagua, lahoras tu gieta unci e scindeys aquel per la latitut entro que aias inscindit le liament e sia dissolvuda la nodacio.	If the patient experiences pain in the joints or has a gouty condition, the doctor will be careful to avoid confusing their symptoms.
E guarda te que no sia fayta fissura en le preon de la carn e que scindas aqui arceria e vengua flux de sanc.	If you are careful, the pain in the foot will be eased.
E aprop sia lavat le vestigi de la inscisio am ayguaros o am vi agre o am aygua frega; e aprop pausa dejos la lengua licini; so es meca la qual tengua le malaute dejos la lengua en quascuna nuoyt per so que no sia consolidat autra veguada.	And if necessary, apply a poultice to the affected limb after the initial treatment.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc, pausa sobre le loc vetriol trissat; mays si le sanc ventz, lahoras cauteriza le loc am cauteri lantiginos le qual conveneys ad aquo.	This describes what a physician should do if a patient has a blockage in the intestines due to gout.
E aprop aquel cura am las autras causas entro que sia sanat.	Then place it on their legs, so that the pain does not spread.
Capitol .xxxv.	This refers to gout, which is a form of arthritis.
De extraccio de ranula dejos la lengua.	Then apply the same cushion on their feet.
Alcunas veguadas accideys dejos la lengua apostema asemblant a nomla petita prohibent la lengua de la sua operacio natural; e fort leu es magnificada entro que huempla la boca.	And if the pain is severe, apply another cauterization to the area; otherwise, it is a simple gout.
E la operacio en lu es que huebras la boca del malaute sesent devant le solel e considera le apostema.	Then apply the treatment to the patient's legs.
E si tu le vezes de fusca color o de negra, dur, al qual le malaute no atroba sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel quar es cranc.	And if the pain is in the foot, and it's felt in the feet, and the person has a sharp pain, place a cushion under their foot, so that they can no longer feel the pain.
E si es declinat a blancor, en le qual es humiditat, lahoras tu met le onci en lu, e inscideys aquel am spatum subtil, e inscindeys le de tota partida; e si sanc te ventz en la hora de la tua operacio, lahoras tu pausa desus zegi trissat, so es vetriol, entro que sia restreyt le sanc.	E si es, that is, if you must do a cushion for his/her grief.
E aprop retorna a la obra tua entro que lo haias trayt am compliment de lu, entro que sia lavat am vi agre e sal; e cura aquel am l’autra curacio ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the appropriate remedies to restore your health to its proper state.
Capitol .xxxvi.	The meaning of "Capitol .xxxvi." depends on the context. It could refer to a section or chapter number in a book or treatise.
De extraccio de apostema de doas aurelhas e de aquel que es nada en le golayro e de las autras apostemas.	This describes how to treat an injury if you need to use the information for treatment in the future, you can refer back to this text.
Quan endeveno en le golayro godat, so son glandulas las quals son asembladas algodat, las quals accideysso deforas e son nompnadas doas aurelhas, las quals quan tu las curas am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no es sanat, lahoras tu considera si le apostema es dur, de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, lahoras no toques aquel am ferr.	When the patient's body has been afflicted by the fire of illness, such as the throat, you must place a hot iron on their neck, to apply cautery to the affected area.
E si es de roga color e la razic es grossa, lahoras no toques aquela am ferr per le flux del sanc; abantz layssa aquel entro sia madurat, e lahoras o tu trauqueras aquel, o sira romput per si.	And if the pain is severe in the legs, do not touch them; they are only to be treated with a poultice on the affected area.
E si es de blanqua color, radon, e la razit de lu es subtil, lahoras aquel es que cove esser inscidit.	When one needs to cauterize an area, such as if there's pain in the foot.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras, denant la tua operacio, si ja ha repausat le apostema de lu caut am repaus complit o si es deminuit am alcuna deminucio; e lahoras fay sezer le malaute denant le soleyl, e·l cap de lu sia en le tieu se, e huebre la boca de lu, e le servidor prenent entre las suas mas prema la lengua de lu dejos am instrument mot noble del qual aquesta es la forma:	E then you should consider whether the doctor has already treated them for the ailment, so the patient is in their normal state.
E sia fayt de argent o de aram, e sia subtil cum cotel.	And if it is made of silver or iron, use a knife to make them better.
Donc cum tu premes am aquel la lengua e es mostrat a tu la apostema, e catz sobre aquel le tieu vezement, lahoras pren onci e fica aquel en l’amenla, e tira aquel a las partidas defora tant quant podes.	And if the pain is in the legs or feet, it is best to use a hot cautery.
Otra aquo que tiras alcuna causa de las tunicas, e aprop incideys aquela am instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	And so treat them with whatever remedy will address the cause.
e es asemblat a forceps, empero las extramitatz de lu son corvadas, ayssi que l’orrifici de quascuna de aquelas es en le endreyt del autra, mot agudas, le qual sia de ferr indi enbegut.	And if a person has a slight limp or stiffness in their gait, it is called a "forcep" by doctors.
Mays si aquest instrument no es a tu present, lahoras inscideys aquel am spatum del qual aquesta es la forma de lu: E sia agut de la una part, no agut del autra part.	And if a cautery is present, apply it to the bowels so that they are kept in their place.
E pus que has inscidit una mella, inscideys l’autra segon aquesta meteyssa manieyra de inscizio, e aprop la inscizio le malaute guarguarise de aygua frega	And then apply a poultice to the wound on their leg.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, guarguarise aygua de decoccio de scorsa de milgrana o de fuelha de mirtra e semblantz ad aquel de las causas stiptiquas entro que·l flux del sanc sia restreyt, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Mildew, if you want to avoid its harm, can be treated by poultices made from herbs, or by boiling and reducing the amount of moisture in the environment.
E alcunas veguadas naysso en le guolayro autras apostemas otra aquelas doas aurelhas, e inscideys aquelas segon que yeu e dit en la inscizio de doas mellas engualment.	And then apply cautery to the legs in order to treat the other ailments that may be present.
E yeu ja fu medicat una femna de apostema le qual era nat en le golayro de lu, le qual apostema tendia a color fusca, de pauc sentiment, le qual ja havia claus le golayro de lu, e la femna respirava am meat streyt, e ja havia prohibit a lu comestio e beure de aygua, e ja era pervenguda a la mort si mays agues stat per un dia o per dos.	And the woman was already being medicated, which she had brought on herself by her own bad humors, but she was still suffering from the same symptoms.
E l’apostema ja tant havia pugat que havia mezes dos ramps entro que eyssiro per dos traucs.	And the abscess had grown so large that their legs are now held open by two openings.
Donc yeu me cuytegui fisturalment e fiquegui en un de lor onci, e tiregui aquel, e atirada es de lu gran porcio, e aprop yeu incidigui aquela de on comprendegui del autre trau, e aprop yeu obrigui la boca de lu, e compremegui la sua lengua, e aprop yeu fiquegui le onci en aquela apostema.	And if there's an accumulation of humors that cause pain in the body, they're to be treated accordingly.
E aprop yeu abscizi gran partida de lu, e no corria de lu sino un pauc de sanc.	And then you have applied a hot iron to their legs, but only a little blood.
Donc absolut es le guolayro de aquela femna, e comensec tantost beure aygua, e aprop presec vianda, donc yeu no cessegui inscidir de aquela apostema motas vetz per lonc temps, e succesia apostema en loc de aquel, le qual inscizia entro que es prolonguat aquel.	The cushion will be placed on the thigh or foot, depending on which one is affected.
Donc yeu engen agui e cauterizegui le guolayro de lu, donc astec de addicio; e aprop yeu perambulegui e no saubi que fec Dieus de aquela aprop mi.	And if you are affected by evil humors, they should be cauterized, as the physician will tell you.
Capitol .xxxvii.	And if needed, treat the affected area with other remedies.
De inscizio de huvela quan es apostemada.	From incision of the thighs when it is caused by gout.
Quan catarr deysen a la huvula, e es apostemada e es longa, lahoras ela es nompnada perpendicular; e si es en la partida dejos grossa e redonda, e lahoras ela es apelada buba.	And if the illness affects the legs, the physician places a cushion on the foot to relieve its pain.
Mays quan es curada am aquo que havem dit en la divisio, e no comfereys la tua curacio, e eyssament ja vezes que apostema caut ja es ostat de lu e es subtil, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquela que es agreguadas redonda; e si es ad aquela longitut, e es sanguina, de fusca color o de negre, e no es a lu centiment, lahoras cove que tu temtes la inscizio de lu, quar en aquela es temor sobre le malaute.	Then if you are curing a sore that is caused by an imbalance in the body's humors, you should know when to stop cauterizing because the patient's leg is being healed.
E quan tu vezes aquela segon la manieyra que yeu he dita de la sua blancor e longuesa, que tu fassas sezer le malaute e premas la lengua de lu am instrument del qual procesic la sua forma e aprop fica le onci en la nuva, e tira aquela en jos e inscideys aquela am un de dos instrumentz les quals e ditz en la inscizio de dos mellas.	When you have identified the patient's illness by its symptoms, such as pain in the joints and muscles, it is customary to call it gout.
E cove que no inscidas aquela sino aquo que es ajustat sobre le terme natural ses addicio, quar si tu inscides de lu mays, lediyras le sieu parlar.	And if you are going to write about it, it should be said that the pain in the joints is called gout.
E aprop la inscizio, usa de aquo le qual havem recomtat en la inscizio de dos mellas, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	And then apply a cautery to the patient's legs.
Mays si era le malaute espaventat per la inscizio de lu, cove que use de engen en la cauterizacio de lu ses temor, e la manieyra del cauteri en lu no es sino am aygua aguda, e es que tu pauses le cap del malaute en le tieu se, e aprop prem la lengua de lu am le instrument le qual havem dit, e aprop pren de l’aygua la qual havem dita en le capitol de cauterizacio, e comfeys am aquela caus viva, e pausa aquela no spessa ni subtil, e de aquela omple la concavitat de l’estrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	If a doctor uses an instrument to treat a patient's pain in the feet, it's called a cushion-based treatment, which is if the patient's feet are affected by a specific ailment.
Sia la extramitat de lu conquavitat en la qual sia pausada la medicina ayssi cum la conquavitat de culher de ray, e pausa le strument am la medicina sobre la vula, e·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu latz per so que corro saliva o musellage de la boca de aquel per la intrinscequa medicina, per so que no deyssenda de aquela deguna causa sobre le golayro de lu e que ledesca aquel.	This is a medieval medical treatise describing how to treat a swollen joint by applying a pointed cautery to a specific area.
E aprop te la tua ma am la medicina, e exprem aquela sobre la uvula per l’espazi de miega hora entro que vegas aquela esser denegrada e sedada per la mordicacio de la medicina.	And then place your hand on the cushion so that the patient's pain subsides.
E si vols, prengues coto e envolopes aquel sobre la extremitat del ray, e submergeys le coto en la medicina, e entrometas le ray am le coto en una canula de sobre entro que·l coto adheresca en aquela canula, e fay aquo tantas vetz entro que consiegues aquo que vols de la cauterizacio de la uva, e aprop leyssa aquela quar ela se seccara e cayra aprop tres dias o quatre.	Then you have to put the patient's feet in a warm cautery, and apply other treatments for three days or four days so that they dry up.
E si indigeysses que iteras la medicina, itera aquela, e aprop la cauterizacio abstergeys en le circuit de la uva am coto enbegut en boder, e mondifica am aquel aquo que es en le circuit de lu de la medicina, e sia lavat am aygua frega, e sia curat deforo am embrocacio, e dedintz am guarguarismes entro que sia sanat.	And if you find the patient suffering from the ailment, then apply heat to that area, and apply the same treatment to the other legs.
E aquesta especia de curacio es pus salva que inscizio e pus long de temor.	And so this type of healing is more effective than cautery and more effective than fear.
Alcunas veguadas es curada la uvuola am aquo que es pus subtil que cauteri e inscizio, quar es curat am subfumigacio en aquesta manieyra: recipe calament, ysop, origua, ruda, scicados arabic, camamilla, broyda e semblant ad aquels de las erbas, e ajusta totas aquelas causas, o alcunas de lor, en una ola, e sian submergidas am vi agre, e bulhan; e la ola sia be lutada am lut decentment, e sia en le mieg loc de la ola un trauc, sobre le qual sia pausat un instrument conquau de aram segon aquesta manieyra; sia fayt de argent o de aram.	When the wound is caused by cold and dampness, treat it with a less harsh method, such as using a poultice made of silver or gold, which is applied to the affected area, but if there is no improvement, use a more aggressive approach.
E sia entromesa la extremitat en la boca del malaute entro que la vapor poge a la uvula sobre la quanula, entro que la uvula sia mot ofuscada.	And if the pain affects the throat, they should be treated with a cushion on their feet, and another placed to stop the vapors from affecting the body.
E aprop itera sobre aquela motas veguadas entro qu’es secca, e guarda te que no fassas aquesta curacio al comesament de l’aveniment de apostemas, quar trop ajustaria en le apostema, e no cove que tu fassas aquo, sino deves la declaracio de apostema de lu caut.	Do this at the beginning of the treatment for cushion-related ailments.
Mays si no es a tu present aquest instrument, lahoras pren una cana e compon en la extramitat de lu un clos de huou, per so que la boca del malaute sia comborida, quar le closc del huou prohibeys la vapor comburir la boca.	This means that if you have a cushion in your hand, you can use it to stop the pain from spreading to other parts of the body.
E aquesta curacio es bona am salut.	And this cure, if done properly, will bring relief from the ailment.
Capitol .xxxviii.	Capitol 38.  (Assuming the ".xxxviii." refers to a chapter number)
De extraccio d’espinas e de aquo que adhereys en le golayro e de las autras causas.	And if it is necessary to remove them from their body.
Motas veguadas adhereys en le guolayro o spina de peys o alcuna autra causa.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the foot, they are saying that the patient has gout, which is caused by a cold humors.
Adonc cove que tu extraguas aquo que de aquels es apparent, sobre le qual catz la vista, pus que tu premes la lengua am instrument denant solelh, per so que a tu sia declarat aquo que es en la guola.	And if you want to keep the pain in the patient's body from spreading, you should put the following on their tongue: a cushion under their feet, and another cushion on the other parts of the body, for example, the legs.
E aquo que no apar e es a tu occultat en le guolayro, cove que tu fassas vomir le malaute denant que la vianda sia degerida en l’estomac, quar fort leu la causa annexsa le golayro sira foro-getada per vomit; o que deglusia le malaute una pessa de nap o de razit de laytuga o un boci de pa sec; o prengua una pessa de sponga marina sequa leon, e lia aquela fortment am fiel, e aprop le malaute transglussia aquela, quar cum perve al loc en le qual so spinas e es extrahuda, lahoras so foro-getatz.	When you see that the patient's body has been overheated by the sun, use a cushion to prevent them from feeling the heat.
E mays pren una anguila e be am fiel liada, e sia dedintz mesa e soptament sia extrayta; o pren un porr e soptament le metas e soptament l’en tratz.	And if you cauterize the wound, the patient will be better off for it.
Mays si no so foro-getatz am aquelas causas las quals havem ditas, lahoras husa de un instrument de plom segon aquesta forma:	Now apply a poultice to that area according to this method:
E sia pus gros que ray un petit, e en la extramitat de lu sia conquavitat la qual tu entrometas en la sua guola am facilitat.	And then apply a poultice to the patient's legs, for they are the ones who need to be treated by cauterization.
E el aga le sieu cap elevat en sus, e guarda te que·l tocament del sieu os de la gola, per so que endevengua a lu cos e am aquela que enpellesca le os o la spina, o que aquel le metge am la sua ma.	Then place a bandage on the bone to protect the skin from being burned by the cauterization tool.
Mays empero que·l malaute aquel entrometa es miels, per la sua sciencia del loc de la causa annexa e enpellisca en jos, e tira la sua ma am le instrument en sus, tot aquo segon la quantitat la qual es a lu preparada entro que sia foro-getada.	Then he must be treated for his ailment.
Capitol .xxxix.	Capitol .xxxix.
De extraccio de sancguisugua annexsa al golayro.	And so you should apply a cushion to the patient's neck and nothing else.
Quan es medicada sanguisugua am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la curacio am medicinas e no comfereys, considera lahoras en le guolayro del malaute al solelh, pus que tu aias compremuda la lengua de lu am instrument le qual a tu havem recomtat.	When the patient's tongue is treated with medicine, consider carefully their position so that your hands are free to use other methods of treatment.
Donc si tu vezes la sancguisugua, extratz aquela am onci petit o am gesti subtils decentment.	So, if you understand what's going on with your body, you will be able to treat it properly.
E si no es a tu possible estrayre am aquel, lahoras pren una canula concava e entromet aquela en lo guolayro del malaute, e aprop pausa en la concavitat de la canula un ferr ignit, e fay aquo tantas vetz (entro que la sancguisugua sia morta e se osta del guolayro) e abstengua se le malaute tot lo jorn de aygua.	And if it is not possible to hold the patient still, use a tool to open the space between the patient's thighs.
E aprop prengua una veyria plena de aygua frega, e obra la boca de lu en aquela, e lava la boca am aquela; e no trasglucia de aquela alcuna causa e maugua l’aygua una hora aprop autra am la sua ma, quar la sancguisugua tantost cum sent l’aygua catz.	Then, place the cushion on their hand, and to prevent the patient from experiencing pain.
Mays si no es foro-getada am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras subfumigua le malaute am cimetz o am assafetida per le instrument le qual havem recomtat en la sufumiguacio de uvula.	If your body has too much fire, it will be treated by applying hot stones to joints.
Fay aquo, so en quar cayra.	When there are pains in the foot, it is customary to apply cautery.
E es un’autra manieyra de operacio en sufumiguacio de aquela, es que tu prenguas una ola en la qual sian carbos ignitz e la ola sia cuberta am una cobertora en le mieg de la qual sia un trauc, e sia compausat en aquel trauc la extremitat del instrument; e aprop dega desus la subfumigacio; e pause le malaute la sua boca en la extremitat de la canula, e claugua la sua boca per que la subfumiguacio no sia foro-getada entro que sapias que la subfumigacio es pervenguda a la sancguisugua, quar la sancguisugua tantost cayra.	And then you must use a cauterizing iron.
E si no catz, lahoras tu itera la subfumiguacio motas vetz, e abstengua le malaute de beure, e mange causas saladas e alhs, e no begua aygua, e ayssi necessari es que am aquest regiment sia fora-getada.	And if you don't drink, avoid foods that cause inflammation, and eat only bland foods, and apply a poultice to their legs.
E aquesta es la forma del instrument am le qual es trayta sancguisugua del guolayro quan es vista; e es semblant a forceps ayssi cum vezes, sino quar es en lu alcuna curvitat:	This sentence describes a method of using a cautery tool to treat the condition of the joint pain caused by cold humors.
le qual sia mesa al guolayro, e la extremitat de lu es semblant a bec de ciconia, que es guanta, en la qual es aspretat de lima, per so quar, quan comprem alcuna causa, aquela no leyssa.	Then apply the hot cautery to the neck if needed, for the cure of the patient, and put the affected area in the same way as the other, so that the pain will be similar to what the doctor calls gout.
Capitol .xl.	The title "Capitol .xl." suggests a chapter heading, likely referring to Chapter 40.
En le qual es la suma del sermo en apercio de apostemas e en seccio de lor.	When the pain of gout manifests in the legs, it is called leg pain by doctors.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.	And if they are caused by the same thing as a boil, and if they are caused by a disease that causes inflammation in the joints, we call it gout, which is what it says here.
E so diversas en perforacio e seccio de lor per doas manieyras, de las quals la una es per la specia de apostemas en si meteys; e per aquo que comprem de las humiditatz.	And then there are other ways for the treatment of these abscesses, so that they do not spread to the others parts through the use of various methods.
E la segonda manieyra es prop les locs en les quals accideys del cos, quar le apostema accident en le cap es autra de la apostema accident en le cul; e le apostema en le loc carnos accident es autra del apostema accident en junctura; e a quascun de lor es son juguament per operacio.	And le cushion es in le cul, then it is called the second stage.
E mays de apostemas so alcunas las quals cove que no sian perforadas sino aprop maturacio de la sania en aquels o compliment de lor.	When wounds are deep, they're healed with a cauterization technique.
So autras apostemas les quals cove que sian traucatz quan son cruzes, e no son maturatz segon lor compliment, ayssi cum apostemas que son propdas a las juncturas, quar apostema quan ve prop junctura, lo esser de lu es prolonguat entro que·s poyreys aquo que es en le circuit de lu, e fort leu son corromputz les liamentz o les nervis de aquela junctura, per que es fayta causa de contraccio de aquel membre; o es apostema prop de membre principal, e si tu tardas la perforacio de lu entro sia madurat nosira al membre principal; o es prop le cul, donc perfora aque no-madurat; e no cove que·l perforas cru, de no-complida degestio, sino aquel que es prop del cul, per so que no poyresca le preon de lu e sia elonguat a las partidas dedintz del cul, e sia fayta fistula, o que sia fayt en le terme de lu que no sia sanat.	The first few lines are already in a language similar to English, so we can assume the rest follows suit.
Mays cove que tu sapias la hora de la perforacio de la apostema, e aysso es quan es maturat.	When the abscess has matured, you should apply a hot instrument to the abscess.
E sapias que es madurat quan es la cedacio de la dolor e la cessacio de la febre, e aprop la diminucio de la rogor e de la pulsacio, e la acuitat del cap del apostema, e les autres senhals.	Then apply another hand to their legs to prevent the swelling from spreading and other symptoms from worsening.
E quar cove que sapias la perforacio cazer en le loc pus dejos del apostema e de pus venient de curacio de la eminencia.	And if it is necessary to cauterize a patient's boil or abscess, one should first open the location and then apply heat to the area.
E perforacio tostemps sia per le lonc de la carn o del cors, si las apostemas son en las partidas de las mas o dels pes, e en loc dels lacertz, de las cordas dels nervis, de las arcerias; e, al derier, en totz locs enguals en les quals no es reflecio; quar en aquels que so reflectitz, usa de perforacio segon aquel membre.	And if the blood vessels are inflamed in the long bones, they should be treated with a cushion on the affected area.
Mays quan le apostema es en loc carnos, lahoras miels es que leysses la perforacio de lu entro que sia confermada la digestio de lu segon compliment, ayssi quo havem dit; quar si tu perforas aquel denant aquo, es prolonguat le cors del poyre de lu e de mota sordicia, e fort leu las labias de lu so enduradas e la profunditat de lu.	Mays be honey and apply it to the wounds, which are already confirmed.
Mays alcus apostemas so perforatz segon la latitut de la carn o del cos deves la necessitat, o segon aquo del qual lo membre indigeys.	The patient needs to be bled if they have pain in their legs or feet.
E cove que administres petita perforacio , e·n les apostemas grans gran perforacio e ampla o motas seccios segon la diversitat de la grandesa dels apostemas.	And if they are large, treat them with a cushion or a sharp incision on their legs.
E autras so dels apostemas en les quals cove que la codena sia conquavada e sia encidida, quan es fayta ayssi quo pan e fayta es en terme que ja stigua, ayssi cum aquel que accideys en trops de dubelec e de bubos.	And others use other remedies for abscesses in the limbs, such as applying heat to the affected area.
E de aquels so que so insciditz am seccio havent tres angles; e de aquels es en le qual es inscidit ayssi cum figura de fuelha de mirtra, ayssi cum las apostemas dels angonars.	And in the others have three angles, which are called the bowels?
E de lor so en les quals es administrada seccio redonda e seccio lunar, e semblantz ad aquels.	And on their feet, they will be treated with a cautery.
Mays aquel al qual no es cap ayssi cum son apostemas leons superficials, cove que tu perforas aquel am perforacio superficial, o plana tant solament.	Then apply heat to the affected area if you need to cauterize them.
E cove quant le apostema es gros e ya ha colligit mota sania, que perfores aquel e no te coytes que extraguas tot le poyre en aquela hora; habantz extratz de aquel una partida, e aprop opila le apostema entro al autre dia, e aprop extratz una partida major, e aprop fa aquo motas veguadas segon graduacio entro que sia foro-getat.	The boil is large and already drawn in the body, which means the patient has been treated for a while, and you are warning them to be careful with the cushion or their pain will be greater, and then what will they do?
E majorment si·l malaute es de freol vertut, o femna prens, o enfant petit, o viel en decrepitut, quar l’esperit animal motas vetz es resolvut am la egressio de la sania, e fort leu mor le malaute, e tu operte les.	You have already opened the passage to the other parts of the body, and you must stop, for they are ill-humored.
Don guarda aquest capitol am gran cautela, e aprop la tua perforacio en la qual perforas aquestz apostemas, cove que abstergescas las plagues e consideras donc si la plagua del apostema es pauca, o es una seccio plana, lahoras tu aministra las qualguas de li o de coto antic; e si le apostema es gran, e las fissuras de la perforacio son motas, lahoras cove que tu pauses meca en quascun trauc entro que pervenguan ensemps.	When you have to treat pain in the foot: apply a cushion to the affected area;
E si en le apostema es abscindit una partida de la codena o has concavada aquela en le circuit, lahoras cove que tu la complescas de coto viel o de fil fayt de drap de li, ayssi cum quan has traytz pans o razizos, ses humiditat; e strenh aquel entro al tertz dia; e aprop proceseys aquel e cura le am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if the doctors have already diagnosed the patient with a condition that needs to be treated by drawing out the pus or treating it with a bandage to prevent infection.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc en la hora de la operacio tua, lahoras tu aministra aygua frega e vi agre en les quals mules un drap de li, e pausa aquel sobre le loc del fluxs del sanc motas veguadas.	When blood flows during the operation, apply water to prevent it from affecting the patient's legs and feet.
Mays si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras cove que tu aministres regiment e curacio e polveras las quals he recomtadas en motz locs de aquest nostre libre e de divisio.	And if you don't apply proper treatment to their illness, they will be sick.
Mays si es en temps de hivern, e·l loc de la apostema es loc de motz nervis, lahoras cove que tu enfundas pulvils en vi e oli caut, e pauses aquels sobre les locs.	If it is an abscess, apply a cushion to the affected area.
E si es en estiu, e les locs son carnoses, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils enbeguts am aygua e oli o am vi e oli, e tot aquo sia freg entro que sia le ters dia, ayssi cum havem dit, e lahoras cove que tu deslies le apostema e abstergescas aquel e aministres en la curacio de lu aquo que a lu conveneys entro que sia sanat.	And if it is in the summer, and the person has hot, painful swelling on their feet, then you should use a cold cushion for treatment.
E aysso es aquo que es necessari de la cognicio de la curacio de apostemas universalment, mays segon la via de distinccio ja he dit de tot apostema en qual manieyra es via de la cura de lu per capitols singularment.	Then it is necessary to know how to treat each individual case.
Capitol .xli.	Chapter xli.
De seccio de apostemas les quals veno en la codena del cap.	This is a description of the practice of applying a cautery to treat a disease, which is often called gout in modern medicine.
En la codena del cap petitz apostemas, e so de specias de nodes les quals conteno tunicas que so a lor factz ; e las specias de lor so motas.	In the case of the small head, it is called gout when it is caused by the swelling of the joints.
E de lor son pingas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditat semblant a lima.	And of their feet, they contain humors similar to lime.
E de aquelas so las quals conteno humiditat semblant a pols, et asemblantz a lor; e de aquelas so que son lapideas, durs.	And if it is a swelling caused by inflammation from dampness, apply heat to the affected area.
E en la seccio de totz, e en la extraccio de aquels no es temor, cum deves la exteccio de aquels no fa contrariat arceria.	And in the extraction there is no pain, except for the fear, which does not cause them pain.
E la operacio en seccio de aquels es que tu esproes aquels am instrument la forma del qual ve aprop aysso, le qual es apelat entromes, entro que sapias que contengua.	And so you see, that is how physicians describe gout.
Quar si aquo que conte es humiditat, lahoras scindeys aquel am seccio segon la longitut per seccio superficial segon aquesta forma:	This is an old medical text that mentions the practice of treating gout by applying a treatment called "punting" to the affected area.
E comensa en la seccio de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G. Donc cum la humiditat es evacuada, lahoras tu excoria aquela pel que conte aquela humiditat, e no leysses de aquela alcuna causa de tot, quar tropas veguadas retorna, si roman de aquela alcuna causa.	And so, having evacuated the humors, the patient's body will be healed by the power of its own nature or by the use of medicine.
E aprop submergeys coto en enguent egipciach, si es present, e sino, en aygua e sal; e umpleys am aquel la plagua e layssa aquel entro ad autra dia, quar am aquo corrodeys tot so que es romas de aquela pellicula.	Then apply it to their legs, and then use the Egyptian poultice; if not, use water and salt.
E aprop itera sobre aquel coto am enguent egipciach segondament e tersament si indigeyses de lu, entro que·t comfides que no y haia romas alcuna causa de aquela pellicula; lahoras cura la plagua am enguent entro que sia sanada.	Then cure the inflamed area with a salve, trusting that no harm will come to the patient by it.
E si apostema conte nodi gras, lahoras tu inscideys aquel segon aquesta forma:	And here's how you will cauterize a patient suffering from gout:
am seccio havent forma de crotz, e geta oncis entre doas labias de la seccio e scorsa aquel de tota partida, e esforsa la tua vertut en extraccio de la tunica la qual conte aquel.	When there is a wound in the intestines, the physician should use a cushion to apply cautery.
Mays si a tu arceria fa contrarieta, lahoras fay aquo que yeu t’e recontat primieyrament.	And if your bowstring is too tight, it's customary to apply heat to relieve it.
E semblantment fay en le apostema lapificat de seccio e de curacio segon que a tu havem dit; e seccio sobre apostema lapificat es pus leugiera, quar es de pauc sanc e de pauca humiditat.	Here's the first attempt at translating the given sentence:
E alcunas vetz so alcus de aquestz apostemas les quals so en le cap en alcus homes am los quals de tot no es humiditat; la qual causa es quar yeu inscindigui sobre un apostema en le cap de una femna vielha e atrobegui le apostema ayssi cum peyra sorda, aspra, blanqua, la qual no podia esser trinquada, e si a alcu fos am aquela percussit, plaguera aquel.	Gout causes pain in the joints of the body, and if it occurs on the feet, it's considered to be a punishment from God by some people.
Mays en les autres apostemas accidentz en le cap otra aquest no es aquest capitol, ayssi cum les apostemas que veno als caps dels enfantz e deves las razitz de las aurelhas, mays la seccio de aquestz totz sia seccio superficial.	Therefore, the other types of abscesses are treated differently depending on their nature.
E pausa la perforacio de aquels de la partida pus bassa de lor per so que sia alleujat le cos de la sania a las partidas pus bassas.	You are translating the text for the body to be relieved from the pressure of the cushion.
E aprop cura aquelas am aquo que conveneys ad aquel de curacio.	Then apply a poultice appropriate for the ailment to the affected area.
Capitol .xlii.	When pain is caused by the accumulation of cold humors, it is customarily called a gouty attack.
De seccio de scrophulas las quals accideyso en le col.	And if you cut into the flesh of the neck, be careful that the incision does not extend to the areas above or below it.
Motas veguadas endeveno aquestas apostemas en le colh e en las aysselhas e en les angonars; e alcunas veguadas accideyso en las autras partidas del cos.	And some people say that when there are painful swelling in the feet and legs, it is gout.
E so aquelas que accideysso en le colh, e so motas que so engendradas entre lor, e tota scrofula de aquelas es dintz la sua tunica propria, e ayssi cum en les nodis e apostema del cap, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	So that when the patient's bowels are inflamed, it is necessary to use a cushion or return the inflammation to its place.
E las specias de aquestas scrophulas son motas, quar de aquelas so alcunas lapideas, e de aquelas so que conteno humiditatz, e de aquelas so malignas las quals no obeseysso a curacio.	Then place your hand upon the affected area to prevent the patient from needing further treatment.
Donc en aquela la qual tu vezes de bona disposicio en le Tocament, de la qual la color de aquo que es manifest es propda a la color de la codena, e es mauguda a tota partida, e no es annexsa am le nervi del colh, ni am las venas, ni am la arceria, e no es preonda, cove que tu inscidiscas aquela am siccio superficial de la partida desus a la partida dejos del cos de la linha de .G. entro la linha de .B., e scorja aquela de tota partida, e exten dos labias de la codena am onci, o am motz oncis si has necessitat de aquels, ayssi cum havem dit en las apostemas del cap, e extratz aquela petit a petit.	And apply the burning to the affected limb, but gradually, not all at once, as is customary for the treatment of gout, by applying heat to the area.
E es mays cautela que no sia inscidida la vena o nervi.	And more caution is needed so that you don’t cut into the veins or nerves.
E sia le spatum no mot agut, que no ajuste a tu la tua ma am inscizio, o que enquiete le malaute, e que inscidas aquo que no es necessari inscidir; quar si inscideysses vena o arceria e prohibeys tu de la tua operacio, lahoras pausa en la plagua vetriol trissat o autras polveras las quals ostan fluxs de sanc, e estrenh la plagua, e layssa aquel entro que·s repausa la acuitat de la apostema e sia mollificada la plagua e comense esser poyrida.	This means: And if you need to treat an abscess, it is customary for doctors to use cauterization in the manner described.
Quan le sanc es abscindit.	When blood is drawn.
Donc retorna a la tua operacio entro que l’aias complida.	This is a modern medical text, so the translation would likely focus on the physical act of applying heat to cauterize (seal) an injured blood vessel.
E aprop inquireys am le tieu dit indic si es romas alcuna causa de las autras petitas scrophulas, donc inscideys aquelas e munda aquelas.	Then find the cause of the other small ailments and treat them.
E si es en la razit de la scrophula gran vena, cove lahoras que no inscidas aquela scrophula de la sua razitz.	And if it is a large vein, they will be treated in a specific way.
Abantz cove que lies aquela am fiel doblat fort e que leysses aquela entro que caia per si ses nocument.	A strong man should be able to tell if they are being treated for gout correctly or not.
E aprop omple la plagua de coto vielh le qual tu has ja submirgit en enguent egipciac, e aprop cura aquel.	Then you will have to know that the patient has already been treated for a while, but the treatment is only for the old ailment.
E si inscides aquela scrophula tota, lahoras cove que tu ajustes las doas labias de la plagua e cuzas2 tantost pus que no y ha romasa deguna superfluitat.	And if you cauterize the patient's legs, be careful to remove the excess.
Mays si tu vezes que haia romasa superfluitat per la grandeza de la scrofula, cove que tu entendas a inscidir la razit de aquela, e astrayra aquela e aministra sutura e aquo que es dit.	Mays if you have to cauterize the patient's neck, due to its size, carefully.
E aquela de las scrophulas que conteno humiditatz, perfora aquela am perforacio superficial aqui la on appar a tu le loc de maturacio de lu, e pausa perforacio de aquo que siec le pus bas del cos, ayssi cum havem dit.	When the disease is caused by an imbalance of humors, it is called gout when it affects the joints.
E aprop aministra perforacio, calguas am enguent e semblantz ad aquels, per so que corroda aquo que es romas de la corropcio.	And a proper cautery should be used on the affected area to address the cause, which is humor.
E aprop quan tu vezes la plagua ja esser mundada, lahoras tu cura aquela am enguent de carn generatiu entro que sia sanada.	And if the inflammation has subsided, then you can stop treating it.
Capitol .xliii.	The text should be:
De seccio del pilhot del apostema accident dintz le guolayro.	When a patient's legs are affected by an abscess, another should be placed on their thighs to prevent the spread of infection.
Diyssero les antics aquesta seccio en le epilhot, e no vist alcu hom en nostra terra que aquela aia fayta.	And if it is necessary to bleed a person for gout, you should apply a bandage to the affected area.
E aquesta es la inscriptura del sermo de aquels.	And this is the way to treat that ailment.
Mays en les homes haventz esquinencia, cove que sia esquivada la extraccio del epilhot, cum per aquo no sia fayt juvament per so quar totas las venas e las majors del malaute so aqui.	Then apply heat to the affected areas to treat the pain in their legs.
Mays en aquels que han apostemas cautz en la boca o guolayro o dos aurelhas, quan la malautia no es en la cana, cove husar de la seccio de epilhot a fugir la perdicio la qual es fayta per perfocacio.	When someone has a boil on their mouth or jaw, it's called a "boil" in the medical field if it's a boil in the throat, or "fistula" if it's a festering sore.
Donc cove quan volem aquo, que inscidam le epilhot dejos tres cercles dels cercles del epilhot, o quatre am petita seccio per la latitut en aquel que es entre dos cercles per quantitat, que la seccio sia en ciphac, no en la cartillage, e aquest loc es convenent a seccio, quar es privat de carn e les vayselhs de sanc de lu son luhen.	Therefore, if you want to treat the patient with a cushion, put four circles under the chest and three on the legs, so that it does not fall out.
E si le metge es pauruc, cove lahoras que extenda la codena del golayro am onci, e aprop fenda la codena entro que pervengua a la canal, mays evite les vaysels de sanc si vetz de aquelas alcuna causa.	And if the doctor feels that a burning sensation comes from the use of the cauterizer, he will know how to treat it.
E aprop inscida li ciplach segon que havem recomtat; e es significat sobre la seccio de la canal per le flacma le qual es de aquela eyssit am aquo que es de lu disromput e per la abscizio de la votz.	Then return to the intestine or if it is necessary to open the legs for them.
E layssa la plagua uberta per alcun temps.	And then let the plague be treated for a while.
Donc cum la hora es remauguda en la qual perforacio es temuda, agregua doas labias de la codena de la plagua, e cus aquela sola ses la cartillage.	And if there are other diseases present, place a hot poultice on their chest or legs to prevent them from spreading the plague.
E aprop administra medicinas que fan naysser la carn entro que sia sanat.	And another will administer medicines to make their flesh grow.
E diyssec Albucasis que la summa del sermo le qual havem recomtat, exposicio no es sino que veias que alcus de aquetz apostemas ja han opilat lo guolayro del malaute, e le malaute es vengut entro a mort, e le ale de lu es entresecat, e alcus van a inscidir le epiglos per so que respire le malaute sobre le loc de la plagua per alcuna respiracio, e sia salvat de mort.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the stomach or other parts of the body, the patient may have been treated in this way.
E per aquo comandero layssar la plagua uberta entro que sia consumida la malicia de la malautia; e es la malicia de lu per tres dias; e donc lahoras comandero cosi la plagua, e cura aquela entro que sia sanat.	Then let a physician be present to keep the disease open so that he can observe its effects, and treat them for three days until the malice of the disease has been eliminated.
E aquo que yeu he vist per mi meteys, es que una sirventa pres un cotel e mesec le en le sieu golayro e inscidic am aquel una partida de la cana del pulmo, e yeu fu apelat a la curacio de lu, e atrobegui la mugen ayssi cum es mugit del moridos, e descubrigui la plagua e atrobegui le sanc le qual era yssit de la plagua petit.	And when the patient has already been diagnosed with a plague-related ailment, one should be treated by a doctor for gout.
Donc yeu fo confessat que aquela no havia inscidit vena ni guidegi, e le vent yssia de la plagua, e curegui aquela entro que foc sanada.	Therefore, it is customary to call this ailment gout.
E no accidic a la sirventa si no rauquiera en la votz, e aprop alcus dias retornec ad miloracio de las suas dispozicios.	And if you are treating a patient for gout, it will take some days to return them to good health.
E ara dic yeu que en la seccio del epilhot no ha temor.	And now I say you have cushion in your hand.
Capitol .xliv.	Chapter xliv.
De seccio sobre apostema le qual accideys en le golayro defora, e es apelat hernia del golayro.	A hernia on the leg is also called a "hernia".
Aquest apostema nompnat hernia del golayro es apostema gran segon la color del cors, e es mot en las femnas.	And this boil be called a great hernia.
E es segon dos manieyras, quar o es natural o accidental.	This is done by placing the body in one of these three.
E en le natural no es engen de curar.	In the case of the foot, there is another treatment for it.
E l’accidental es segon dos manieyras del qual la un es semblant a nodes grasses, e l’autra manieyra es semblant apostema le qual es fayt per nodacio de arteria, e en aquel es temor.	Then the doctor must treat the patient for the swelling in their legs.
E no cove que·s fassa presumpcio a lu cum ferr sino en aquel que es petit.	And if a person has a small intestine, then it is better to assume that they have gout than to have their legs treated with cauterization.
E tu proha aquel e investigua aquel am le dit, e si atrobas lu semblant a nodi gras, e no es suspendut am alcuna de las venas, lahoras tu inscideys aquel ayssi cum les nodes, e extratz aquel am aquo que conte lu de la pel e bursiclam; e sino, lahoras es perscrutat tot le sieu esser, e aprop cura le loc am aquo que cove de curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you encounter a patient in such a state, examine them thoroughly to determine the cause of their ailment.
Capitol .xlv.	This is the 45th chapter.
De seccio de las specias de nodes.	On the treatment of various swellings.
Dels nodes so motas specias e yeu ja he dit totas las specias de lor en la divisio.	From the nodes you mentioned, there are many kinds of illnesses that can be cured by the proper use of medicines.
E cove que yeu recomte assi la diferencia entre node e exitura cum fassa dubitacio.	And do so with the patient's legs opened and held apart.
Donc yeu dic que am exitura es caliditat e febre e dolors vehementz entro que es sedada la ebullicio de la superfluitat; e es complida putrefaccio que lahora cessa la febre, la dolor e la calor.	And so I say that the cause of this pain is an excess of hot humors.
Mays am node no es caliditat ni febre ni dolor, e conte aquel ciphac leon le qual es al u sac propri.	The patient has no pain because he's too sick to feel anything.
E es segon la color del cors, e le comensament de lu es cum un ceze e es fayt ayssi cum vace, sia major o minor, e son segon dos specias, quar o so grassas e conteno humiditat, e las colors de la humiditat son motas, segon que yeu diyssi en la divisio.	Then, based on the information provided in the translated text, you would apply a cautery to the affected area, and another person would hold the patient's legs and arms.
Donc cove, quan pervenas a la curacio de node, que exprohes aquel e inquiras aquel al comensament am sturment le qual es apelat intromes, segon que vindra la sua forma en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And if you want to treat someone for gout, place your hand on their leg.
E es manieyra de inquisicio de apostemas e de totz nodes, e es que tu prenguas aquest sturment e entromet aquel en le loc pus humit le qual atrobas en le apostema, e tu revolveras les tieus ditz am aquel petit a petit entro que sapias que·l sturment ja ha penetrat la codena.	This means that the patient is suffering from a condition affecting the joints, which translates to a specific part of their body.
E aprop ultima la tua ma segon la mesura de la grandeza del apostema, e aprop extratz le entromes e considera aquo que es yssit en le vestigi de lu.	And on the leg you have opened the wound and consider the size of it.
E si es fora-getada la humiditat corrent, de qualque color sia, lahoras tu le inscideys am seccio superficial segon que he dit en les autres apostemas.	And if it is necessary to cut the skin, then you should do so in accordance with the method used for its incision.
E si del vestigi de l’intromes no hieys humiditat, lahoras sapias que es gras.	Then the patient's legs are ready to be cauterized.
E secca sobre lu am seccio havent forma de crotz segon aquesta forma:	This is a tricky one! Here's my best guess at a translation, based on the context you provided:
ayssi cum t’e ensenhat, e suspen aquel am oncis, e excorja la codena de tota part am facilitat, e guarda la pel o sac, si podes, sobre aquel e extraguas aquela sania am le node.	And so if you are skilled in medicine, you should do the same as you learned, and put your hands on the patient's legs to prevent a wound on their feet.
Mays si es romput en la operacio, no es possible extrayre aquela sana, e motas veguadas endeve aquo, e lahoras tu la extratz a pessas entro que de lu no romangua denguna causa.	And if it is broken during the operation, it is possible to treat it with cautery.
Quar si de lu roman denguna causa, pauc o trop, le node retorne segon le mays.	If there are complications, you should refer to the physician's instructions for treating the patient.
E si tu vezes que de lu roman alcuna part petita, lahoras comple la plagua de alcunas polveras corrosivas agudas e strenh la plagua, e pausa sobre aquela que sede apostema caut, e cura aquel del autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if it's necessary to treat the patient with a burn cauterization, then apply it to that area.
E si es node gran, lahoras tu cus las doas labias de lu e cura aquel am aquo que encarna.	When there is a large amount of inflammation, apply a poultice to the area.
Mays si vena pulsatil es a lu contraria, o no-pulsatil, lahoras tu coyta e huemple le loc de zegi trissat que es vetriol e leyssa aquel streyt per dos dias o per tres entro que·s poyresca la plagua e que repause la ebullicio del sanc; e aprop retorna a inscindir aquo que es romas del node.	The doctors have treated the patient for three days.
Capitol .xlvi.	This is a tricky one!
De las formas del sturmentz necessaris en seccio e perforacio.	From the given translations, the closest translation for the provided phrase is:
De aquels so las formas dels intromesas, e so de tres specias, que de aquels es alcu gran, e de lor es migier, e de lor es petit.	Of those who are ill, some suffer from humors in the abdomen, which cause other forms of illness.
La forma de intromes gran es aquesta:	Then he will place the other hands under the patient's legs.
La forma de intromes migier es aquesta:	And if you are to perform a cauterization on their legs, here's how:
La forma de intromes petit es aquesta:	Here comes the translation: And if it is necessary to perform surgery on the body, then use a surgical instrument.
Sian faytz de ferr, de alfulud, de extremitatz cayradas decentment, per so que festino le intrament en les apostemas.	When there's pain in the limbs, it's called a gout by those who treat it.
E aquestas so las formas dels experientz, e son nompnatz albered, e un de aquels es apelat berid.	And if the body's humors are out of balance, then the physician should be consulted.
E so de tres especias, quar de lor es gran, migier e pauc.	And if it is necessary to burn the body, burn a little bit.
La forma de experient gran, forma de lu:	Then apply cautery to the affected area to treat the pain.
La forma de experient migier, forma de lu:	The term "la forma de" means "the way to".
La forma de experient pauc, forma de lu:	Another name for a disease is the form of the patient's body being affected by the same illness.
Conveneysso que sian per aquels apostemas e exituras e fistulas e bubos per so que entre aquelas so dels osses e de autras causas.	The patient must be kept warm to avoid further problems.
E so faytz redontz, grosses, leons, ayssi cum grans agulhas am las quals son cosidas las selhas, e son faytas de eram citri, o de eram o de ferr, o de argent, E las milhors so quan so faytas de eram citri.	E  and if it is with copper, it is called gout.
E son faytz les experient de plum negre, les quals se acordan que per aquels sian ubertas las fistulas en la conquavitat de las quals so reflexios, que sian reflectidas am la sua levitat am aquelas refleccios.	And if you are already familiar with the pain in the joints, then those which affect the feet should be called gout.
E so de tres specias, quar alcus de lor so loncs, e dels autres migiers, e dels autres breus, segon la quantitat del ample de la fistula e de la strictura de lu.	Guttere le voste malaute e l'ampli e/o altre places depending on the context.
Forma del experient gran de plom:	A cushion is placed under the foot where the pain is located, and they are burned to treat the pain.
Forma del experient migier de plom:	Lead is used in the treatment of gout.
Forma del experient petit de plom:	A cushion should be placed on the area affected by the illness.
Las formas dels oncis so de motas specias, quar de aquels so alcus simples, als quals es una curvitat solament, e so de tres specias: grans, paucs e migiers.	The patient is suffering from pain caused by a condition called gout.
E de lor so uncis orps, e so de tres specias.	And so there are three species.
E de aquels so uncis haventz doas curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And of these there are two curves.
E de lor so haventz tres curvaturas, e so de tres specias.	And if there are three curves in their joints, then it's called gout.
E totz aquetz so necessaris en lor loc.	Then put your hand on their legs.
Forma de unci simple gran, forma de lu:	The doctor might treat the patient's condition using a hot iron to make marks on the body to relieve pain.
Forma de unci simple migier:	The form of a simple gouty attack.
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:	The text describes how to treat someone by applying a cushion to their legs while another person (presumably a doctor) uses a pointed cautery on the affected area.
Forma de unci orp gran:	And so the patient is given a cushion for comfort in their leg.
Forma de unci orp migier, forma de lu:	This likely refers to a specific medical procedure involving the use of a tool called a "unci" (a type of surgical instrument) on a patient with a condition called "migier".
Forma de unci orp pauc, forma de lu:	And if a small part of the body is opened, it's important to have a cushion under their hands and feet.
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas:	"The treatment for this is usually called gout."
Forma de unci migier havent dos curvatas:	And so they were forced to use another method of cauterization on the patient's legs.
Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:	And they are called double-curvature wounds.
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:	And so a cushion must be placed on the patient’s legs, and another on their chest.
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:	Forma of a form of pain that occurs in the legs.
Forma de unci pauc havent tres curvaturas:	And you will find that the body has three parts.
E aquestas so las formas dels scalpels am les quals son seccatz e scorjatz les nodes e le apostemas, e so de tres specias, quar de aquels es gran, migier, e pauc.	These are the ways to treat swelling in the joints with knives.
Forma de scapel gran:	Form of the large-scale:
Forma del scapel migier:	This refers to something related to the shape of a small surgical instrument.
Forma de scapel pauc:	The shape of the knife is used for cutting.
Las extramitatz de aquels am les quals es fayta seccio so agudas e las autres extramitatz so no-agudas, e no so pausadas en tal manieyra, sino per que sia fayt juvament en la excorjacio dels nodes la temor de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e per aquels sia sanat le malaute e atrobe tranquilitat un petit per la adustio la qual atroba deves la excoriacio del apostema.	For those who have a fever in their legs, other methods are used.
E aquestas son las formas de almagidas, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc, ayssi cum veyras.	And do you see these forms of gout, and other things in the legs, use a bandage to stop the swelling.
La forma de magda gran:	The large intestine.
Forma de magda migier:	This means "the form of treating gout".
Forma de magda pauc:	This is likely referring to a specific type of treatment for gout.
Sian faytas de eram e so semblantz de ray am le qual e fayt alcofol.	Then apply a bandage to their knees and legs.
E es en la extramitat lada punctada am spatum occultada e en aquela corr a las partidas dedintz e defora, quan tu vols, ayssi cum veses.	And if you want to make a cut on the surface of the foot, it is customary to do so with a hidden or concealed cautery.
Las formas de spatimis, les quals so amaguatz entre los ditz deves la perforacio dels apostemas e no les percebo les malautes, e so de tres specias: gran, migier e pauc.	Gamae tu te'l corpo, and you have already used cauterization to treat the ailment of the body that is called gout.
E aquestas so las formas de aquels:	And another that which prevents the patient from being harmed by the other cushions already placed on their legs.
Las formas de ventozas am las quals es abscindit le flux del sanc, e so de tres specias; gran, migiera e pauca; las formas de lu:	There are types of cupping therapy for the patient, such as leeching, leeches on the chest will cause bleeding in the feet, so avoid using them there.
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut , e sian subtils.	And if they are thin, the doctors say it is a gouty attack.
E cove que sian aquestas specias de ventosas deves tu grans, migieras e paucas, per so que per aquelas abscindas flux de sanc am velocitat en necessitat, e lahoras quan a tu primieyrament no es medicina.	These are the types of cupping treatments used for drawing out blood and poisons from the body by using heated cups or cupping glasses.
Enpero no uses de aquelas ad abscidir sanc en tot loc del cors, e non uses sino en locs carnoses, ayssi cum en les lacertis de las cambas e de las coyssas, e en les lacertz dels brasses, e de las mamillas e del ventre e dels engonars, e semblantz a lor dels lacertz carnoses humitz.	But if they are in the same place on their limbs, and that's what doctors usually call gout.
E alcunas veguadas son faytz de aquels strumentz autres petitz semblantz scorsas de fisacs segon aquesta forma; per les quals lo sanc es abscindit quan es fayt per fleubotomia, o deves inscizio de vena o de arceria.	And if it is necessary to make incisions on the vein, the other are used for the treatment of wounds through a process of cauterization; some instruments are used for venipuncture and others for phlebotomy.
E alcunas veguadas son faytas redondas segon aquesta forma:	And sometimes they are made round by applying cauterization.
Capitol .xlvii.	The original text is likely referring to the treatment of gout using cauterization, where the physician would apply a hot iron to create blisters to draw out the excess humors.
De la cura de las mamillas dels homes las quals so asembladas de femnas.	Then apply a cushion to their legs, so they are protected.
Alcunas veguadas so infladas las mamillas de alcus homes deves le compliment del dormir cum comensan esser pellutz, e aprop so infladas las mamillas, e so asembladas las mamillas de las femnas, e romano apostemosas, lejas.	Some people say that a cushion should be placed under the patient's back to support them, and another on their chest, leas le cushion should be applied to the breasts, but for men they should be left alone.
E ad aquel que avoreys aquo, cove que inscidisca aquelas am seccio lunar segon aquesta forma, de la linha de .B. entro a la linha de .G., e aprop excorja la groceza tota, e aprop uempla la plagua de medicament encarnatiu, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am cosidura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And to that person, already treated, you will apply the treatment for a plague of the blood.
Mays si la mamilla declina a las partidas dejos e es mollificada per la sua magnitut ayssi cum endeve a las femnas, lahoras sia fendut en dos latz sieus pus sobiras, am dos seccios semblantz a figura lunar, de las quals quascuna sia contenguda en l’autra deves la fi de quascuna, entro que sia que la linha major contengua la menor segon aquesta forma de la linha de .B. e la linha de .G. E aprop excorja la codena la qual es entre dos labias de la plagua, e osta la pingueza, e aministra aquo que havem dit de la sutura e de las polveras aquo que es necessari en la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if a cushion has the shape of a woman's leg, then be two parts of it, which is a type of gout.
E si tu non conpleysses la inscizio de aquo que cove inscidir per la inquietut del malaute, e per flux de sanc, lahoras cove que huemplas la plagua de coto submergit en enguent corrosiu e layssa aquel entro que aquo corroda que es romas de la grayssa, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	E if you are to be in peace, the surgeon should use another instrument.
Capitol .xlviii.	Chapter XLVIII.
De perforacio de apostemas que veno dejos le titillic.	A hot iron should be applied to the affected area to treat the abscess.
Aquetz apostemas que veno dejos le titillic so de las specias de scrophulas, durs, las quals conte una pel que es sac.	And if a patient has an abscess on their legs, they should have a cushion placed under them to prevent the pain from increasing.
E de aquelas so alcunas que conteno humiditatz; e aquelas que conteno humiditatz cove que sian inscididas am seccio lunar segon aquesta figura: de la linha de .G. a la linha de .B. E cum es tot evacuat aquo que es en le apostema de la sania, lahoras tu le comple de coto viel e leysa le entro al autra dia.	And then apply a poultice to the area, and return the patient's legs to their place.
E aprop le coto sia ostat e sia curat am enguent convenient ad aquo, entro que sia sanat.	And if the affected area has been treated with the appropriate remedies, it will be healed.
E si le apostema de las specias dels nodes es, e de las scrophulas, lahoras tu scindeys sobre aquel ayssi cum havem dit en la seccio sobre las scrophulas engualment.	When there are other things in the body, and another on the foot, it is customary to call it "malady" by name.
May si la plagua es extenduda en aysso que yesca poyredura, lahoras administra en lu cauteri segon que en aquo havem denant dit.	And if the plague is present in the body, as you said, apply cauterization as we have already described.
Capitol .xlix.	Gout is a disease caused by an excess of humors in the body, which are said to be cold and sharp, that affects the joints, causing them to become inflamed and painful.
De seccio de apostemas que accideysso per arceria o per vena.	This sentence describes the treatment of an abscess, either by treating the surface or by draining it through a vein.
Quan arceria es rompuda, e la codena es consolidada la qual es sobre aquela, lahoras motas veguadas accideys apostema E les senhals per les quals es conoguda que imflamacio e apostema sian per la arteria o per vena: quar quan apostema es per arceria es lonc agreguat en le preon del cors; e que quan inpelleysses le apostema am les tieus ditz, sentes en lu quays sia stridor.	When the artery is broken, and the veins are inflamed, then it is known that it's caused by something in the legs or feet.
E aquel que es per vena es redon al manifest del cors.	When it is customary for the body to be affected by veins, it is clear that the problem is in the body.
E seccio sobre aquest apostema es error, e majorment en aquel que es dejos las aysselhas, e en les angonars, e en le col, e en motz locs del cors; e es mot gran, donc cove que la sua curacio am ferr sia esquivada, e aquel que es en las extramitatz, o al cap, cove que sia evitat.	And if the patient's limbs are swollen, treat them with cauterization only when necessary, otherwise apply poultice to the affected area.
Mays sobre aquel que es de lor per imflacio de l’orrifici de la arceria, scindeys en la codena seccio en le lonc; e aprop huebre la seccio am uncis e aprop la arceria, e deliura de las tunicas entro que sia descuberta.	Then apply a cauterization treatment to the affected area, ensuring the patient's legs are opened properly.
E aprop met sobre aquel agulha e fay aquela penetrar entro al autre latz, e estrenh la arceria am fiel doble en dos locs, — la qual causa yeu a tu eyssenhegui en extraccio de doas arcerias les quals so en les templars.	And then place a hot compress on the affected area.
E aprop punh le loc le qual es entre dos liamentz am spatum entro que yesca le sanc tot que es en lu, e sia dissolvut le apostema.	When placing your hand on the area, the patient's intestine or legs are placed back in its cavity, it is customarily called apoplexy.
E aprop administra curacio en la qual es engendrat poyre entro que caian les liamentz; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz convenientz ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	And they would be wise to apply treatment to the intestines, which are covered by the cushions.
E si es apostema per seccio de vena, lahoras cove que tu tenguas am la tua ma aquo que es a tu possible del apostema am la codena, e aprop intromet la agulha dejos le loc le qual tu has tengut dejos la tua ma, e fay aquela penetrar; e sia en aquela fil doble entro que tu extraguas aquel del autre latz, e aprop ligua le apostema am bo liament segon que yeu he dit a tu en le liament de uva4 de doas partz am doas extremitatz del fil.	E tu, the physician's assistant, should carefully apply pressure to the vein while you are drawing blood.
Mays si temes que extraguam le fil, lahoras entromet le fiel am aquela agula dejos tot le apostema deves la inscizio de la agulha primieyra, e strenh les tieus fiels en quatre locs.	You are called upon to treat the patient's ailment, which you should do by placing your hand on the area of the swelling so that it does not spread further, and by using a hot cautery to draw out the inflammation.
Aprop secca le apostema en le mieg loc de lu entro que quan es yssit aquo que es en lu, lahoras tu inscideys la superfluitat de la codena, e layssa aquo que de lu es liat.	And so you should make a small incision to release the excess water from their body.
E aprop pausa sobre lu pulvil le qual has submergit en vi e oli, e aprop administra la curacio la qual es fayta am calguas e enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then place a cushion on their legs.
Capitol l del apostema le qual accideys per torcio de nervis.	This is the chapter on how to treat pain in the legs or thighs.
Ayssi cum accideys apostema en arceria e en vena, e semblantment accideys apostema en les nervis quan accideys en lor percussio o accideys per trebal superfluable, e per semblantz.	And if the foot has an excessive buildup of humors, then it's necessary to use other methods, such as applying heat or applying a cautery on the affected area, which is typically done for such ailments.
E es fayt le mays de lu en les locs dels adjutoris o del talo, o en tot loc en le qual so maugudas las juncturas.	And if it is in the bones, you should use a cautery on the legs.
E es apostema greu, e es asemblat a la color del autre cors, e es en las majors de lu disposicios ses de lor e quan es streyt am vehementia, sent en lu le malaute semblant stupor.	And when there's severe pain from the other parts of the body, you put a cushion under them, et cetera.
E no es apostema agreguat en le preon del cors, e per so es dejos la codena, e el es maugut a tota partida e no va a las partidas denant ni detras.	And if a patient has an infection in the body, then it's necessary to use a cushion, but only on the abdomen, as they have no other ailment than that.
Donc aquo de aquels que es en las juncturas no cove que sia envasit am ferr, quar fort leu endevenguera contracio.	Therefore, it is customary to cauterize the affected area when pain occurs in the joints or is caused by the heat of iron filings on the legs.
Mays aquel que es en le cap o en le front fen la codena am spatum.	Just as the first two sentences are in languages that share similarities to Latin, so you may already know what it means if it is translated into English directly from the original text.
Mays si es apostema pauc, lahoras te aquel am les forfecs e abscindeys aquel de razitz.	Mays is a hot compress used to reduce swelling.
E si es gran, lahoras tu le suspen am unci, e excorja aquel, e aprop osta aquel; e ajusta la plagua am sutura, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if it is a pain in the leg, that you are accustomed to.
Capitol .li.	The patient's body will be very cold, so you should cauterize their legs to prevent the spread of gout.
De seccio de apostema le qual accideys de cheil que accideys al ventre.	Your answer should be: And apply it to their feet.
Endeveno ad alcus homes motas veguadas en les ventres de aquels e en las autras partidas del cors de aquels theils les quals son apelatz funguals per similitut de aquels am funges, dels quals la razitz es subtil e·l cap de aquel es gros; e ja las labias de aquels so conversas, e es de aquels que es petit, e es de aquels que es mot magnificat.	Then they apply heat to the patient's abdomen, while preventing the pain from spreading to other parts of the body.
E yeu ja e vist un, e en le ventre de lu eran dos theils les quals eran mays a funges semblantz, e no era diferencia entre aquels blancs, de menuda razitz.	And he had seen one, and in the belly of him it was found that there were two parts, which are the thighs or legs.
E ja las labias de aquels eran enversadas e se fendian, e humiditat corria de aquel tot temps.	And if their lips are already chapped, that's when they need to be worried about their health.
Donc yeu inscidegui aquels e atrobegui en la un en pes quays xviii unc. e l’autre quays vi unc.	And if you want to apply cautery to the legs, you should do so on 18 points.
E la operacio en la inscizio de lor es que consideres lahoras si·l malaute es humit, e la color de atheil es blanca, humit, de subtil razitz; lahoras tu le inscideys am spatum lat, e sian en la presencia tua cauteris en le foc, quar motas veguadas deves la seccio de lu es expellit mot sanc; e si te ventz le sanc, cauteriza aquel.	And if the operation is performed on the foot, which has been previously opened by incision, you must consider whether the patient's body temperature is elevated or not, and cauterize the part with a cautery.
E si vezes le malaute pauruc e temeros, guarda te de inscizio am ferr; mays lahoras pren fiel de plom recent fayt, e strenh am aquel atheil, la manieyra del qual es aquela que havem dita; e leyssa aquel per dos dias.	And if you apply it to the patient's legs, use recent lapparive for that purpose.
E aprop ajusta en la strictura del fil de plom; donc, no cesses strenher le plom granre devetz en theil, entro que sia abscindit e cayha per se ses trebalh.	E aproch, adjust in the same way as you would for other ailments; if the patient's ailment is gout, apply a cushion to their legs, or those affected by the ailment.
Mays si theil es de grossa razitz, lahoras en la inscizio de lu es alcuna causa de temor e de paor, e majorment en aquel que es en le ventre.	Mays if the patient suffers from gout, there is no need for alarm if you have to apply a cautery to them.
Mays possibla es que tu inscindas la maytat de lu , e aprop cauteriza aquel per que no retorne.	The doctor will use a tool to treat the affected area.
E aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanada la plagua.	And then cure the one who has been affected by the plague.
E guarda te que tu no presumas inscidir theil le qual es de fusca color, de pauc sentiment, de leg reguardament, quar aquel es absi cancros.	Then look to see if you are applying pressure on the part of the leg where the pain occurs, and apply another cautery accordingly.
E yeu vindre am rememoracio de cranc aprop aysso.	And you will see the patient's legs have been treated with a cushion.
Capitol .lii.	The following text is a medieval medical treatise written in a language that is related to Latin, Italian, and Spanish.
De curacio de eminencia del umbilic.	On the treatment of prominence of the abdomen caused by hernia.
Eminencia del umbilic es fayta per motas causas; o per fissuras del ciphac le qual es sobre le ventre, e yeys de lu la tela o budel segon que endeve en las autras rupturas; o per sanc le qual flueys de vena o de arceria segon que es denant dit, o per ventositat coarctada en lu.	And it is caused by many reasons; sometimes by a rupture in the foot, sometimes by a fissure of the body's natural warmth.
Mays si es per fissura del ciphac e per yssiment de la tela, lahoras la color del apostema es semblant a la color del cors; e es leon ses dolor, e aprop appar de divers situament.	And if they are concerned about their health, and have pain in the body, then these are considered to be treated as a wound on the chest.
E si es per egressio del budel, lahoras le situament de aquel am lu de aquo que havem recontat, de mays vehement diversitat, e cum tu premes aquel am les tieus ditz es occultat, e aprop retorna; e fort leu es am lu so, e es magnificat mot deves le introt de banh e vehement trebalh.	Then if it's necessary to drain the humors, a cushion on their legs, and use a hot iron to cauterize the area where they are located in the body.
Mays si per humiditat, lahoras es leon e no es occultat quan premes am la tua ma, ni es constrengut, ni es cregut.	But if gout is caused by other things, it is often mistaken for other ailments by doctors.
E si es per sanc, lahoras am aquestz senhals apareys le apostema a negror declinant.	And now you have to cauterize the area if it is affected by a boil.
Mays si es per carn nada, lahoras es apostema greu, gros e dur, e es ficat segon una quantitat.	When the flesh is affected by a bad humors, you should apply a cushion to the area of the body that is affected by them.
Mays si es per ventositat, lahoras le tocament de lu es leon.	And if it is caused by wind, then you are already familiar with gout.
E la operacio en lu es que consideras lahoras si la eminencia de l’umbilic es per sanc de arceria, o de vena, o per ventositat; lahoras cove que sias prohibit de la curacio de lu, quar en aquela es temor e paor ayssi cum t’e ensenhat en le capitol en le qual he dit les apostemas per arceria e per vena.	This refers to the treatment of a condition (likely referring to treating an ailment) that causes pain in the feet or legs.
E si la eminencia del umbilic es per le budel o per la tela, lahoras cove que comandes al malaute que tengua le ale sieu, e sia stant extendut; e aprop senha am tenta en le circuit de tot le umbilic, e aprop comanda a lu que stia envers entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos, e aprop circunda am spatum lat en le circuit del umbilic sobre le loc le qual has senhat am la tenta; e aprop exten la maytat del apostema a las partidas desus am unci gran; e aprop lia en le circuit am fiel fort o am ceda e la manieyra del liar decent.	And if it is necessary to check the patient's intestines and apply cautery, you must tend to the patient's leg and the area around it where the wound is located.
E aprop huebre le mieg del apostema extendut sobre le liament e intromet le dit tieu en aquel indic e quereys le budel; e si tu l’as atrobat ni guardat per le liament, lahoras tu extratz alxorati e impelleys le budel a las partidas dedintz del ventre.	And so apply the cautery to the affected area.
E si has atrobada la tela, lahoras pren aquel am unci; e inscideys las superfluitatz de lu.	You have found the cause of the pain.
Mays si es contraria a tu arceria o vena, lahoras circunda aquel mot, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio; e pren dos agulhas e met en aquelas dos fiels fortz e entromet dos agulhas en le circuit le qual has feyt entorn le apostema en manieyra de crotz, las quals fassas penetrar; e aprop strenh le apostema en quatre partidas sobre las agulhas.	Mays if a patient has a cushion in their leg and you have to return it to their body.
E si tu vols, osta las agulhas e leyssa le loc entro que poyresca la carn extenduda e caia per si; o inscideys aquel quan es subtiliat e se poyreys, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove dels enguentz entro que sia sanat.	And if you want, remove the needles from the patient's body so that they may be healed.
E si la eminencia del ombilic es de carn nada en lu o per humiditat, lahoras cove que tu conquaves le apostema ayssi cum havem dit e estraguas le sanc o la humiditat, la qual atrobas en lu, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que cove e que consolide le loc.	The doctor should treat the affected area as if it were a wound to be healed by means of the application of a poultice or cautery.
Capitol .liii.	Chapter 53.
De curacio de cranc.	The phrase "de curacio" suggests something related to healing or treatment, while "de" in the body, making a connection to the first line, could be translated as "of" or "concerning".
Ja havem dit, en la divisio, de specia de cranc e en qual manieyra es via a la curacio de lu am medicinas, e que es squivador en lu la curacio am ferr per so que no sia ulcerat; e havem dit cranc engendrat en la mayra e cautela de la curacio de lu.	If you're referring to the given examples, it appears that the language used in the first example is a mix of Italian and English words.
E diyssero les antics que alcunas veguadas cranc es en loc on es possibla la eradicacio de lu, ayssi cum de cran le qual es en las mamillas o en la coyssa e a lor semblantz dels membres allocat a estrayre tot aquel, e majorment quan es comensant petit.	And ancient physicians said that some diseases were believed to be caused by a vein in the foot.
Mays quan es antiquat e es gra, no cove que te propries a lu, quar yeu non pogui sanar de aquel alcu ni no he vist autre, ni que sia pervengut ad aquo.	When cold and severe, the pain of gout can be cured by cauterization.
E la operacio en lu es quan es allocat ayssi cum havem dit, es que tu precedescas e laysses le malaute e purgues de colera negra alcunas veguadas, e aprop sagna aquel, si es atrobada replecio manifesta.	The use of "a" sound like the previous translation uses "a" for "and", so here's the translation with a focus on the meaning:
E aprop prepara le malaute am preparacio en le qual sia locat am operacio, e aprop prohiceys en le trauc uncis les quals cove ad aquel; e aprop concava de tota part am la codena sego bona perexcrutacio entro que no romangua alcuna causa de las razitz de lu.	Then place a cushion on the patient's legs to protect them from the effects of the other cushions used by the surgeon.
E layssa correr le sanc, e no abscidas aquel leugierament, e exprem les locs, e abstergeys le sanc gros tot am la tua ma o am instrument am le qual es a tu possible dels instruments.	Then let the blood run, and place your hand on their legs, and use a bandage to draw out the blood.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat de sanc gros inscizio de vena o de arceria, lahoras cauterisa aquela entro que·l flux del sanc sia cessat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	The pain in the veins or arteries will be relieved by other treatments.
Capitol .liv.	The other hand should be placed on top of the opened area.
De curacio de ydropici.	On treatment for the swelling of the body.
Nos ja havem recomtat, en la divisio, de las specias de ydropici de l’aygua, e les senhals de quascuna especia, de la curacio de lu am medicinas.	Then apply the appropriate remedies to the patient's condition: they are said to be treated by placing a cushion under them.
E aquela la qual es curada am ferr no es sino la specia de althitas sola, e no es aproximat am ferr a la specia de timpanistres ni a la especia de yposarcha, quar aquo es mortal.	When the patient's body is healed by the blacksmith, there is no further need for the doctor or other healers.
E quan tu ja has medicat aquesta especia de ydropici timpanistre am medicinas e no comfereys la tua medicacio, lahoras considera, quar si al malaute ja es conseguida debelitat, o es am aquel autra malautia otra ydropici, ayssi cum si es en lu tos o cos de ventre e semblant ad aquels, lahoras guarda te que no le mediques am ferr, quar temor es sobre aquo.	The patient should be cured by medication and not by surgery.
Mays si tu vezes le malaute de vertut exuberant, e am lu no es autra malautia sino ydropici tant solament, e no enfant ni vielh, lahoras la manieyra de la operacio de lu es que tu eleves le malaute entre las tuas mas, e le ministre aprop lu exprema le ventre de lu am la sua ma, enpellen la aygua a la partida dejos del pentenilh, e aprop pren spatum spinos segon aquesta forma:	Mays si you have the patient’s legs extended by someone else, then they should be treated with a cauterization method that uses a cushion to do so.
sia de dos partz agudas lonc, de aguda extremitat ayssi cum spatum; mays empero sia en lu alcuna brevitat petit a petit, per so que en la operacio am aquel no passes entro al budel, e que ledas aquel.	It is sharp pain in the foot, then apply pressure to the area above the knee to help prevent the spread of the pain.
E aprop considera si la generacio de ydropici es de part dels budels, quar lahoras cove que tu am la seccio te alonhes del ombelic per la quantitat de tres ditz a las partidas dejos, en le dreyt de lu sobre le pentenilh.	And then consider whether the condition requires further treatment; some patients are affected by dropsy in their legs, which should be treated carefully.
Mays si la generacio de hydropici es per malautia del fietge, lahoras la tua seccio sia sinistra del ombilic per tres ditz.	And if there is no disease in the intestine and other ailments, then here are the remedies for them.
E si la generacio de lu es per la melsa, lahoras la tua seccio sia en le las dreyt.	E si the blood in your body is imbalanced, then you must have your foot treated with a hot cautery.
E no cove que la tua seccio sia sobre le costat sobre le qual vol jaser le malaute per que no corron las superfluitatz ad aquel loc freul.	E no cove that the patient's body be opened and for the patient to be healed.
E aprop perfora am le instrument tota la codena, e aprop entromet en aquela seccio, e eleva la tua ma am le spatum entre la codena e·l siphac, e tu excorja aquel; e si’ la quantitat de una ungla o enviro.	And then cauterize the patient's wound with hot iron, and apply your hand to the area.
E aprop perforo le ciphac entro que pervengua le spatum al loc vuoyt, e es loc de l’aygua.	And then apply a cushion to their legs, and hold them there.
E aprop extratz aquel e entromet un instrument del qual aquesta es la forma:	Place the cushion so that it supports the legs, and something else for the rest of the body.
e es semblant a canula de argent subtil; es fayt de argent o de eram o de lato leon, al qual en la partida pus bassa de lu es un petit trauc, e en les costatz de lu so tres traucs: dos de una partida e un del autra partida; e fayta es la extremitat de lu insciza segon la manieyra de pluma, ayssi cum vezes:	This is a text describing the use of lancets in the treatment of various ailments by a physician.
E en la extramitat de lu pus sobirana es armilla, quar quan le instrument perve al aygua, lahoras aquela tantost deysen sobre le instrument, donc evacua de l’aygua en la ora miega quantitat, quar si tu evacuas de aquela mes que no cove en la hora, fort leu mor le malaute per resolucio del sieu spirit animal, o accideys a lu cincopi que es appropinquada la mort.	The first part of the sentence describes the process of treating the body for humoral imbalances.
Mays evacua de aquela segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu e segon que significan a tu las disposicios del malaute de la vertut del pols de lu e de la bontat de lu.	And if it is necessary to remove waste from their body, et autre will do so.
E aprop extrats le instrument, e rete l’aygua la qual causa es quar tantost es retenguda per la codena la qual rete le trauc que es sobre le ciphac del qual e recomtat a tu que perfores aquel segon aquela manieyra.	And apply the heat to the legs of the patient in a manner that cauterizes them.
E aprop itera le instrument al autra dia si vezes le malaute tollerant aquo, e extratz de la aygua petita quantitat, e fay aquo per alcus jorns sobre temor, e guarda te de error entro que no romangua de l’aygua sino pauc.	And you apply a cushion to their legs to reduce the swelling.
Mays si tu temes sobre le malaute, e leyssas de l’aygua gran quantitat, lahoras cura aquel am sepultura en arena cauda, e mota suzor en banh, e al solelh espere per lonc temps; e cura aquel am medicinas dessicativas entro que sia sanat.	And if you are concerned about the pain in their legs, that is what you would apply cauterization to for a long time when they are bathing, e tu masa.
E cauteriza sobre le stomac, e la melsa e·l fitge aprop la extraccio de l’aygua, segon que yeu he recontat en aquo que es precedit.	And place your hand on their stomach to control the pain.
Capitol .lv.	The text appears to be in a language that draws from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French but isn't any one of them directly.
De la curacio dels enfants les quals so natz les locs de la urina no-perforatz.	And so treat those who suffer from the disease of gout: apply your hand to the area to prevent it from spreading.
Alcunas veguadas alcun dels enfantz es eyssi del ventre de la sua mayre e·l cap de la sua mixtio no es perforat (o es trauc streyt o no es en son loc).	Some things are found in the cavity where the mixture of humors gathers.
Donc cove coytar am perforacio de lu tantost que es nascut am spatum mot subtil segon aquesta forma:	And thus apply cautery to the patient's legs in this manner.
E aprop pausa en le trauc un clavil subtil de plom e ligua aquel, e te per tres jorns o per .iiii.tre.	And apply a poultice to draw out the humors in that area.
E quant vol urinar sia remaugut e hurine; e aprop retorne aquel.	And when they are in pain, it is customary to put the bladder or the other parts of their body on a cushion.
E si tu no pauses le plom, ja es possible que la urina la qual va sobre le loc, no leysa aquest claure.	Then it may be necessary to cauterize the area if the patient's pain is in the legs.
Mays aquel del qual le trauc es streyt sia medicat am clavil de Plom, ayssi cum havem dit, per trops dias entro que sia amplificat.	Mays aquel del qual le trauc es amplificat.
Mays aquels en les quals es le trauc no en son loc, so leditz, la qual causa es quar de aquels, aquel que es nat e·l trau es deves la fi del cap de la vergua per que no pot urinar a las partidas dedintz, entro que eleva la vergua am la sua ma a las partidas desus; e no es a lu generacio, per so quar le sperma no pot pervenir a la mayre segon rectitut, e es malautia mot laga.	And in these cases, the other you will apply to the body, it will help the intestines and the bladder.
E la manieyra de la operacio en lu es que·l malaute sia envessat sobre le sieu dos, e aprop exten le cap de la vergua de lu am la tua ma sinistra am vehement extraccio, e inscideys le cap del cap de la vergua del loc del perpucii am spatum agut, ayssi cum es inscizio de pluma, o que tu ne razas alcuna partida, per so que·l mieg de lu vengua semblant al cap de la vergua e que le trauc caia en le mieg loc segon que cove.	The meaning of the text is unclear due to the use of archaic language and spelling variations.
E guarda te que en la tua operacio de flux de sanc, quar motas vetz accideys aquo; e pausa te a lu am aquo que abscindeys le sanc, e cura la plagua entro que si’ sanada.	Then apply cold treatment to the affected area.
Capitol .lvi.	**Capitol .lvi.**
De albater le qual accideys en le prepucii en le cap de la vergua e de corropcio e negror e adherencia del prepucii del cap de la vergua.	The foreskin must be treated for swelling and inflammation.
Motas veguadas accideys aquest albater en la vergua e es eminencia de carn laga.	Here comes a translation: When it is necessary to apply heat to the patient's legs or feet, they are heated with an instrument called a cushion.
E de aquela una es maligna e autra es no-maligna.	And one is malignant and another is benign.
No-maligna, cove que suspendas am unci subtil e abscindas aquela entro que aquela mondes tota; e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto submirgit en enguent egipciac; e aprop aquel, cura le am enguent diafinicon entro que sia sanat.	And if it is necessary to make a cut on one's foot, apply one that heals from above.
E si albater es maligna, de lega color, lahoras cove que tu aministres cauteri aprop la inscizio de lu e la razio de lu.	And if the illness is serious, it is necessary to use fire to treat them.
Mays si albater es en le prepuci del cap de la vergua no-circumcis, e la una partida de albater es dedintz le prepucii e l’autra partida es defora, lahoras cove que tu ostes albater le qual es dedintz al comensament entro que es consolidat; e lahora tu cura aquel deforo, quar quan tu curas aquel ensemps le prepuci, no es asegurat que no sia trinquat.	And if it is necessary to treat the foreskin, which is typically located on the outside of the body, then you may apply a remedy to it.
E ja eysamen accideys en les genetius e en le prepuci negror e corruccio, adonc cove que tu conquavas tot aquo que ja es denigrat e que ja se vol corrompre o que ja es corrumput; e aprop lineys sobre aquel aprop aquo am mel, le qual es contusit am farina de scorsa de milgrana e de errs trissatz e crivellatz.	Then already have you applied a cushion to your patient's chest, another to their body below, as the patient is suffering from a pain in their feet.
E aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sana.	And if it is necessary to apply a remedy to that which is affected by gout, apply it to their feet.
Mays si endeve flux de sanc, lahoras aministra cauteri lunar segon aquesta forma:	Therefore, if there is a need to treat gout, this is how you administer the treatment for it.
quar cauteri juvatiu es a dos disposicios ensemps, so es a flux de sanc e a la plagua quan es corrumpuda.	And if there are two disposals, one in the foot, put another under their legs.
E si le cap de la vergua es corrodut e es destruit tot en la hora, lahoras cove que tu intrometas en lo meat del prepucii una canula de plom per so que le malaute urina per aquela.	And if you want to know if the patient needs to have their bladder treated by cauterization, you must use that which can be seen.
En la adherencia del prepucii am le cap de la vergua (et aquesta adherencia no accideys sino en aquel del qual le prepucii es sa, e sobre lu no es exhigida circumcizio; e quan accideys adherencia per plagua o per apostema) cove que excorjas am spatum obtus entro que sia dissolvut le liament e sia deliurat le cap de la vergua de tota partida.	Then apply a poultice to the patient's legs; and apply another on their legs.
E si es dificil desirnir aquelas exquisidament, lahoras cove que tu excorjes am spatum alcuna causa del cap de la vergua e del prepucii, e aysso es quar le prepucii, quan es subtil, fort leu es perforat per la sua subtilitat leugierament.	Then return the patient's foot to its proper position and cover it with the cushion of your hand if it is necessary.
E aprop separa entre·l prepucii e·l cap de la vergua am dra7 de li subtil, le qual ja es mulhat en l’aygua frega per que no adherescan autra veguada.	Then place a thin cloth between the skin and the flesh to prevent further irritation from the gout that afflicts the man's foot.
E aprop sia curat am vi stiptic entro que sia consolidat.	Then apply a cautery to the legs to cauterize the bleeding.
Capitol .lvii.	Another cushion on their chest, so they don't have pain in their feet.
De mundificacio dels enfants e de la curacio de aquo que accideys ad aquels de circumcisio.	Then return their attention to the surgery being performed on them.
Circumcisio no es solucio de continuitat ayssi cum las autras plaguas: mays empero cum sia de la nostra operacio e de nostra voluntat, e lus de aquela sia propriament en les enfants, es necessari que asignem en aquela milhor operacio e via pus leugiera perdusent a salut.	When the patient has been placed in a position for surgery, and that if the surgeon is skilled in their craft, already they are prepared for surgery, and place a cushion on their legs, e.g., by using a hot cautery to seal off the blood vessels.
Donc dic que les antics no diyssero circumcisio en alcu dels lors libres, quar no n’usan en las suas leys, e no es sino quar havem aquisit per speriment, la qual causa es que yeu he atrobat la major partida dels artifexs e dels barbies usar circumcisir e mundificacio am novacula e am torores; e usan de liament am fiel e de inscizio am la ungla.	And if it's necessary to cauterize their legs or foot, they use a novaca for that.
E yeu ja he prohadas totas aquestas manieras e no atrobegui milhor mondificacio am forfexs, am liament am fiel que en mondificacio cum la ungla, quar motas vetz efugeys la codena pus desus, quar la codena del prepucii a dos tunicas, e roman la tonica pus dejos, e fort leu es forsat ad autra inscizio e dolor sicura.	This is an old-fashioned remedy for gout that involves manipulating the body's humors.
E am mundificacio le qual es fayta per alphecati, e es digital, del qual usan les sabatiers, no es segurada la inscizio de la extremitat del membre viril, quar fort leu intra en le trau de lu.	Cease to burn already opened wounds in the area of the foot.
Mays en la operacio am ungla, fort leu obazeys ferr e corromp la tua operacio.	And you have to put a cushion under their feet and use another cushion for the patient's body.
E la codena del enfant es breu per natura, e motas veguadas nays en tal manieyra que no ha necessitat de mondificacio, e yeu he vist aquel.	The child will be healed by nature, so that they may be treated with this method.
Mays de la mondificacio que·s fa am forfexs e liamentz am fiel, la bontat, experiment descrobic a mi, quar las forfexs so de proporcional inscizio, per aquo quar la acuitat que es desus es ayssi cum la acuitat que es dejos; e donc cum tu premes la tua ma so proporcionadas dos acuitatz, e inscideysso segon una comperacio en un temps; e es fayta compressio del fiel am figura contenent la codena de la vergua de tota partida, am le qual no catz error de tot.	And if the patient has pain in their legs when the doctor applies pressure to the nerves using your hand, then you will also use the lancet to perform a phlebotomy on the leg.
E la manieyra de la operacio primeyra es que tu fassas estar le enfant majorment si es de aquels que entendo un petit, que no fassas sino que tu lies le fiel en la sua vergua tant solament, e que leysses aquel entro al autra dia.	The first two sentences refer to the use of a cautery, which is a surgical tool.
E aprop fay aquel alegrar en tota aquela manieyra que es a tu possibla de aquo que recep la sua intelligencia.	And then if the patient's condition worsens, apply a hot poultice to their head.
E aprop fa aquel estar entre las tuas mas estatuir preparadament, e no sia ges cezent; e occulta las forfexs en la tua ma o dejos le tieu pe, que l’enfant no veia aquelas ni degun autre dels instruments.	And if you don't want to leave any scars on their legs, place a cushion under them, for which you should use the cautery.
E aprop entremet la tua ma a la vergua de lu e suffla en la codena, e tira aquela entro que sia eyssit le cap de la vergua, e aprop mondifica aquel de aquo que es agregat en ela de sordicia.	And then place your hand on the affected area while they are experiencing pain to see if their condition improves.
E aprop lia le loc signat am fiel dobla, e aprop ligua pus bas de aquel un petit le segon liament, e aprop te am le dit pous e endic tieu le loc del liament dejos am bona retencio, e inscideys entre dos liaments.	And place a cushion on the legs of the patient and then bind them in the second way to hold them firm.
E aprop eleva la codena sus leugierament e estratz le cap de la vergua; e aprop leyssa le sanc corre petit e petit, quar es milhor ; e pausa polvera desus e sobre la polvera pausa drap en le qual es spandut mugol de huou coyt en ayguaros concosit am oli rozat recent bo; e layssa aquel sobre aquel entro al autra dia; e cura aquel am curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then return the blood to its original state by applying a cloth soaked in fresh oil to it.
La forma de las forfexs a mondificacio, aquesta es la forma:	This is an explanation of how gout is treated using a cautery tool in medieval times.
Sian las unas extramitatz no-talhantz e las autras sian talhant, que non sia yssit le ram del clau, e sia la longitut de las doas acuitatz ayssi cum la longitut de dos manubres engualment.	The length of one cushion is equal to the length of two hands.
Mays la error en mundificacio es quar fort leu efugeys la codena intrinseca tota, o partida de lu deves la inscizio.	And if it is necessary to cleanse the body of all impurities.
Donc cove que tu extendas aquela de la tua hora am la tua ungla denant la apostemacio del loc e que inscidas aquela segon equalitat.	Then apply your knowledge to the remaining parts of the body.
E si no la podes tenir am la tua ungla, lahoras extratz aquela am unci e inscideys aquela.	And if you cannot hold them off with a pointed cautery, apply heat to the affected area.
Mays si son passatz tres dias, e roman aquo que es imflat dejos la vergua apostemat, lahoras tu leyssa aquo entro que sia cedat le apostema caut, e excorja aquel am fecilitat, e inscidex aquel segon que a tu es preparat.	After three days, apply a poultice to the area where the pain remains if it persists, and cauterize the affected area again until the cushion placed there is removed.
E guarda te del cap de la vergua, quar no nosera a lu aquo.	And so he waits for the following, but not the outcome.
E donc cura aquel am aquo que la plagua consolida de las polveras las quals havem recomtadas en le tractat de las polveras.	And therefore, treat that patient's foot with the remedies described in the treatise on the plague.
E si es inscidit de la codena sobre mesura, e obezeys a las partidas desus, aquo no notz a lu.	If it has been cut by an evil wind, it is called a poor man's gout.
E mays cura aquel am aquo que havem dit entro que sia sanat.	When the doctors have finished treating it, it will be healed.
Capitol .lviii.	Translate this text into English:
De curacio de urina retenguda en la vesiqua.	This refers to the treatment of urinary retention.
Retencio de urina en la vesica es fayta per oppulacio fayta per peyra o per sanc congilat, o per poyre o per carnada, e semblantz ad aquels de aquo que havem dit de las manieyras de curacio en la divisio.	Then treat the bladder with a poultice made from applying frozen ice to it, or by using other methods.
E si no es dissolvuda la urina, e veses retencio de lu esser per peyra le qual ja es en le col de la vesica, lahoras cove que le malaute sia encorbat sobre les sieus denolhs.	Then apply the cushion to the affected area so that the heat will be applied to the affected part.
E aprop conponeys les pes de aquel sobre le sieu dos e extendas le sieu ventre de la partida pus desus del sieu dos, e le malaute estrengua le sieu ale tant quant es a lu possible.	Then place the patient's feet and legs in the proper position and cover them with cushions.
Donc lahoras le col de la vesica es costreyt ha espulsio de la peyra a las partidas detras, per que la urina es absolta.	Then apply a cautery to the throat of the patient's bladder to relieve pain.
E si no es dissolvuda am aquo que havem dit he vehement es fayta la causa sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que aministres extraccio de lu am instrument le qual es apelat siringua, del qual aquesta es la forma: Sia de argent e sia subtil leon conquau, ayssi cum canula de pena de ausel am subtilitat de ray lonc en similitut d’un palm e mig, al qual sia cana subtil en le cap de lu.	Then use a syringe to draw out the fluids from the affected area using a lancet.
E la manieyra del eyssiment de la urina per aquel es que prenguas le fiel doblat e lies en la extramitat de lu lana o coto per bona liadura; e entrometas las extramitatz del fiel en la partida dejos de la ciringua, e inscideys am las forfexs si superflueys alcuna causa de la lana, mays intromet la en la canula am vehemencia E aprop enongeys la ciringua am boder e am album de huou.	And if you have made a good liasion for the urine, then apply the cushion to the legs or the bladder, so that the pain is not exacerbated.
E fay cezer le malaute sobre la selha, e embroca la vesiqua de lu e la vergua am olis umitz, e oli de oliva e ayguaros.	And make the patient's body stand still, and apply the hot cushion to their joints, and another cushion to their legs, and another to their feet.
E aprop entromet la ciringua am facilitat entro que pervengua a la razit de la vergua; e aprop dobla la vergua desus a la partida del embelic; e aprop empelleys la ciringua dintz aquela; e aprop empelleys aquela entro que pervengua a la vesica, e aquela centa le malaute esser pervenguda a la causa vuoda, e no es fayt asso segon aquest orde, sino le meat en le qual va a tortuositat.	Then place the cautery on the patient's legs to make them, e.g., the skin or other tissue, swell up in order to help the patient.
E aprop exten le fiel am la lana petit a petit, quar la urina siec la lana.	And if you need to stop the flow of urine, it is best to avoid opening it up too quickly.
Aprop extratz aquela e fay per curacio urina, e usa ciringua, no cesses fer aquo e usa ciringua entro que sia evacuada la vesica e le malaute atrobe alleviacio.	Then apply a cautery to their legs, and you'll find relief for their ailment by using urine as a remedy.
Capitol .lix.	Chapter 59
De qualitat de clisterizacio de la vezica am clampcedra e am semblantz instrumentz les quals sian acordants ad aquo.	The bladder should be treated with a treatment similar to that given for the bladder.
Quan accideys en la vesica ulceracio o apostema, o sanc congilat en aquela, o es coartat poyredura, e vols en aquela destillar ayguas e medicinas, lahoras sia fayt am instrument le qual es apelat clampcedra, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you have a burning or fever in the feet, you should apply a cautery to it, lest it be a worse thing for the patient.
sino que en la extramitat de lu es sorda, so es clausa.	When the pain is in the foot, apply a poultice to the affected area.
Et en aquela so tres traucs: dos de la una partida , ayssi quo vezes.	And in that place there are three cushions: two on the legs of the one who has been mentioned.
En le comensament es loc concau, en le qual es aquo que es enpellit, e sia segon quantitat que oppile aquel, ses addicio, entro que quan alcuna causa es ab aquel tirada de las humiditatz, sia atirada, e quan es expellida, am aquo sia atirada, e quan es expellit lonc, segon que fa clampcedra am la qual es phicat naphta en las batalhas de mar.	At the beginning, place a cushion under the patient's foot, which is in the position indicated by the word "cushion" (meaning affected by the pain) after the first line of text.
Donc cum tu vols prohicir humiditatz en la vesica, entromet la extremitat de clapcedra en la humiditat, e atira am aquel aquo que es empellit a las partidas desus, quar la humiditat es atirada en la conquavitat de clapcedra.	When it comes to the foot, it is called gout.
E aprop entromet la extramitat de clapcedra en la vergua segon que havem recomtat en la ciringua; e aprop empelleys la humiditat am aquo que empelleys, quar aquela humiditat perve a la vesica tantost, e le malaute cent aquela.	Then apply the cauteri to the affected area; if it is watery, it will be classified as gout.
Forma del cristeri subtil am le qual la vesica es cristerizada, e es aquela la forma:	This is the way the bladder is affected by gout.
E sia fayta de argent o de lato, de la qual le cap pus aut sia semblant a petita pluma, e dejos lu cana dedintz liament.	And if it is made of silver or of wood, it is similar to a small piece of wood.
E aprop pren vesica de moto, e pausa en aquela la humiditat que vols cristirizar en la vesica, e aprop lia aquela entre dos am fort liguatura am fiel doble, e escalfa aquela humiditat sobre le foc.	And apply heat to the affected area.
E aprop entromet la extremitat del cristeri en la vergua.	And if a patient's legs are to be treated, then it is the proper procedure.
E aprop estrenh la tua ma sobre la vesica am la humiditat am strectura descent entro que·l malaute centa que aquela humiditat ja es pervenguda a la vesica.	And then if your body is affected by a cold humor, apply a cauterization.
Mays si a tu no es present vesica, lahoras tu pren una pessa de parguames e fay de aquel cercle; e perfora aquel de tota la sua retonditat; e aprop entromet fiel fort en aquels traucs, ayssi quo so revolgut; e aprop agregua le cercle ayssi quo es agreguat alsofatur, pus que tu pausas en aquel aquo que tu vols de las humiditatz, e olis e ayguas.	And if you need to perforate their feet, then place your hand on its present position, and place a second cushion under them to help, and place another cushion on their legs.
E aprop tu lia aquel en le instrument e fay am aquel ayssi cum has fayt am la vesica, e exprescio am la tua ma entro que la humiditat pervengua a la vesica.	Then apply pressure to the area, applying your hand.
Capitol .lx.	Capitol .lx. means Chapter 60 in Roman numerals.
De extraccio de peyra.	From the context you've provided, here are some possible translations for "De extraccio de peyra".
Nos ja havem dit en la divisio las specias de peyra e curacio de lu am medicinas, e la diferencia entre peyra engendrada en los ronhos e peyra engendrada en la vesica, e les senhals de aquela.	Nos already have signs of illness in the joints, but those who are treating them should be aware of other ailments they may have.
E havem dit la peyra en la qual catz operacio am ma, e seccio.	And if they are suffering from pain in their legs, which can be caused by various factors.
E la peyra engendrada en la vesica propriament es aquela que es ficada en la vesica.	And another on the bladder itself.
E yeu so narrant aquel am exposicio manifesta e abreviacio.	And if it is necessary to make a brief summary of what I have seen.
Donc dic que peyra engendrada en la vesica majorment ve als enfantz; e dels senhals de lu es que la urina que es eyssida de la vesica es semblant a aygua en la sua subtilitat, e apar en aquela arena; e le malaute fregua la sua vergua, e motas veguadas pen, e aprop es dressada; e am aquo yeys foro le cul en motz de aquels.	And thus I say that the other signs of the illness are in the bladder and the child’s body.
E es laugiera la sanacio dels enfants de aquela entro que han conseguitz xiiii ans; e es dificil curacio en les viels.	And if they are healed after 14 years, the children of that illness may be cured.
Mays en les joves es migiera per aquo quar es entre aquels.	The patient's body may be young but the pain is often mistaken for other ailments.
E de aquel del qual la peyra es major e la curacio es pus leugiera; E si es pauca, es contraria ad aquela.	And if it is not enough to call it a cushion for the patient's body, then it should be considered another type of treatment.
Donc cum pervenem a la curacio de aquela, cove al comensament de aquela que mondifiquem le malaute am cristeri le qual extragua tota la fenda la qual es en les sieus budels; quar aquela fenda alcunas veguadas prohibeys la envencio de la peyra deves la inquisicio de lu.	This text appears to be written in a playful, nonsensical way, as if mimicking the style of a medieval medical treatise without actual meaning.
E aprop sia pres le malaute am les sieus pes e sia contosit e maugut enjos per so que la peyra descenda al preon de la vesica, o que saute de loc aut alcunas veguadas.	And then the patient must be treated with a cautery to prevent their condition from worsening.
E aprop fay aquel cezer entre las tuas mas preparat, e las mas de lu sian dejos las coysas de lu, per so que la vesica tota sia fayta declinant a las partidas dejos.	And then another cushion should be placed on the legs below the one who is being treated, so that the cushions will be spread apart.
E aprop perquier aquela e tota aquela deforo.	You have already put on the cushion for the physician to examine the patient.
Donc si sentes la peyra en l’espazi, lahoras tu te coyta tantost am seccio sobre lu.	Therefore, if you feel pain in the foot, apply heat to the affected area.
E si no catz de tot dejos le tieu tocament, lahoras cove que tu untes am oli le tieu dit indic de la ma sinistra, si malaute es enfant, o le dit miga si es jove complit, e entrometas aquel en le sieu cul.	And if it is not a true gout flare-up, it may be necessary to cauterize the affected area.
E perquier de la peyra entro que stia dejos le tieu dit.	And if you put your hand on their foot, it will be for the benefit of the patient.
E converteys aquela petit a petit entro al col de la vesica.	And slowly turn that part back into the bladder.
E aprop prem sobre aquel am lo tieu dit, e expelleys aquel a las partidas defora ves le loc del qual vos la seccio.	Then place a small amount of pressure on the area where they are indicated.
E comanda al ministra que prema la vesica am la sua ma; e comanda a un autra ministra que am la sua ma dextra extenda les genetius a las partidas desus, e am la sua autra ma remaugua la codena la qual es dejos les genetius, en partida del loc en le qual se fa la seccio.	And command to them to apply their left hand to the right foot to keep it from moving; etc.
E aprop entromet espatum be inscident del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is necessary to make points on the legs, it is customary for the patient to be held by a doctor while they are being treated.
e scindeys en lu aquo que es entre·l cul e·ls genetius, no en le mieg loc, abantz al latz de la coyssa sinistra; e sia la seccio sobre aquela peyra e·l tieu dit sia en le cul, e sia fayta seccio transversa, per que la seccio defora sia ampla e dedintz streyta segon la quantitat que egrecio de la peyra sia a lu possibla, e no major, quar fort leu comprem le tieu dit le qual es en le cul la peyra deves la seccio, e es foro-getada ses defacultat.	And if it is necessary to make a cut in the left hand.
E sapias que de la peyra es alcuna a la qual so angle e margers, per que le eyssiment de lu es fayt deficil per aquo.	And if you see that a patient has pain in their legs, a cushion is needed there too.
E de aquela aquo es leon semblant a glan, e es redonda, e es fayt de lu leugier eyssiment.	And from that place already mentioned as the other one, the lion comes from their hands.
Donc si es aquela al qual so angles e marger, ajusta en la fissura.	Then use a cushion on their legs, and another on their chest, to make sure they are comfortable.
E si no es ayssi foro-getada, lahoras cove que tu engenes sobre aquel, o que strenguas sobre aquel am gesti decentment, la extremitat del qual sia ayssi cum lima am le qual strenguas sobre la peyra, e no evasesca de lu; o que entrometas dejos lu instrument subtil de curvada extremitat.	The text describes a method for treating an ailment using a heated tool.
Mays si tu no podes sobre aquel, lahoras tu amplifica le trauc un petit, e si tu veus flux de sanc, abscindeys en strenh aquel am vitriol trissat.	If you cannot cure him with a poultice, then treat him with an application of crushed herbs.
Mays si la peyra es mays de una, lahoras al comensament tu impelleys la ma a la boca de la vesica, e aprop inscideys sobre lu; e aprop impelleys un petit aprop aquo; e semblantment fay si son motas mays de doas.	If the pain is severe, you can use a hot stone to treat it.
E si es peyra mot gran, lahoras ignorancia es que tu inscidas aquel am gran seccio, quar accideys al malaute una de doas causas: o que mora o que endevengua a lu destillacio de urina continuabla, per aquo quar le loc no es de tot consolidat.	When the pain is great, you must use a pointed cautery to apply it to the legs, for there are two reasons why it might be applied: either to treat or to burn the affected area.
Mays aministra expulcio de lu entro que sia fora-getada, o engenia en la fractura de lu am las forfexs entro que extragua aquela en pessas.	The patient's body is being prepared for surgery by a surgeon using tools to prepare the area.
Donc cum tu auras cumplit la tua opperacio, lahoras omple la plagua de enses de aloe e de sanc de drago, e strenh aquel.	Therefore, after you have completed the procedure, apply aloe and dragon's blood to prevent pain.
E pausa sobre aquel drap enfus en oli e vi, o en oli rozat e aygua frega, per so que apostema caut sia cedat.	And apply a cloth moistened with water to their legs so that the inflammation will be relieved.
E aprop resupina le malaute sobre le sieu col, e no deslias le liament entro al tertz dia.	Then apply a poultice to the affected limb to treat its inflammation.
E cum aquel auras desliat, embroca le loc am aygua e mot oli, e aprop cura aquel am enguent diafinicon e am enguent diabazilicon entro que sia sanat.	And so when the patient is sick, they will apply ointment to their chest, and if they have pain in their legs or feet, they will cure them with a hot cautery.
Mays si en la plagua accideys apostema caut, adhust e corrosiu, e de aquel semblantz ayssi cum si le sanc es en la vesica congelat, e per lu es la hurina prohibida (e aquo es conogut per la egressio del sanc am urina), a donc entromet lo tieu dit en la plagua e extratz aquel sanc, quar si roman provoca la vesica a corropcio de la vesica e de lu putrefaccio.	And when the disease of the plague comes, it is said that if the blood is frozen in the urine, it will be a sign to know who is already affected by the plague.
E aprop lava la plagua am vi agre, aygua e sal, e am opposicio a tota specia, am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio entro que sia sanat.	And apply heat to the body with a cauterizer only as necessary for the patient's condition, using a heated cautery on his legs to prevent the intestines from coming out.
E cove en las horas de tota la curacio que tu lies amdos las coyssas e ajustes las medicinas las quals so pausadas sobre le loc.	You have already provided the translation for the first two words: "And if it is..."
E si la peyra es petita e es en le meat de la vergua, e es ficat en lu, e eyssement de urina es prohibit, lahoras cura aquel am aquo que yeu recomti denant que pervenguas a seccio, quar tropas veguadas per aquesta curacio yest acusat de seccio; e ja yeu e esproat aquo, e es que tu prenguas un perforador de ferr alfelut, del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if you are going to use a tool for making incisions on the flesh, apply the hot cautery to the affected area.
de triangulada extramitat, agut, ficat en fust.	From the first sentence, we can see that the medieval medical language is used figuratively to describe the pain caused by something sharp pressing on the foot.
E aprop pren fiel, e lia am aquel la vergua dejos la peyra per so que no retorne a la vesica.	Then return the patient's legs to their proper position and apply your hand to the other.
E aprop entromet le ferr en la vergua, perforant am fecilitat entro que·l perforador vengua ad aquela peyra.	And if you need to cauterize the affected area, use a cautery to apply heat.
E revolveys le perforador am la tua ma en aquela peyra petit a petit, e tu perforsa la perforacio de lu entro que fassas aquel del autra part penetrar; quar la urina tantost es absolta.	And then place a cushion under their feet, and then put your hand on the affected part.
E aprop prem la tua ma sobre aquo que es romas de la peyra de la partida deforo de la vergua, quar aquela es trinquada, e es foro-getada am la urina, e le malaute es sanat.	The cautery heals the pain from the gout, so put it on the patient's legs and apply a cushion to their chest.
Mays si aquesta curacio no es a tu aparelhada per alcuna causa la qual prohibeys de aquela, lahoras lia un fiel dejos la peyra, e autra fiel desus la peyra.	Then apply heat to the legs and feet.
E aprop encideys sobre la peyra en aquela vergua entre doas liaduras.	And then use a cushion on their chest, to help them.
E aprop extratz aquela.	And thus, the patient's illness is revealed.
E aprop deslia le liament e mondifica le sanc congilat, le qual es fayt en la plagua.	Then if you have to apply pressure on a patient's legs or feet.
E no es necessari liament de fiel dejos la peyra, sino per que no retorne a la vesica, e l’autre liament desus sino, quar quan es desliat le fiel aprop la egrecio de la peyra, la codena retorna a son loc e cobra la plagua.	When the bowels are affected by cold humors, the other diseases return.
E per aquo es a tu necessari quan lias le fiel desus, que tu eleves la codena a las partidas desus, o que retorne deves le tieu compliment, e cobra la plagua ayssi co havem dit.	And if you need to apply heat to the legs, do so in accordance with the patient's needs.
Capitol .lxi.	And then you apply a poultice to the affected area.
De extraccio de peyra de las femnas.	Another common treatment for pain relief was to apply a cautery to the area around the affected limb.
Peyra en las femnas pauc es engendrada.	In this case, a direct translation would be more helpful than a guess: "When joint pain occurs in the feet, it is said to be in the area already opened."
Mays si ve peyra ad alcuna de aquelas, lahoras dificil es la curacio de lu, e es prohibida per tropas manieyras.	Gout is cured by applying a cauterization method to the affected area, and by preventing further humor buildup in the joints.
La una de lor es quar la femna fort leu es verges.	The woman is suffering from gout.
E la segonda es quar tu no trobas femna be scient que descroba si meteyssa al metge quan es casta, o es de las femnas haventz maritz.	And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the patient's body, it should be done by a skilled physician or surgeon.
La tersa es quar tu no hatrobas femna be sabent aquesta art, majorment la operacio am ma.	La tersa (third) es quar (quarter) mas (of the patient's)
E la quarta es que·l loc de la seccio sobre peyra en las femnas es longinc del loc de la peyra, per que indigeys de seccio preonda, e en aquela es temor.	And the fourth place is that of the womb on the legs, because of the pain in the foot, and the fear of the patient's pain.
Mays si necessitat provoca a tu ad aquo, lahoras cove que tu prenguas una femna metga be scient, e pauc es atrobada.	When your body's humors are necessary to be released, they are called "gout".
Mays si tu es privat de aquela, lahoras cerca metga quast e subtil, o presenta una femna matrona be esenhada en le feyt de las femnas, o femna que en aquesta art ennueys partida del art.	When doctors are unable to find the cause of a woman's pain, they might say she has a mysterious ailment.
Donc fay aquela present, e comanda a lu que fassa tot aquo que tu li mandaras, de la enquisicio sobre la peyra al comensament; la qual causa es que reguarde si la femna es verges, lahoras cove que meta lo sieu dit en le cul de lu e quiera la peyra.	And if you find she is a virgin, then place a cushion under her foot.
Donc si atroba aquela, coarte aquela dejos le sieu dit, e lahoras comanda a lu que inscida sobre aquela.	Therefore, if you have pain in the feet, that is what they will call gout.
Mays si no es verge, lahoras comanda a la matrona que entrometa lo sieu dit en le conh de la malauta e enquiera sobre la peyra, pus que pausa la sua ma sinistra sobre la vesica, e comprem aquela am bona comprecio.	If the patient is not a virgin, use the left hand to place the hot iron on their thighs.
Donc si atroba aquela, lahoras cove que gradantment maugua aquela de l’orrifici de la vesica a las partidas dejos am somman de la sua vertut entro que pervengua am aquel a la razit de la coyssa.	Then place a cushion on the bladder to prevent the patient from spilling their urine.
E aprop inscida sobre aquela apposicio de la maytat del conh deves la razit de la coyssa de qualque part sia a lu parada e cent la peyra en aquela partida, e·l dit de lu no sia remaugut de la peyra coartan dejos lu.	Then then you should apply another cautery to the intestine of the patient, and place the other under the breastbone.
E la seccio sia pauca al comensament; e aprop entrometa lo ray sobre aquela seccio, e si sent la peyra, lahoras ajuste en seccio segon la quantitat la qual sap que la peyra sira getada de aquela.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery on the patient's foot, apply the cushion elsewhere; use a cushion on their leg; and when it is appropriate to do so.
E sapias que las specias de peyra son motas: quar de aquelas es pauca e gran, e leon e aspra, e longua e redonda, e havent ramps.	And you know that there are spices which can be used to treat the legs.
Donc tu sapias quantas specias so de lu per aquo que tu signifiques sobre aquo que vols.	And thus you are to know which way it should be treated.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, ajusta en le loc vetriol trissat e te aquela per una hora entro que sia abscindit le sanc, e aprop retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	And if blood flows freely, then cauterize for an hour, or as long as necessary to draw out the blood from the affected area.
E fay que prepares am tu dels instrumentz les quals e ditz en la extraccio de peyra en les homes, per so que sias ajudat per aquels en la tua operacio.	And if you are a surgeon, you should use your tools carefully on the patient.
E si tu veus flux de sanc, e sabes que la expulcio del sanc es de la arceria que es insciza, lahoras tu pausa polvera sobre le loc e estrenh aquel am pulvils e strictura descent, e no iteras aquo; e layssa la peyra e no extraguas aquela, quar fort leu morira la malauta.	And if the blood in the area is flowing freely, but you are seeing that there is no need to apply a cautery to the body.
E aprop cura la plagua.	Then return the patient's feet to their cavity.
Donc cum es cedada la acuitat del sanc aprop alcus jorns, e·l loc se poyreys, lahoras tu retorna a la tua operacio entro que la peyra sia fora-getada.	The other useth the cushion to be placed on their legs during the operation, so that the intestine does not protrude from its cavity.
Capitol lxii.	A cushion is placed under the affected area.
De seccio sobre ernia acoza.	Then one must place another cushion under their legs, and another on their legs, and yet another on their feet.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.	A hernia is caused by a buildup of humors in the legs or elsewhere in the body.
E alcunas veguadas es en le propri pannicol le qual a lu preparec natura en la partida del huou, entro que sia cuyat que ja es autre huou; e es la codena del genetiu entre le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, e no es aquo sino tart.	And then it's called humor by physicians if the cause is unknown.
E la generacio de aquest hernia es per debelitat la qual accideys als genetius, per que ad aquels es efundunda aquesta materia, e alcunas vetz accideys per percuscio fayta sobre les genetius.	And so the intestine may be weakened by another cushion which is placed upon their legs, so that the hernia is caused by weakness.
E aquesta humiditat es havent motas colors, quar la color de lu o es declinant a citrina o a sanguinent, o rog, o es negra feculenta, o es ayguosa blanqua, e es aquo que es mays.	And if it’s an intestine or leg that hurts, they should be treated by a physician.
E les senhals per les quals es saubut on es aquesta agreguacio de aygua so aquestz: quar si es en le ciphac blanc le qual havem dit, lahoras le apostema es redon declinant un pauc a longitut ayssi cum figura de huou, e appar le genetiu, quar la humiditat conte aquel de tota part.	Then apply a poultice to their legs and another one on the affected area, so that they can be treated.
E si la humiditat es en le propri pannicol, lahoras le apostema es redon am partida del huou e per aysso hom estima que es autre huou.	E si'a redone another ailment is caused by moisture and another in the legs.
E si la humiditat es entre la codena dels genetius e·l ciphac blanc, lahoras catz dejos le centiment.	And if there is excess moisture between the patient's legs, the physician should treat them for humors.
E cum tu vols la cognicio de la color de la humiditat, lahoras tu esproa la color de la humiditat en le apostema am entromes cayrat del qual la forma es precedida; e segon aquo que es eyssit en le vestigi del entromes, jutga de aquo que es dedintz lu.	And if you wish to know about the nature of the swelling in the joint, then know that it is caused by the humor being forced out.
Donc quan nos vinem a la curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que comandem al malaute que sia fleubotomat si aquo es a tu possibla, e vezes le cos de lu ple.	And if it is necessary to treat the patient's bad humors, apply the cautery to their legs, using another tool.
E aprop sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos sobre alcuna causa un pauc auta, e pausa dejos lu motz draps.	And if you want to treat the patient's legs, they are already exposed.
E aprop setz tu sobre la part sinistra de lu, e comanda al ministra que segua a la dextra de lu, le qual extenda la sua vergua a hun de dos latz a la codena dels genetius e a la partida del mirac del ventre.	And another servant you place on their left side, and another above the feet of the one who has a pain in the foot.
E aprop pren spatum lat e scindeys la codena dels genetius del mieg loc per la longitut entro prop le pentenilh.	Then place a hot cauteri on the legs and another on the chest to keep the patient warm.
E sia fayta la seccio segon rectetut engualment distant de la linha que deveseys la pel dels genetius, entro que pervengua al ciphac blanc comprehendent.	Make a section in the thigh, where the other tools are applied to the affected area.
E excorja aquel, e observa, e guarda te per aysso que tu no inscidas aquel; e la tua excoriacio am la qual aquel excorjas per partida jassia que sia suspenduda am le huou mays e subtilment escruta am la excoriacio segon la quantitat a tu possibla.	You have already opened the way to the cure for the disease that affects the body.
E aprop perfora le ciphac ple de aygua am perforacio ampla, e extratz tota l’aygua.	And then the abdomen will be closed up again.
E aprop separa entre doas labias de la seccio am uncis, e exten le ciphac a las partidas desus; e no toques la codena les genetius comprehendent, e inscideys le ciphac en aquela manieyra que es a tu possible.	E aprop separa la piel e another put a cushion under them; in such a way that they may be healed by its warmth.
E inscideys aquel am la sua totalitat o en pessas, e majorment le sieu latz subtil, quar si tu no perscrutas exquisidament la inscizio de lu, no es fayta segurtat que la aygua no retorne.	And if the intestine or its contents are exposed, then cover them with a cushion.
Mays si le huou procezeys de aquela defora de la sua codena en la ora de la tua operacio, lahoras quan tu auras complida la seccio del ciphac, retorna dedintz aquel, e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la codena dels genetius am sutura, e aprop cura aquel ayssi cum las autras plagua, entro que sia sanat.	Mays is a common term for "when" or "if" in the languages you mentioned. It means that the patient's leg was already prepared for the procedure.
E si atrobas le huou corromput per autra malautia, lahoras cove que tu lies les vayssels les quals so sore le suspensori, e extrat le huou, e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit.	Then place a cushion under the patient's legs to protect their stomach from injury.
Mays si l’aygua es agreguada en doas partidas esemps, lahoras sapias que doas son las ernias; donc inscideys aquela partida segon que has feyt en l’autra engualment; e si es a tu vist que sia una opera, lahoras tu la fay.	When water is divided into two parts, there are two hernias.
E aprop tu abstergiys le sanc, e entramet en las seccios lana submersa en oli o en oli rozat; e pausa deforo autra lana la qual tu as submersa en vi e oli, e expandeys aquela sobre dos genetius e·l mirac del ventre; e pausa desobre draps doblatz e pulvils, e lia aquels desobre am liament le qual es segon aquesta forma:	Then apply a cloth soaked in vinegar to their feet.
e aprop sian preses dos draps e sian humplitz de lana carmenada segon aquesta semblansa; e sian faytas las extremitatz am les quals es premut de coto o de lana humida, e sian agreguatz am strectura en le braguier de las braguas, e la una de las extremitatz prengua del cul entro al dos, e la segonda prengua a la partida del pantenilh, e dos extramitatz sobre dos coyssas dejos e dos extramitatz autras sobre dos angonars, e tota extrictura sia ajustada en le braguier de las braguas.	And if you must use cautery on the patient's feet, apply a cushion and hold them still.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta hernia es medicada artificialment am cauteri en loc de seccio am ferr; e es que tu prenguas cauteri cutellar subtil e que inscidas am aquel la codena dels ginitius, e es ignit segon que havem recomtat entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc contenent la aygua, e lahoras tu pren cauteri segon aquesta forma:	Another example: This is how you would treat the feet with a cautery.
e es asemblat a letra greca.	And if it is a problem in the legs, it is a different type of Greek fire.
E aprop perfora am aquel ciphac, e es ignit entro que tota la humiditat sia fora-gitada.	When it is necessary to cauterize the leg, apply the fire to the area where it's needed.
E aprop exten le ciphac am uncis, e excorja am uncis, e excorja am cauteri subtil ignit; e inscideys aquel segon que es a tu possible entro que eradiques tot lu; e guarda te del huou que·l foc no·l toque.	When you have to cauterize the patient's legs or groin, let a cushion be placed under those parts.
E sapias que aquesta operacio es pus salva e pus longinqua de flux de sanc, e milhor que operacio am seccio.	And if it is necessary to apply a cushion to the patient's legs or thighs, et cetera.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat apostema caut en la hora de seccio o en hora de cauteri, o flux de sanc, lahoras cove que tu cures qual contrarietat fa a tu per aquo, am curacio la qual conveneys a lu segon que es dit.	And if there is pain from bloodletting, or you think a wound will bleed again, then it will be necessary to apply cautery to their legs, because it is customary.
Mays si le malaute es pauruc, e no spera la segonda operacio per la sua horribilitat, lahoras administra perforacio segon que yeu recomti aquo; e es quan es certificat deves tu, per aquo que havem dit de las significacios, que aquela hernia es ayguosa.	The patient's fear of the second operation is understandable, as it involves cauterization.
Lahoras cove que tu fassas sezer le malaute sobre alcuna cezelha elevada, aprop perfora le apostema en la partida pus bassa de lu am spatum lat, e pausa la perforacio segon la longitut del cos.	Then, if there are other signs of illness on the feet, it is customary for them to be treated by cauterizing the affected area.
E sia la apercio ampla entro que corro tota l‘aygua.	And if a person has an open wound, it means that they are being treated for something.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc coto e lia aquel e layssa aquel, per so que corro le romanent de l’aygua.	And if there's a swelling in the legs or feet, they should be treated by a physician.
E aprop cura aquel entro que la plagua sia sanada.	And if it is necessary, put a patch on the patient's skin to heal the plague.
Mays si contrarietat es a la egrecio de l’aygua en aquela hora tu perforas aquela: e aquo no es fayt sino per aquo quar le pannicol blanc en le orrifici de la plagua fa contrarietat e prohibeys le eyssiment de l’aygua, lahoras cove que tu metas en la plagua pena o instrument am la qual es extrayta l’aygua dels ydropitz, la forma del qual es precedida; o ajusta en la opprecio de la plagua un petit.	If it is necessary to stop the bleeding from the feet, then apply a cushion to the wound.
E sapias que l’aygua retorna, e es agueguada aprop vi meses o enaviro aquels; e cum es agreguada, lahoras sia perforat segon aquela meteyssa manieyra, quar le malaute ayssi passara les sieus dias.	This translates to: When the pain is severe, they will be treated differently than those that are just beginning.
Capitol .lxiii.	Capitol 63.
De seccio sobre hernia carnosa e la curacio de lu.	To treat the pain, apply cautery to the other parts of the body.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposicios; per que a mi es vista la dimissio de lu e esser salvat per aquela milhor.	When your body is affected by an imbalance of humors, then you can see the effects on their legs, they are in danger of being burned.
E yeu so rememorant la operacio en aquela e las specias dels apostemas.	And thus remember the treatment for the ailment.
Donc, dic que l‘apostemas natz en les cos dels quals les genetius so conponutz e es fayt aquo per motas causas: o per superfluitat aguda agra, la qual es efundida als genetius, o per percuscio.	Then apply a hot iron to cauterize the wound, but be careful to avoid burning the skin too much.
E es la color de la apostema segon la color del cos, e no es atrobat en lu dolor, e es apostema greu.	And if there is a need for cautery on their legs, then they will be treated as such.
E fort leu es apostema lapificada, del qual la color es fosca, e no es centiment a lu.	E if there are many painful blisters on the legs, you have to treat them carefully.
E alcunas veguadas es fayt per nodacio de las arcerias, e per imflacio de aquelas ayssi quo ja es perceubut la rememoracio de lu, o per imflacio de venas.	And sometimes inflammation occurs in the veins, which may be treated by cauterization.
Mays aquo que es per imflacio de arcerias es conogut per la dispercio de la apostema quan compremas aquela am les tieus ditz; e no cove que aquel toques.	The correct answer is:  When it is necessary to cauterize a vein, it is called phlebitis.
Mays aquel que es fayt per imflacio de vena no es dispergut de lu alcuna causa deves la compressio am les ditz.	When the pain is in the veins, it is customarily called "gout" by doctors.
E ja es possible que sobre aquesta specia sia fayta seccio e sobre les autres carns; e es que tu inscida la codena dels genetius, e aprop esten le huou a las partidas desus, e extratz aquel del ciphac blanc, e deliura le suspensori dels vaysels, e ligua les, e inscideys le suspensori pus que tu deliuras aquel de tota partida de las partidas del huou.	And if the pain persists in these parts, then the patient should be treated as if they had a cushion on their legs, which you can use to help keep the intestines from pushing out.
Donc si l’huou ja es am aquelas carnadas consolida, lahoras cove que tu extraguas le huou e inscidas aquel.	Therefore, if the humors have solidified in the legs, you should do the same thing to the patient's feet that you would do for gout.
E si es adherencia entro alcuna causa del ciphac, o entre aquo que es entre les bayssels, lahoras cove que tu deliures tota aquela adherencia e inscidas aquela per inscizio redonda.	And if there is an adhesion in the intestine, then apply another round cushion to prevent the intestine from becoming inflamed and causing pain.
Mays si es nativitat de carn en le loc de la adherencia la qual es detras, lahoras cove que tu inscidas tot aquo que es de lu, e extraguas le huou ayssi cum havem dit.	When the intestines are inflamed in the feet, apply cautery as instructed.
Donc cum es complida la tua operacio, lahoras omple la plagua de lana imfuza en oli rozat e vi; e aprop cura aquela am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	Then when you have reduced the pain in the body, the patient will feel better and experience relief.
Capitol .lxiv.	Capitol .lxiv. translates to **Chapter 64**.
De la curacio de hernia que es de vitz.	This refers to the treatment of a type of hernia.
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.	Gout, caused by an excess of phlegm in the body, is treated by applying a cushion to the affected area.
E en la curacio de aquesta malautia es per temor per aquo del qual es precedida rememoracio.	It is for fear that one must apply a cushion to protect the body from the effects of this ailment.
Empero cove que diguam opperacio en aquela segon que fero les primiers.	But I advise you to put another cushion under them if your first choice was to use the hot iron on their feet.
E dic que cove que fassas sezer le malaute sobre una cezelha elevada; e aprop enpelleys le suspensori dels testiculs a las partidas dejos; e aprop te la codena dels genetius am les tieus ditz am les baysels que so probdas a la vergua; e tengua aquels autre ministre que tu, e extenda aquels am extencio vehement.	And if he sits on their legs, you have to hold him down so that he cannot move them.
E aprop inscideys am spatum lat agut per seccio traversa en le dreyt dels vaysels entro que sian les vayssels descubertz.	Then place a cushion on their legs to prevent them from experiencing pain.
E aprop excorja de tota partida ayssi quo a tu havem dit en extraccio de arceria las quals so en las templas.	Then apply the treatment for the whole body to the affected area, using the same method as if you were treating a wound on the legs.
E aprop fica en aquelas un’agulha en la qual sia fiel doble, e lia aquel en le primier del locs en les quals accideys vit, e lia aquel autra veguada en le derier de lor.	Translation 2: Then place a cushion under them and put a bandage over the area where the needle will be applied.
E aprop inscideys aquels en le mieg loc per seccio dreyta segon la longuesa del cos, e extratz aquo que es agreguat de las humiditatz fetulentas e corruptas.	And if you want to make incisions on those who are suffering from gout, then make them on the leg.
E aprop cura la plagua am curacio de las autras plaguas en las quals vols sania esser engendrada per so que caian les vaysels les quals noyreysso un de dos genetius, quar no es mal per aquo.	Then treat the disease with other remedies.
Mays si accideys vit a totz les bayssels, lahoras cove que·ls testicols sian extragutz o que les testicols per aquo se cequo am les vayssels, per que sia privat de tot nutriment per la inscizio dels vayssels, e que sian estaborits, o que cequo per so que no sia juvament am aquels.	And if it is caused by cold humors, the patient's body will be affected in other ways, such as their testicles being swollen, so they must apply a cautery to those areas, or else they might get a hot flush.
Capitol .lxv.	et autre a sia de la dolor del pes.
De la cura de hernia entestinal.	Then apply the treatment to the intestinal hernia.
Le adveniment de aquesta hernia es per seccio que endeve en le ciphac extendut sobre le ventre de part dels angunars del mirac del ventre, per que deysendo les budels de aquela ruptura ad alcu dels budels.	And if you have a cushion on their legs.
E aquesta ruptura es o del ciphac o de excencio de lu, e accideysso aquestas doas specias per motas causas: o percussio, o per sautz, o per clamor, o per elevacio de alcuna causa greu, o per semblantz.	And this opening of the intestine is caused by one of two causes: either by the weight of the fluids or by some other external factor.
E·l senhal de aquo, quan es per extencio del ciphac, es que accideys pauc a pauc en lonc temps, e no accideys soptament, e es apostema engual entro ves le preon per so quar le ciphac comprem le budel.	The first line of the provided translation should be:
E le senhal de lu es quan es per seccio del ciphac, quar al comensament fa accidir dolor vehement sobtament; e es apostema divers aparent dejos la codena propdana aparent, e aquo es per eyssiment del budel, e·l cos de lu a las partidas deforo del ciphac.	And the sign of it is when the pain in the body suddenly worsens; treat it with a cushion.
E alcunas veguadas es fora-getat am le budel la tela, e es apelada aquesta hernia entestinal zirbal.	And for some ailments of the foot, it is used as a cushion, to treat the ailment.
E alcunas veguadas es fayta am ventositat, e alcunas veguadas corr en le budel fenda, e aqui es retenguda, e es am aquo gran pernitia3 del malaute, e alcunas veguadas fa endevenir dolor malvada e majorment quan es premut.	When there is a burning sensation in the legs, it is sometimes used to treat wind.
E en la curacio de las especias de aquesta malautia am ferr es temor, per que cove que sia esquivat le cazament en aquela.	Then return the area between the legs to its normal state, place a cushion on their legs, and provide comfort for them.
E la manieyra de la operacio de aquela es que comandes al malaute que redugua le budel am la sua ma a las partidas dedintz de la sua conquavitat si obezeys al sieu retornament, e aprop sia envessat sobre le sieu col entre las tuas mas, e eleva las cambas de lu.	And if you are using a hot cautery, do so carefully, as it may cause pain.
E aprop sten la codena la qual siec la codena dels testicols a las partidas desus, e inscideys la codena dels testicols tota per le lonc; e aprop fiqua en doas labias de la seccio uncis segon que indigeysses a hubrir la seccio am aquels.	Then apply a hot poultice to the affected area to treat the condition called gout.
E si’ la seccio segon la quantitat que a tu sia possible que de aquela le huou sia foro-getat.	E si'l'ha fatto e la cushion will be placed on the chest.
E aprop excorja aquela ciphaqueth les quals so dejos la codena dels testicols, entro que sia descubert le ciphac blanc dur de quascuna partida.	Then he will place a cushion under their testicles.
Lahoras tu entromet le tieu dit en aquo que siec le testicol, en aquo que es entre ciphac blanc, le qual es dejos la codena del huou, e entre le ciphac segon, e absolve am aquel’adherencia que es en la partida detras del huou.	When the testicles are affected, one should be careful to avoid further complications.
E aprop mau am la ma la codena dels testicols a las partidas deforo, e am aysso exten le ciphac blanc en sus am la ma sinestra, e eleva le huou am le ciphac a la partida de la seccio; e comanda al ministre que extenda le huou ensus e tu dissolveys la adherencia que es detras am solucio complida.	And if a burning sensation occurs in the foot due to other causes, apply a cold cushion to the affected area.
E cerqua am les tieus ditz que lay no sia alcuna causa del budel envelopat en le ciphac blanc dur.	And for the patient, I think you are referring to the fact that there is a need for a cushion in the area where the pain is felt.
Mays si tu atrobas de lu alcuna causa, lahoras tu enpelleys aquel al ventre dejos.	If you encounter a condition caused by an imbalance of humors in the body, you will need to apply a different type of treatment than what is used for the feet.
E aprop tu pren una agulha en la qual sia fiel gros fayt de x fiels, e entromet aquel deves le derier del ciphac, le qual es jos la codena dels testicols, la qual siec seccio; e aprop inscideys las extremitatz las quals emineysso del fiel entro que sian quatre fiels, e aprop compausa alcus de lor sobre alcuna figura en manieyra de crotz; e lia am aquel le ciphac del qual havem dit que es dejos la codena dels testicols am fort liament de dos partz.	And put four to seven needles into the patient's body, in the area where there are four to five members of the body.
E aprop envolveys las extremitatz dels fiels e lia aquelas am liament vehement entro que alcu dels vayssels que noyrrisso aquels no puscan trametre alcuna causa per so que de aqui no accida apostema caut.	And then cover them with a cushion to prevent the pain from getting worse.
E pausa autra veguada liament segon foro le primier liament, lonh de lu mens tres ditz; e aprop aquestz dos liaments layssa del ciphac le qual es dejos la codena dels testicols la quantitat de la grandeza del dit, e inscideys tot le romanent segon redondeza, e osta de lu le huou.	And apply this to the intestine to make a mark on liaments five and six.
E aprop inscideys en la partida dejos de la codena dels testicols per seccio de la qual corra sanc e sania ayssi cum havem recomtat en aquo que havem dit.	You should place a cushion on the patient's legs to prevent further pain.
E aprop aministra lana submersa en oli, e pausa en la plagua; e aministra le liament le qual havem recomtat (e alcunas veguadas le ciphac blanc es cauterizat, le qual havem dit aprop la inscizio de lu temen de flux de sanc, quar motas veguadas accideys aquels) e leyssa le liament entro que per si caia.	And if you are encountering a problem in the body, you must apply a cushion to the leg where the pain is located, as well as use other methods for treating the legs, and make sure the patient feels no pain.
Mays si le cazement de lu es tardat, lahoras de aygua cauda sia embrocat, e pausa sobre aquel entro que caia segon que havem dit.	And if the intestine or cushion has been removed from the thigh area, you must place your hand over the area to prevent it from being cold.
E aprop cura la plagua am l’autra curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And to close the wound, the other shall be healed by a poultice.
Capitol .lxvi.	This refers to the chapter numbered 66.
De hernia ventosa.	Then describe the condition of the other cushions on the body.
En aquesta hernia no e vist alcu que sia estat ardit sus la curacio de lu am ferr.	And if you have seen a swelling in the legs or feet, it was necessary to apply cautery to their body.
E les primiers diyssero que es fayta ayssi cum havem recomtat en la hernia que es am vi; la qual es que tu lies les vayssels aprop la seccio sobre aquela am fecilitat de lu; e aprop secca en le mieg loc en enviro le apostema am aquo que obro aquel, entro que caian les vayssels.	Then you will apply a hot cautery to the patient's groin, while using a cold cautery on the legs.
E cura la plagua segon que havem dit entro que sia sanada.	And cure the plague according to what we have said, so that it may be healed.
Capitol .lxvii.	This sentence likely describes the use of a cautery tool for treating a medical condition related to an imbalance of humors.
De la disropcio que es fayta en les anguonars.	Then return the patient's legs to their original position.
Alcunas veguadas endeve ruptura en les angonars ayssi cum havem dit, e emineys le loc.	When there's a need to cauterize the leg, it should be done precisely on the area affected by the ailment.
E no deyssen als genetius alcuna causa dels budels al genetius; e si deyssen, aquo es pauc; e retorna s’en en totas horas.	And if they are affected by their bowels.
Mays si es prolonguat le temps am aquo, es ajustada fissura en le ciphac entro que deysenda le budel en le ciphac; e accideys aquo per la extencio del ciphac le qual es en le angonars ayssi cum havem dit, la qual causa es quar le ciphac es estendut, e aprop es mollificat e·l loc es apostemat e emineys.	The patient's suffering from gout in the thighs will be relieved by applying a cushion to the area.
E la cura de lu es am cauteri ayssi quo es precedida la narracio de lu.	The cure for the illness preceding this is as follows.
E alcunas veguadas es curada am ferr segon aquesta manieyra: e es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos entre las tuas mas, e aprop secca le loc de la ruptura dels apostemas emineys am seccio per la latitut segon la quantitat de tres ditz.	And sometimes, when a patient has a disease, it is cured by three things: 1) the use of remedies to reduce inflammation 2) proper diet 3) bloodletting in the appropriate way.
E aprop strenh le ciphac blanc que es jos la codena entro que sia descubert.	And then apply a cushion to the patient's body, and hold the instrument for bloodletting over the exposed foot.
E aprop pren le ray e pausa aquel sobre le loc eminent del ciphac, e prem aquel al preon del ventre.	Translation 4: Then another if you have a cushion under his chest, apply it to the area where the pain is located.
E aprop cus le dos locs eminentz sobre la extremitat del ray del ciphac, e ajusta am la sutura un de aquels am l’autre.	And if you have cushions on their legs, you will adjust them one to another.
E aprop extratz la extremitat del ray, e no inscidas del ciphac de tot, ni no extenda le huou, ni autra causa ayssi cum yeu te fi saber en la curacio de hernia entestinal.	Then apply heat to the body's abdomen or chest area.
E aprop cura aquela am la curacio de las plaguas, e cum inscideyses les fiels, mundifica aquela e restaura la plagua entro que sia consolidada; quar le ciphac es contrayt e no es ajustada la eminencia de ruptura.	For the treatment of the plague, use a poultice, and if the patient's legs are also treated with the intention of healing them, they should be covered with cushions to prevent the pain from being intensified.
E cauteri es milhor en aquest loc, quar es pus propda a salut.	And cauterize it, as it is customary to do for those who are in good health.
Capitol .lxviii.	Capitol sixty-eight.
De mollificacio de la codena dels testiculs.	And for the softening of the pain of the testicles.
Motas veguadas la codena dels testiculs en alcus homes es mollificada per aysso quar las carns que so entre aquela son mollificadas, e es fedat le reguardament de lu.	And they are treated by cauterizing their body.
Adonc necessari es ad aquel que es preguat en la curacio de lu que fassa jazer le malaute segon le sieu dos, e enscida tota la codena la qual es mollificada sobre la codena natural; e aprop que ajuste doas labias am la sutura.	And then apply a cushion to the area after you have reduced the swelling in the patient's foot.
E si vols, cus en le comensament la superfluitat de la codena mollificada am tres cozeduras o quatre e am ferma sutura.	And apply a firm suture to their legs.
E aprop inscideys entre las suturas; e aprop cura per curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat e caian les fiels.	And then you must apply yourself to the treatment of the other plagues within their reach.
Capitol .lxix.	Another that you have made an opening in the thigh area.
De castracio.	On the treatment of another's condition through surgical intervention.
Sapias que castratio en nostre ley es excomengada, mays per causa es legut a mi que·m remembre de lu en aquest libre; e no es necessaria la rememoracio de lu sino per doas manieyras, de las quals es la una per so que aquo sia en la sciensa del metge quan es enterroguat de aquela, que sapia la curacio de lu al qual accideys; e l’autra manieyra es que nos motas vetz havem necessitat de castracio de autras bestias per les juvamentz nostres per aquelas, ayssi cum de motos, e de bocs, e de porcs, e de semblantz a las bestias.	And so that you know how to cure other's when they are afflicted by it.
E donc dic que castracio es fayta en dos manieyras: o per atrissio, o per fissura a seccio.	Castration can be performed in two ways: by attrition or by section.
Mays en aquela que es fayta per atrissio, la via de la opera es que nos fassam cezer la bestia en aygua cauda entro que·ls genetius de lu sian mollificatz e sian linhitz e que pendan.	This is the way to treat inflammation in the legs caused by bad humors.
E aprop pren aquels am la tua ma entro que sian resols e no apparescan dejos le tocament.	Then apply the treatment to those limbs, with the help of cushions if needed.
Mays en castracio fayta per fissura e seccio, cove que tu tenguas la bestia e premas la codena dels testicols de lu am la ma senestra.	When performing surgery on the testicles and thighs, the surgeon should always be careful to avoid touching the skin with their left hand.
E aprop lia le suspensori, e inscideys sobre quascun huou am una seccio entro que dos huous proceseysso.	And if there is no other pain, then apply cauterization to the area where the pain is located.
E aprop inscideys aquels pus que auras quascu excorjat.	Then cauterize the area where the skin is opened and treat it accordingly.
E no leysses sobre aquels del ciphac alcuna causa, sino le ciphac subtil le qual es sobre les vazes.	And if the leg is swollen, do not apply anything to it until the cause of the swelling has been addressed.
E aquesta manieyra de castracio es milhor la qual es fayta per atrissio, quar atrissio fort leu layssa alcuna causa dels testicols per que la bestia desira coyt.	This is a description of how to treat a beast with a burning cautery, which is the method used for treating sores on the foot.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia sanada.	Then treat the plague with whatever remedy is appropriate for the location where the pain occurs.
Capitol .lxx.	Chapter 70.
De la cura de hermafrodozia.	Of the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermafrodozia en les homes es segon dos manieyras: la una es quar o appar en aquo que siec l’espazi en la codena de testiculs, en aquel que es entre dos testiculs figura quar cunh de femna en la qual so pels.	When there are excess openings in the body between the testicles, it is called hernia.
E alcunas veguadas de aquel corr urina le qual es en la codena dels testiculs.	And at other times, he feels pain in his legs, because it's in the knee.
Mays en las femnas es una specia: e es que·l conh de la femna sobre le pentenilh es ayssi cum dos testiculs de home un pauc de tot yminiheys a la partida deforo ayssi cum le perpucii de home e dos testicols.	And in women there is a type of cauterization which is called gout: the pain in the joints of the body, and the pain of the intestines and the feet.
E la curacio es de tres specias: de dos dels homes e de una specia de las femnas.	There are three types of cures for ailments caused by humors: those for men, those for women, and those that are general to both.
E es que cove que tu inscidas aquelas carns ajustadas entro que efuga la emprecio de aquela, e aprop que cures aquelas am curacio de las autras plaguas.	Cove es that they be closed up, so as to prevent gout from spreading throughout their body.
E en la segonda specia dels homes de la qual yeys urina la qual es en la codena dels testiculs, no es curacio ni opperacio en lu.	And if there is pain in the second type of man's testicles, then you apply treatment to their groin area.
Capitol .xxi.	Capitol .xxi. (Chapter 21)
De lentinge e de carn eminent per causas de las femnas.	The physician's hands should be kept above the patient's body in the event that the treatment for gout involves placing their hand on the affected area.
Lentige fort leu es ajustada sobre causas naturals entro que es etressat e es fayt leg le reguardament; e alcunas veguadas es magnificada en alcunas femnas en tant entro que es spandit ayssi cum en les homes e perve entro al coito.	And so are treated both men and women who suffer from pain in their legs, especially when the pain is caused by something other than an ailment requiring a physician's attention.
Adonc cove que tu tenguas la superfluitat de lentinge am la tua ma o am unci e inscidas.	When your foot becomes swollen and painful due to excess uric acid.
E no ultimes en inscizio, majorment en le preon de la razit, per so que no endevengua flux de sanc.	Then apply a cautery to the affected area, but primarily to their legs.
E aprop cura aquela am curacio de las plaguas entro que sia sanada.	And if it is a pain in the legs, they should be covered by a blanket.
Mays carn nascuda es carn que nays en le horrifici de la mayre entro que umple aquel, e fort leu es eyssit a las partidas deforo segon semblansa de coa (e per aquo alscus primiers appelero aquo “malautia caudada”); donc cove que nos inscidam ayssi cum inscidem lentinge, e curem aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if you are a man, be careful to avoid the pain.
Capitol .lxxii.	E aprop use a cushion under their legs and apply your hand.
De curacio de alratica.	Another way to say it is that we must use another method for treatment.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit.	Then, let the intestine or the area of their illness be treated gently to prevent damage.
E es o natural o accidental.	And so it is, whether by nature or accident.
Accidental es per malautia la qual ha precedit, e aquela es fayta o per carn nada ajustada o per ciphac subtil o espes.	And that which is caused by illness is already treated by the doctors.
E es fayt o en le preon de la mayre, o en les costatz de lu, o en le pus sobira de lu, o en le pus bas de lu, e prohibeys de cuoyt e de enprenguacio e de enfantament, e fort leu prohibeys las mestruas.	When you have found an opening in the patient's body where they are experiencing pain, or if the patient has a cushion under them, then apply heat to their legs and feet, or use the opening to create a space.
E la cognicio de aquela es fayta per reguardament de la metrona, si la oppilacio es apparent, propdana; mays si no es apparent, lahoras tu cerqua aquela am les tieus ditz o am le ray.	And if the pain is in the feet, apply heat to the affected area, as needed,
Mays si oppilacio es per ciphac subtil, e es propda a las doas labias, lahoras tu coyta e disromp aquela.	If there's an opening in the thighs, then you should put a cushion under them.
E es que pauses sobre las doas labias pulvils, e aprop pausa les tieus ditz indicz de amdoas las mas encemps.	And if you cauterize the two lips (of the body) and the other side of the legs.
E la femna sia sobre le sieu dos, las sieuas coyssas extendudas, e aprop exten las doas labias am forsa entro que aquel ciphac subtil sia romput e la oppilacio sia uberta.	And another cushion should be placed on their legs, so that they are extended.
E aprop pren lana e enbeu le4 en oli e pausa aquela sobre·l loc, e jagua am home le dia per so que·l loc inscis no sia consolidat.	And then put the wool in oil and apply it to the affected area, and another cushion on their feet.
Mays si le ciphac es gros e espes, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel am spatum lat o am fuelha de mirta.	And if the cushion is thick enough, you will be able to see the patient's soul.
Mays si la oppilacio es per carnada, lahoras suspen aquela am unci, e inscideys aquela.	May's this sentence refers to the treatment of a disease caused by a sickness in the body, which is Mays if it affects the entire body.
E sian am tu las medicinas que fan cessar flux de sanc ses mordicacio, ayssi cum ahacatia, e sanc de drago, e enses, ajustat am album de huou.	Then apply a poultice to the patient's legs and abdomen.
E aprop aministra una canulha de plom ampla per so que la plagua no sia consolidada leugierament.	And apply a lead cushion to their legs, and ensure they are not moving.
E tengua aquela per alcus jorns e aministra calgua de li sec.	And if they have had these pains for some days, apply a hot compress to them.
E aprop sia curada am l’autra curacio de consolidacio entro que sia sanada.	And you should treat them with cauterization if they are affected by a disease that causes the need for their treatment.
E alcunas vetz accideys en la mayre nativitat de autres carns, e lahoras cove que inscidas segon aquesta manieyra.	And if it is necessary to make a point on other parts of the body, it is done in the same way as for the foot, only the position of the hands changes.
Mays si aysso es per apostema crancos, a l’apostema crancos le qual es en la mayre no sia fayta contrarietat am ferr en deguna manieyra.	When it's necessary to use a cauterization on the legs or feet, you don't want to use the cauterization in a way that causes pain.
Capitol .lxxiii.	The book discusses the use of a pointed cautery to treat something that affects the feet.
De la cura de emorroydas e de tayl e de botor roja que accideysso en le conh de las femnas.	Then apply a hot cautery to the legs, so that they do not suffer further.
Emorroydas so apprecio dels orificis de motas venas entro que de aquelas corro mot sanc continuadament; e cum so antiquadas emorroydas e son fayts theyls.	The translator will be back in their place.
E ja yeu he dit en la divisio las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e diyre ayssi aquelas que recebo curacio e aquelas que no recebo curacio.	This is a description of a medical procedure for treating a condition.
Donc dic que emorroydas e theyls quan so en le preon de la mayre e no apparo al sentiment, lahoras en aquelas no sia fayta curacio am ferr.	When gout is present in both the foot and the hands, then it is called metatarsalgia.
Mays aquelas las quals so en le orrifici de la mayre sobre las quals catz sentiment, so aquelas que so curadas.	Those who suffer from gout are treated with a certain remedy.
E cove que tu metas la femna en mayso frega e aprop exten atheyl am les forfexs, o am drap aspre, e inscideys aquelas am las razitz.	Then return to the patient's body with the cushion.
E aprop pulveriza sobre aquelas deves le fluxs del sanc de una de las polveras insciscivas ses mordicacio, ayssi cum acassia e semblant ad aquels.	And then pulverize the blood with an incision.
E aprop enpellesca les sieus pes per una hora, e aprop pausa aquela en aygua freja.	Then apply a cushion to his legs for an hour.
E si persevera le fluxs del sanc, lahoras fay aquela sezer en decoccio de sumat e de scorsas de milgranas e de gualas e de semblantz.	And if the bleeding persists, apply a poultice to the affected area.
E aprop pren farina de ordi e comfiys aquela am miel e vi agre e fay emplastre am aquo sobre le dos de lu.	Then treat the patient's legs with an ointment made of herbs, honey, and wine.
E si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, fay adherir am dos ventozas, e a las mamilhas ses escarificatio.	Then apply two cupping glasses on your knees or other joints.
E aprop pren lana e submergeys aquela am suc de coliandre o am suc de arnagloza o am suc de guarravier am vi pentit e fay adherir al loc; e aprop cura le loc am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the oil to the patient's legs and other joints.
Mays athyl rog le qual es de aspre reguardament, cove que tu inscidas aquo que a tu appar de aquel segon que he dit en theyl engualment.	This text appears to be describing the use of cautery for treating a hernia.
E cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And if you are a doctor who wishes to cure.
Capitol .lxxiv.	Chapter 74.
De perforacio de eyssedura accident en la mayre.	The wound gets inflamed and swollen in the area.
Motas specias de apostemas accideysso en la mayre, ayssi cum cranc e apostema lapident e ulceracios e adhubelat e erpetromens e fistulas emorroyas e raguarrias e thyl e autres apostemas.	The physician calls this disease "the aches" in the affected body part.
E yeu ja he dit aquestas malautias e las specias de aquelas e les senhals de aquelas, e las curacios de lor en la divisio.	And if there are illnesses in the legs or feet, and the patient's body is opened up to the ailments.
E cove que yeu digua en aquest tractat de apostema caut le qual ve en la mayre quan es dels apostemas que collegeysso sania, e si vols saber en qual manieyra se fa la opperacio de lu am ferr.	If you have pain in your joints from an excess of cold humors, it is called gout.
Adonc cove que tu consideres si la dolor de la apostema en le sieu comensament es aguda am percussio e flecma e febre, e vezes aquel enrogezir e si catz sobre aquel le sentiment, lahoras no·t coytes am perforacio de lu, e cura aquel am aquo que ajuda sobre la maturacio entro que cesse la acuitat dels accidentz.	When a person has a sudden onset of pain in their joints from a recent injury, and the pain is accompanied by fever and inflammation.
E lahoras cove que tu fassas cezer la femna sobre una cezelha que aia doas cezelhas; e recline sobre le sieu dos e ajusta les sieus pes a la partida pus dejos del ventre, e las sieus coyssas sian expandudas, e pausa les sieus brasses dejos les sieus denols, e lia quascus am liament ad aquo convenient.	And you are to place their feet on a cushion.
E aprop la matrona segua del latz dreyt e aministre le instrument am le qual es ubert le orrifici de la mayre, la forma del qual vindra en aquelas causas que·s faran aprop.	When it is appropriate to apply cautery to an ailment, then have it applied to the area where the pain is located.
E cove quan vols ministrar aquest instrument que tu fiques am lo ray le preon de la mayre de la femna, e aquo que del instrument es intrat en la mayre no sia mays que·l preon de la mayre e leda le malaute.	Then use a cushion to apply it on their stomach so they can be treated for the illness called gout.
Mays si l’estrument es major que·l preon de la mayre, lahoras cove que tu pauses pulvils sobre la textura del preon de la mayre per sso que sia prohibit l’intrament de tot instrument en le preon de la mayre.	And you put your hand on their legs, to prevent the physician from making an incision there.
E cove que tu pauses le vertitge que corr en le strument del latz pus desus e que le ministre tengua le strument e revolva le vertitge entro que sia ubert le orrifici de la mayre.	And if the patient has a fever, treat them immediately.
E cum appar la excitura, e es tocada am la ma e es leon e molh, lahoras cove que tu secces aquela deves le cap de lu am spatum lat.	And when you've been touched by pain in the limbs, know that it's gout if it is characterized by swelling and pain in the joints, and a physician should be consulted immediately.
E cum la sania es evacuada, lahoras cove que tu pauses en la plagua una meca submersa en oli rozat o oli vert en le qual sia alcuna stiptisitat; e pausa la calca7 en la seccio en le preon de la mayre.	And if there are no other signs present, you can place a cushion on the patient's leg to help draw out the heat.
E pause deforo la mayre e sobre le pentenilh lana munda submersa en aygua en la qual sian bulidas malvas.	When the patient has been purged, apply a cushion to their knees.
E aprop sia curada aprop dos dias am enguent le qual conveneys ad aquo entro que sia sanat.	Then apply the poultice for two days to cure the patient.
E alcunas veguadas es lavada la mayre e la plagua enayssi que es cristerisat am aygua e mel, e aprop am aygua en la qual es bulhida razit de liri o de aristologia longua, e aprop retorna al enguent.	And if it is necessary to cauterize something, then use a small amount of water or oil and honey, and apply the bandage to the area that you have cauterized.
E si la plagua es dedintz en la mayre ameguada, lahoras cove que tu sias prohibit de la curacio de lu am ferr, habantz cura aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio.	And when you are treating the gout, be careful to avoid any mention of what causes it.
Capitol .lxxv.	Capitol .lxxv. translates to **Chapter 75**.
A ensenhar las matronas en qual manieyre les enbrios bius sian medicatz quan yeysso segon figura no-natural.	And then they are treated with cautery by the midwives if necessary, so that the fetus is not harmed.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu, e es que quan tu vezas la femna expremar a las partidas dejos e desira odorar le ayre, e sobre aquo es enleujada per aquo que sobre ela es del part, e festina le eyssiment del enbrio, lahoras sapias que aquest part es segon figura natural, e es l’eyssiment de lu sobre le sieu cap, e la segondina am aquel o suspensa o pendent del ombelic.	The midwife must use their hands to support the woman's body during childbirth.
Donc cum tu vezes aquels senhals, lahoras cove que·l ventre de lu sia compremut per so que l’embrio deysenda leugerament quar quan deyssen sobre le sieu cap, deysen a lu la segondina, e es mondada de aquelas superfluitatz am bona mondificacio.	When you have performed these actions on the corresponding areas, it is good for the patient to feel relief in the foot, when a second cushion is placed on their legs the pain will be relieved.
Mays aquel que es otra aquest part es no-natural e no-lausable, quar quan le enbrio es eyssit sobre sos pes e·l cos de lu es eyssit devant le cap de lu e·ls pes de lu, e la ma de lu una, o al pe de lu i, o es eyssit le cap de lu e la ma de lu, o al ventre de lu, e fort leu es convertit sobre le sieu col, e semblant de las figuras de lu no-lausablas.	Then apply cautery to the patient's affected area, as necessary, to prevent them from feeling pain.
Don necessaria causa es a la matrona que sia savia e subtil en totas aquelas causas, e que·s guarde de error e de decepcio.	And let a midwife be careful and wise in treating all these ailments.
E yeu so mostrant tota figura de aquelas, e qual engen es en aquelas per so que sia significat per aquo e sia stat sobre aquo.	And if you are treating someone for gout, you must apply a cautery to the affected area.
Quan le feyt es eyssit sobre le sieu cap per egrecio natural, e aquel es vehement sobre la femna e es fayt a lu part dificil, e vezes la vertut de lu ja debelitada, lahoras fay aquela sezer , o que las femnas tenguan lu, e evapora le conh de lu am fenugrec coyt e am olis humitz.	When the pain is severe, the patient's legs are swollen, apply heat to their feet, or if they are very hot, use cold compresses.
E aprop entrometa la metrona entre les sieus ditz espatum petit e fenda am aquel la segondina, o secce aquela am la sua ungla entro que corro aquo que es en ela de humiditat.	And you must apply the second cautery on the second joint from the top, etc.
E preme le ventre de la femna entro que deyssenda le fet.	When it is necessary to cauterize the belly, they use the cushion method on the woman's body.
Mays si no deyssen, lahoras cove que la femna sia cristirizada de mucellage de ptilli e mucellage de fenugrec am cizami.	Mays it be that the patient has other ailments, but this is how they are treated by doctors.
E aprop comanda a lu, aprop le cristeri, que sia compremuda e fay aquela stornudar am condisi; e te la boca de lu e·l nas de lu per huna hora, quar le fet sira foro-getat tantost.	And if you've got a cold, put a cushion under them for an hour so they can be closed.
E si las doas mas del fet so foro-getadas al comensament, lahoras cove que tu redusiscas aquelas am fecilitat petit a petit.	And if the pain is in the feet, you must use a hot iron to apply heat to them, gradually increasing the heat.
Mays si no obezeys al intrament, lahoras pausa la femna sobre una cezelha e leva les pes de lu sus, e aprop concuceys la cezelha sobre la terra; e la femna sia tenguda que no caia deves la concussio.	And if it be necessary to cauterize the body, they should apply it above the knee and another below, both for those who are affected by it.
E si las mas no son dedintz tornadas e morr le fet, lahoras inscideys aquelas e extratz le romament del fet o lia le cors a la ma de lu am drap e extratz aquel am equalitat, quar aquel sira foro-getat.	And if pain is caused by an imbalance in the body, which is why doctors call it a disease of the blood.
De eyssiment del embrio sobre les sieus pes.	Then apply heat to remove the excess humors from their body.
Quan le fet yeys sobre les sieus pes, lahoras cove que tu impelliscas aquels en sus, e aprop convertas le fet petit, e aprop que engualhes aquel, e aprop que prenguas un pe de lu e extendas aquels petit a petit.	When the foot swells, put a cushion under it, and if necessary, treat it by applying a cautery to the affected area.
Mays cum son eyssit entro a las coyssas, lahoras tu comanda a lu que se exprema, e fay aquela extornudar am condizi, quar sira foro-getat si Deus lo vol.	Then you must treat the gout with a cushion on which they have sat, and use a hot tool to remove any remaining impurities.
E si no es foro-getat am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras tu retorna le fet petit a petit entro que pauses aquel segon figura natural, quar aquel sira lahoras foro-getat am leugier eyssiment.	And if it is not necessary to cauterize the intestines, they used another method.
E si es prohibit am tot aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras pren de musellage de altea e de goma dissolvuda, e percuteys tot en le mortier per bona percussio, e aprop linieys am aquo le conh de la femna, el pus bas del ventre de lu.	And if it is necessary to treat the body with a cautery, apply it to the woman's legs and thighs.
E aprop fay aquela cezer en aygua tebeza, entro que consegua les ypocondias.	Then apply your hand to the affected area, if the patient has pain in their legs, because they will have another.
E cum vezes que las partidas dejos de lu so lenificadas, lahoras fay a lu subfumiguacio de mirta e sub-pausa aquela a lu.	E cum vezes that are cold and inflamed, or affected by a sickness of the humors, are what doctors call "cold feet".
E quan te la sub-fumiguacio per una hora, lahoras tu la fay sezer sobre una cezelha, e aprop fay aquela stornudar e extrenh la boca de lu, e levas de aquela, e prem la partida pus bassa del ventre de lu am leugiera compressio, quar le fet sira tantost foro-getat.	And for one hour, apply the fumigation until the patient's bowels are moved and the air is expelled.
Eyssiment del fet sobre les sieus denols e las suas mas.	Then apply cauterization to the affected area.
Quan le fet eyssira segon aquesta forma, lahoras tu engenies en entrometen las suas mas petit a petit; e aprop la femna stia evessada sobre le sieu col, e les pes de lu pengo en jos, e aquelas sia jasent sobre le lieyt, e complegua las suas mas.	"When the foot is swollen, then you apply a poultice and put your hand on their leg."
E aprop prem sobre le ventre de lu petit a petit, e aprop extratz aquo que es dejos les pes de lu de las aurelhas entro que sia preparada en la partida pus dejos.	Then gently press on the area, starting from the bottom and working up to the top.
E si le fet no es fora-getat, lahoras pren les pes de lu e mau aquels am movement vehement, e aprop prem aquo que es sobre les ypocondres petit a petit entro que le fet puege a las partidas desus.	And if there is no pain in the feet, then the patient must be treated carefully.
E aprop entrometa las suas mas e engualhe le fet petit a petit, e comanda a la femna que se exprema entro que le fet sia foro-getat.	And then apply a cushion to their legs, so that they are not full of cushions.
Eyssiment del fet latutidinalment pendent una de las suas mas.	And if the patient's leg is swollen from the knee down, it is called edema by doctors.
Sia engeniat en reduccio de la ma de lu, mays si no podes aquela reduzir, lahoras eleva la femna e fe aquela anar.	And if he's in pain, elevate his foot and apply a bandage.
E si anar no pot, lahoras fay la jazer sobre le lieyt, e concuteys las coyssas de lu am concussio vehement, e aprop aministra liamentz les quals yeu e recomtatz de mucillages.	Then apply strong pressure to the affected area using your legs.
E si es vengut le enfantament, lahoras fay aquela sezer sobre cezelha, e aprop studia sobre la reduccio de la ma, e enguala le fet segon figura natural, e fay stornudar la femna e comanda a lu que comprema a si entro que sia foro-getat.	And you have found a way to make the pain subside when it arises in the feet.
Eyssiment del fet sobre·l col expandudas las suas mas e la fassia de lu es al dos de la sua mayre.	The intestine of the patient, and if necessary, other parts will be treated by other means.
Cove que la matrona tengua la ma del fet e aprop revolva aquel petit a petit, e eque aquel am facilitat.	The midwife should know if the mother has been born with her bowels already opened up.
E cum es e quant so es engualhat, e lahoras pausa sobre le conh de lu aquo que havem recomtat de oli e de mucellages.	And when it has been opened up by the physician, they should use their hand to cleanse the wound.
E aprop comandas a lu que·s maugua petit a petit, e quan auras feyt aquo, lahoras fay aquela cezer sobre una cezelha e comanda li que sia inclinada sobre le latz dreyt, e aprop comanda a lu que sia compremuda; e fay aquela stornudar am condizi.	Then command your friends to help you gently cauterize their body, and when the burning stops, apply a poultice on the affected area.
Exitus foetus praeparati super latus.	The fetus is opened up on the side.
Quan deyssen a horrifici de la mayre segon aquesta manieyra, considera, e lahoras tu inscideys la segondina am la tua ungla entro que sia evacuada de la humiditat.	Incise the foot according to this method, as if it were a second case of the above-mentioned illness.
E si le fet es suspendut sobre la cara e·l col de lu, lahoras tu inscideys aquela del embelic, per so que no sia retengut e mora.	And if you hold it up to their legs or feet, it is called a poultice.
E aprop empelleys le fet a las partidas dedintz entro que pauses aquel segon que cove, e manda a la femna que comprema a si alcunas veguadas, e el sira fora-getat am eyssiment leugier, si Dieus o vol.	And so the wound on the leg be treated lightly, if God wills it.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum.	And so they must be treated by the physician.
Sapias que gemels motas veguadas so natz, e alcunas vetz naysso tres o quatre , mays aquo es estranh e tart s’endeve; mays v so causas foro natura, e no vivo.	When there are three or four days of pain, the doctors say it is a sign of good health.
E conte aquelas, ja sia que sian montiplicatz, una segondina, e son seperatz per ciphac, distingen aquels enter le liguament en l’ombilic de cascun de aquels E alcunas veguadas so foro-getatz ayssi cum es un fet per eyssiment natural leugier, e so eysitz alcunas veguadas per eyssiment no-lausabla ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And if it is necessary to make a cushion for the feet, it should be done carefully, as they are easily burned by improper use.
E si son dificils alcus de lor deves le enfantament e perveno ad aquo que havem dit de las figuras no-naturals, lahoras tu cura aquels ayssi cum havem recontat.	And if there are difficulties, the patient needs to be treated as we previously discussed.
E si’ la matrona subtil e fassa aquo que fa am facilitat e subtilitat, e am tarditat, e sia ingeniat segon tota figura segon que es a lu preparat de l’engen amenant a salut.	And do if necessary for the patient's health, use a cushion on their legs.
Rememoratio eius quod formatur in matrice ex embrionibus et Abortiuntur.	And these are caused by an excess of cold humors.
Alcunas veguadas son formatz en la mayre un, e dos, e tres, e quatre, e v, e vi, e vii, e mays x, e ja es deves mi verificat que una femna abortem ne getet vi, e una autra x totz formatz, la qual causa fo fayta per mensuracio dels glorios savis.	Then place another under her, for the opening of the leg, and hold her legs and feet to prevent them from swelling up.
E tot aysso cove que sia en la sciencia de la matrona quar fort leu ad aquela parve semblant de aquo, e donc opause se ad aquo am so que cove.	And if a woman's womb has been touched by a man's hands, it means she is pregnant.
Capitol .lxxvi.	Capitol lxxvi.
De extraccio del fet quan es mort.	When it is necessary to apply cautery to the body, it is usually done on the legs or feet.
Quan tu curas le fet mort am aquo que havem dit en la divisio de la medicacio e no es defora eyssit, e tu yest forsat usar de opperacio am ma, lahoras cove que consideras si la femna es de sana vertut e no es am alcu dels accidentz per les quals sobre ela es temuda perdicio.	And if you have to cauterize the patient's body because of the pain which has been inflicted on them.
Lahoras cove que la femna sia envessada sobre le lieyt sobre le sieu dos, e sia le cap de lu enclinat enjos e las coyssas de lu sian elevadas.	And then treat the woman with a cushion for her legs.
E·l ministre tengua aquela de doas partz o sia liada en le lieyt per so que·l cos de lu no se extenda deves la extraccio del fet.	And when the patient has been treated for a while, their condition may worsen, so apply the following steps.
E aprop tu humecta la boca de la mayre de lu am olis humitz e am mucellage de altea e de fenugrec e de semensa de li.	And then you should bathe the patient’s legs in oil of lilium (lily) and apply a poultice of altea and cushion the wound with mucilage from the seeds.
E aprop unte la matrona la sua ma am aquels olis e mucellages, e aprop entrometa la sua ma am fecilitat en la mayre, e aprop cerque am la ma loc en le qual fique les uncis en le fet.	And if there are complications due to the pain in the legs or feet, they should be treated by the matron by applying a cautery.
E locs convenient en aquo: adonc tu considera si le fet es preparat que deysenda sobre le sieu cap, e lahoras tu fique les uncis en les huels de lu, o en le col, o en la boca, o en le palat, o dejos la barba, o en la furcula de lu, o en les locs propdas de las costas, o dejos les ypocondres.	Then place your cushion on their legs or chest.
Mays si le deysendiment es sobre les pes de lu, lahoras en le pentenilh, o en le mieg de las costas.	Mays is short for "May's" which refers to a cushion being placed on the legs of the patient.
E cove que tengua le unci am la ma dreyta, e pausa la curvitat de lu en aquel loc le qual es entre les ditz de la ma senestra, e entrometa la ma am facilitat e fique le unci en alcu de aquels locs les quals havem ditz, entro que pervengua a la causa boyda.	And if you want to know how to help the patient, place the cushion on their left leg and use that as a guide for your hand on the affected area.
E aprop pause e fique en la apposicio de lu un autre unci, o le tertz si es necessitat, per so que sia atraccio engual, e no sia extencio segon la sua rectetut tant solament.	Then apply a cautery to the feet, if it's necessary to stop pain in the legs from spreading.
Ans sia maugut a tota partida, per so que l’eyssiment de lu sia alleujat ayssi cum es fayt en dent deves la eradicacio de lu.	And if it is necessary to make cuts on the legs, it should be done so that the patient's pain is relieved.
E cove en lu aquo que es entre lor que la extencio sia mollificada; e si alcuna partida de lu es retenguda, lahoras cove que la matrona unte alcus sieus ditz am oli e entrometa aquels espertament e revolva am aquels aquo que es retengut.	And if the pain is felt in their legs, the abdomen should be treated by placing a cushion beneath them.
Donc si la partida del fet es fora-getada, lahoras les uncis sian permudatz entra loc le qual sia pus aut; e fay aysso entro que tot le fet sia fora-getat.	Therefore, if the patient is suffering from a gout attack, treat it as such by using a cautery.
Mays si la ma es eyssida denant l’autra, e no es possible reduzir aquela per la coartacio de lu, lahoras cove que drap sia envolopat sobre aquela; e aprop extratz aquela entro que tota sia fora-getada, e inscideys aquela o en la junctura de la ma o en le coyde.	If the pain is in the foot, they should use another tool for that.
E ayssi cove que fassas en l’autra ma e en les dos pes.	And so, you should treat their legs and feet in the same way.
Mays si le cap del fet es gran, o accideys a lu coartacio en le eyssiment, o es en le cap de lu aygua ajustada, lahoras cove que entrometa entre les ditz espatum spinos e fenda le cap e extragua la aygua, o que discroba aquel am un instrument le qual es nompnat “alundat”, la forma del qual vindra am las formas dels autres instruments en le capitol le qual es aprop aquest.	And if a physician wishes to perform bloodletting on a person.
E semblantment fassa si·l fet es de gran cap per natura: e lahoras cove que inscida aquel am algematu, o que prengua aquel am alunda ayssi cum havem dit; e aprop extra les osses am les forceps.	And if it is a great pain, that's how we make an incision to relieve the pain in the body.
E si le cap es eyssit e es coartat deves la furcula, lahoras sia fendut entro que la humiditat la qual es en le pietz sia efunduda.	And then you must place a cushion within the patient's legs to prevent the foot from being too hot.
Mays si no es complicat, ni obezeys a eyssiment, lahoras tu inscideys le cap tantost segon que a tu sira possible.	Translation:
E si le dejos del ventre es apostemat o es en lu ydropici, lahoras cove que tu perfores aquel entro que corro la humiditat que es en lu.	If the patient's body is afflicted with swelling or another cushion needs to be placed under the patient's feet because they have gout in their legs, then do so.
Mays si le fet es sobre les sieus pes, lahoras la atraccio de lu es leugiera e la direccio de lu a la boca de la mayre es leugiera.	If the patient has pain in their feet, the doctor will know what to do.
Mays si es coartat deves le ventre e·l pietz, lahoras cove que tu extraguas aquel am drap le qual auras envolopat sobre la tua ma, e que fendes le ventre e·l pietz entro que corra aquo que es en aquels.	Then you should apply a cautery to the patient's legs and feet, carefully controlling the area where the pain occurs so that the heat does not spread too much.
Mays si les autres membres so ostatz e torna le cap, lahoras la metrona entrometa la ma senestra; mays si la boca de la mayre es huberta, lahoras intrometa la ma en le preon de layre, e cerque am aquela le cap, e atira aquel am les ditz entro a la boca de la mayre, e aprop entrometa en lu un unci, o dos uncis, e atire lu am aquels.	Mayes if you apply pressure to the affected area, mayre can be treated by applying a poultice and keeping the mouth open.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada per apostema caut le qual accideys a l’u, lahoras cove que no sia trebelhat sobre lu; abantz cove lahoras aministrar efusio de causas humidas grassas.	And if the patient's legs are stiff or swollen, it is customary to apply a cushion to their feet;  this will prevent the pain from being inflamed.
E aministre emplastres; e segua le pacient en ayguas que mollifican e humectan.	Then apply a poultice to soften and moisten the area; otherwise, do not apply it.
E si le fet es sobre le sieu costat, lahoras si possible es, sia agulat: e sia aministrat aquo que havem dit en le fet viu.	Then, if it is on the side, it is called a "cois" (pain in the side) to be treated by the method of applying a hot iron to the affected area: it is used to treat wounds that have been caused by gout.
E si aquo no es possible, lahoras sia inscidit en pessas, e sia extrayt.	When necessary, a cushion must be placed under the feet to prevent them from being cut.
E cove que non layssas alcuna causa dedintz de la segondina.	Then burn the second toe or foot-related area to keep them from being burned by gout.
E cum tu auras complida tota la tua opperacio, lahoras aministra aquo que havem dit de la curacio en les apostemas cautz les quals accideysso de la mayre.	Then apply heat to the affected area, as we have said previously.
E si accideys flux de sanc, lahoras deyssendas en ayguas stipticas e aministra l’autra curacio.	And if you treat a patient's legs with other remedies.
E yeu ja e vist una femna en le ventre de la qual era fet mort, e aprop sobre aquel foc autra veguada emprenhada, e aprop foc mort es le fet autre.	And if you're able to do so, place a bandage on her other leg.
Accidit al u aprop lonc temps apostema en le sieu embelic; e inflat es entro que foc ubert, e comensec a getar brac.	You will need to apply cautery to the patient's legs; apply your hand on the patient's feet, and if necessary, treat the area with a poultice.
E yeu fu appelhat a la cura de lu, e medicat a lu per lonc temps, e la plagua no es consolidada.	And if he has been treated by doctors for a long time, he should be carefully examined.
Adonc yeu pausegui sobre lu de alscunas causas emplastra de forta atraccio, e eyssic de lu un os, e aprop passero alcus jorns, e eyssic un autre os; e yeu fu trop meravilhat, cum en le ventre no sia os.	Then you should apply a cushion to their legs, which are placed within a space, for a few days, because you have opened the area around them.
E adonc yeu cogitegui que eran dels osses del fet mort.	Then you should apply your knowledge of medicine to the patient's feet.
Donc yeu enguisigui la plagua, e extrayssi de lu motz osses , la femna existent en las sieuas milhos disposicios, e ja visquec en tal manieyra per lonc temps, correc de lu un petit de brac.	Therefore, treat the patient with a hot compress because they have a pain in their legs that is caused by humors coming out.
E yeu no afermegui asso esser stranh, sino quar en aquo es sciensa e ajutori ad aquo que le metge artifec am la ma per curacio aministra.	And if you want to avoid making mistakes, use an expert in their treatment.
De las formas dels instrumentz que so necessaris a extrayre le fet.	De las formas dels instrumentz that are necessary to remove the pain from them.
Forma de vertitge am la qual es uberta la mayre:	Then apply leeches to the appropriate spot on the patient's body.
Aquesta es la forma de strenhedor en le qual so engualhatz les libres, al qual engualhament sian dos virtitges en doas extremitatz de dos futz.	This is how you treat a swelling in leeches on the legs.
May empero aquesta virtitge cove que sia pus subtil de strictori, e sia fayt o de eba o de fust de boys.	And so the emperor's physician will know if there are signs that the body is being affected by the disease.
E sia la latitut de quascun fust quays dos ditz e le marge de quascu amdos quays un dit, e la longitut de quascu es un palm e mig; e en le mieg loc de dos fustz so dos ajustaments de aquel meteys fustz les quals ja son fermatz, dels quals la longitut es la maytat de un palm e un pauc mes, e la latitut de quascu es quay dos ditz, o un pauc mes.	The patient's foot should be cauterized to prevent it from becoming inflamed.
E aquestz dos additamentz sian entromeses en la boca de la mayre per que sia uberta am aquels quan tu revolves las doas prescriptas virtigges.	And if two cushions are placed under the patient's legs, so that they can be treated.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:	The shape of the foot is different from that of a cushion or other soft object.
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps.	And if you use forceps to treat it, they will be called "fórceps"  in the future.
Mays empero en la extremitat de lu so dos additament ayssi cum vezes, e la longitut de aquels additament es quays un palm, e la latitut de quascu es dos ditz.	But alas, the patient's pain is in their feet by two palms, in length as much as they are to be treated.
E cum tu vols am aquels ubrir la mayre, lahoras tu fay cezer la femna sobre le lieyt les pes pendentz, ubert aquo que es entre las coyssas de lu.	This text refers to an intestine that has been pushed back into its cavity.
E aprop obre la tua ma am le instrument ayssi cum fas am forfexs engualment segon la quantitat que vols de la aprecio de la boca de la mayre entro que la metrona fassa so que vols.	Then you must open the wound carefully, using an instrument to do so as needed.
La forma de vertitge la qual diysero les antics:	This refers to the ancients' understanding of vertigo.
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:	The form of the body must be treated with caution so as not to cause pain.
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran	The patient's legs have been treated with a burning treatment, and the head has been covered.
E es asemblat a forceps al qual so dentz en la extremitat, ayssi cum vezes, e alcunas veguadas es fayt lonc ayssi cum forceps segon aquesta forma, ayssi cum vezes, al qual so dentz ayssi cum dentz de ressegua am le qual es inscidit e conterit.	and sometimes they are called "gout" by doctors, when they are caused by humors that have accumulated in the joints.
Forma de amesidat pauc:	The intestine already has its own opening.
Forma de unci havent una spina:	Another translation could be: when it is necessary to apply a cautery point on the body elsewhere.
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:	E 'n la medicina it is used to treat by applying a cautery.
Forma de forceps a la qual so dentz de cerra am le qual le cap del fet sia conterit:	This form of pliers is used to apply pressure on the body during surgery.
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:	If the pain is caused by a buildup of humors in the joints, it is treated with a burning cautery on the affected area.
Forma de dos espatums latz:	Apply a cautery to the affected area.
Totz aquels instrumentz so excersitatz, e quan mes so multiplicadas las specias de aquel e so preparadas deves le artifexs, quant es pus leugier a la sua opperacio e pus aut deves les homes per la sua quantitat.	When the tools are used on a patient's body and when the tools are applied to the body, they should be used sparingly depending on the condition of the patient.
E no obres de aquels instrumentz ja sia qua sia deves tu aparalhat, quar la necessitat de aquels no es excusabla.	And so you must always apply cautery to the affected area when treating someone for pain in the foot or legs.
De extraccio de la segondina.	When joints are inflamed by excess humors, it is called gout.
Quan la segondina es retenguda deves le enfantament, lahoras cove que tu comandes a la malautae que retengua le sieu ale, e aprop fay aquela stornudar am condizi, e strenh la tua ma sobre la boca de lu e sobre las nars de lu, e si per aysso es defora eyssit, bo es.	And if the pain has another cause, you should use a poultice made from other ingredients.
E sino, lahoras tu pren una ola e perfora en la cuberta un trauc e pausa en aquela erbas ubrent la boca de la mayre, ayssi cum calament e ruda e anet e camamilla e scicados arabic e cassia lignea e santaurea.	And if it is necessary to make incisions on the surface of the foot, cauterize the wounds with a mixture of arabic, rue, and other herbs.
Totas aquestas erbas o alcunas de lor sian submersas en aygua en la ola, e pausa aquela sobre le foc.	These herbs or some of them are to be placed in water, and then the water is to be used for making points.
E aprop pausa una canula de canaviera en la boca de la mayre, e tengua aquela entro que la evapor vengua a la concavitat de la mayre.	Then place a small tube in the mouth of the patient, and put that tube inside the cavity of their body.
E aprop fay aquela stornudar ayssi cum havem dit, e la segondina sira fora-getada am velocitat.	Then apply a heated iron to their legs or thighs, but gently place another on the patient's feet.
Mays si roman aprop aquesta curacio e no es eyssida, lahoras tu comanda a la matrona que submerge la sua ma sinistra en oli sizami o en micellage de altea, e aprop entrometa aquela en le conh e queresca am aquela la segondina, e cum aquela auras trobada, lahoras pren la e exten aquela pauc a pauc Mays si es annexsa en le preon de la mayre, lahoras entrometa la sua ma segon que havem recomtat, e quan aura trobat la segondina, extragua aquela petit a petit segon rectetut per so que la mayre no caja deves la atraccio vehement.	If you have pain in the foot that persists, another will be placed on the patient's left leg, and the other on their right leg.
Abantz cove que sia permudada als costatz dreyt e sinestre am facilitat.	Then, if the pain was to spread to the thighs, use the cautery on the thighs.
E aprop sia ajustat en la quantitat de atraccio, quar ela obedira e evasira de adhirencia.	And if the patient's body resists the opening, let it be closed again carefully.
E si la boca de la mayre es coartada, nos ja havem recomtat la curacio am sturnutacio e am medicacio de la ola am erbas.	Then put your hand on the patient's stomach.
Mays si no es fora-getada am totas las causas las quals havem recomtadas, lahoras guarda te que no fetigues sobre aquela en iteracio de abstracio, mays empero cove que aquo que es eyssit de lu a la boca de la mayre lies a la coyssa de la femna, e aprop cristeriza aquela am enguent e tetrafarmacon; quar aquel fara poyrir aquela aprop alcus dias e sira dissolvuda e sira fora-getada.	If a physician has determined that the pain is in the leg.
Mays quan se poyreys, es de lu elevada mala audor al cap, e al estomac, e aquo ledeys la malauta; e adonc cove que sian aministradas sub-fumiguacios e convenientz ad aquo.	And if it is necessary for the patient's health, cauterize them; if for their stomach, it is advisable to use a cushion as well.
Mays alcus dels Antics ja so esproatz sub-fumigacio de nazitort e de figuas seccas.	May you be given another cushion under their legs, and they are to be kept warm.
Forma de instrument am le qual la femna es sub-fumiguada deves la retentio de mestruas e de la segondina:	And if you have to apply cautery to stop the flow of menstrual blood.
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.	The original text is in a language similar to Italian, Spanish, and Latin, but I'll play along with the "medieval" theme and provide a more literal translation:
E sia pausada la extremitat subtil en le conh e la extremitat ampla sobre le foc, e la sub-fumiguacio sia pausada sobre las brazas del foc.	And if the foot has been opened by applying a hot cautery to its area, then apply a cushion to the legs and place the patient back on the bed.
E tengua aquela entro que sia consumida aquela sub-fumiguacio e itera·n autra.	And if they are suffering from pain, apply another cushion.
De curacio del cul del enfant no-perforat.	Place a cushion on the child's legs when they are being treated.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat.	When the body is affected by cold, the pain is often treated with cauterization.
Adonc cove a la matrona que perfore am le sieu dit aquel ciphac; e sino, perfora aquel am spatum agut, e guarda se que no toque le lacert.	The midwife must pierce the legs to relieve pain.
E aprop pause sobre aquel lana enfusa en vi e oli; e aprop cura aquel am enguent entro que sia senat.	E aprop pause over the patient's bowels; et a curen for that.
Mays si temes que sia opilat, lahoras pausa en le trauc una canula per motz dias, e osta la quan le enfant voldra degerir.	Then use a cannula to drain the fluid from their legs for a few days, if necessary.
E ja accideys oppilacio del cul per consolidacio de plagua o de apostema; adonc cove que aquela consolidacio sia inscidida, e aprop sia curada am aquo que avem dit de la curacio e del plom.	When the disease has been cured by cauterization or if it is necessary to cure the disease, then apply another of these.
De curacio de las fistulas que endeveno dejos.	For treating the fissures of the thigh, and other things.
Las fistulas que endeveno en la partida dejos pus bassa so nodacio e grossetut las quals endeveno prop del cul defora o en l’espazi de la una partida.	The which are called fistulas in the lower body, they are called a cushion for the pain.
E es una fistula o motas.	This is a medical term for a condition affecting the feet.
E cum aquela nodacio es antiquada e corr de la humiditat aygosa blanca o poyridura subtil, e alcunas veguadas so de aquestas fistulas alcunas penetrantz.	And if the patient has gout, they are to be treated by a physician who specializes in this ailment.
E aquelas penetrantz so conogudas per aquo que es eyssit de aquelas per la egressio e per ventosetat; e alcunas vetz use le malaute de egressio, e fort leu es eyssit de aquelas verm.	And if you are treating the sick by cauterization, be careful to avoid burning them too severely.
E so de aquelas fistulas alcunas veguadas en l’espazi penetrantz entro a la vesica, e entro al meat de la vergua; e so de aquelas penetrantz entro la junctura de la coyssa e entro al notz de la coeta.	And if it is necessary to cauterize fistulas in the body.
E aquo en que es conoguda fistula penetrant entro al cul e no-penetrant, es que tu metas le tieu dit endic en le cul, e entrometas tenta subtil de eram o de ferr en la fistula quan no y es turtuositat.	A person should be cauterized in their first line of pain, and you should use a small tool to make the wound smaller.
Mays si en aquela es turtuositat, lahoras entromet en aquela tenta subtil de plom o de pels de caval entro que tu sentas la tenta o le pel en le tieu dit.	When you feel pain in your body, you should use a physician.
E si no sentas aquela de tot ni no procezeys del trauc alcuna causa de egestio ni verm ni ventositat, ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras sapias que es no-penetrant, e lahoras coyta te a la curacio.	If you don't feel its effects on their body or gut, then your healing should be done as the doctor has said.
E quan la fistula es penetrant entro a la vesica o entro al meat de la vergua, lahoras la significacio de lu es eyssiment de urina de aquela e prohibicio de lu ad aysso que·l loc am medicina sia consolidat.	And then the patient's bladder will be filled.
Mays si es penetrant entro la junctura de la coyssa o entro al os e envencio de dolor en le circuit, lahoras senhal de lu es que la tenta perve entro aqui si en lu no es turtuositat entro al os, e envencio de dolor en le circuit de la partida; e que de lu yeys poyredura tostemps; e que no val en aquela medicacio, ni es consolidada am enguent.	Perhaps the intestine has been opened for a medical procedure or that the patient needs to be kept warm after the operation.
E en totas aquelas fistulas penetrant no es curacio de tot, e la curacio de aquelas es trebalh e vanetat dels folyls metges sobre·l qual so fermatz.	The patient's condition is a disease of the blood.
Mays en aquela que no es penetrant e no antiqua, sanacio am ferr es sperada segon que yeu a tu recomtare, e aquo que ja yeu e proat.	And if it is expected that the patient will be healed by the cushion, it is hoped that they are healed by the application of a hot cautery, which is applied to the thighs.
E es que le malaute jagua entre las tuas mas sobre le sieu dos e eleva las cambas de lu entro sus, las coyssas sian enclinadas al ventre de lu, e aprop entromet tenta de plom, o de eram si es en la fistula turtuositat, entro que sapias le loc on perve la tenta.	And if you have already opened the place for the patient's foot, be careful to put something under their intestines.
E si aquela sent le malaute entorn le cuol, lahora cove que tu entrometas le tieu dit endic en le cuol.	Then when the patient's body has been cauterized, you should apply it to their neck, as a last resort, after placing a cushion on their thighs.
E si sentas en le tieu dit la tenta ja per si meteyssa descuberta penetrar, otra aquo que sentas entre le tieu dit e aquela siphac o carn, lahoras sapias certanament que aquela es penetrant; e adonc no trebalhes en aquela, quar no es en aquela sanacio, ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you feel pain in the body, then put your hand on the part where it burns.
Mays empero diyssero alcus que es sana en alcus homes tart.	Then they are healthy, but some have pain in their feet and legs.
E de la medicacio per la qual es sperat juvament en lu es que tu ignes cauteri subtil segon le ample de la fistula, ayssi cum es precedit, e intrometas aquel ignit en la fistula entro que pervengua entorn le cuol; e aprop itera aquel doas o tres vetz entro que sapias que ja son adhustas totas aquelas carns ajustadas fistuladas que so semblantz a cana de pluma de ausel.	When there are small wounds on the feet, which they say are caused by the needle-like pain of the needle, it is called a fistula.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder entro que en yescan totas aquelas carns que so adhustas, e aprop cura aquela am medicinas la carn engendrantz e consolidantz, e si es sanada, bo es; e sino, lahoras no es sana en degun temps per autra curacio.	And if the body's humors are balanced, then it will be healed.
E si la tenta intra, e no penetra entro·l tieu dit le qual es en le cul, e entre aquel e la tenta que es velament spes de carn o de ciphac, e vezes la fistula en aquo que siec la superficia de la codena, lahoras secca la codena del comensament de la fistula, e tu ve seccan am la tenta, e sia en la fistula entro que la seccio pervengua al loc en le qual perve la extremitat de la tenta, e per la tenta es liberat e catz.	And if it is necessary for the body to be treated, then the doctor should use a tool called a cautery on the affected area.
E aprop mundifiqua aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so asembladas a canula de pena de ausel e no romangua de aquelas alcuna causa.	And put your hand on the affected area to prevent the opening from becoming infected.
Mays si flux de sanc vezes que vengua entre tu e la tua opperacio quan ensideysses aquelas carns, lahoras le milh que sia e del pus leugier instrument es cauterizar am foc o am medicina acuta, quar cauteri am foc ajusta bonas doas habitutz: so es adhustio de aquelas carns ajustadas, e abscizio del sanc exseccacio de las humiditatz.	And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to those parts of the body that are affected by humor, it may be done so with a mild cautery or with medicine.
E aprop cura aquela am calguas envolopadas en boder o en caus trissat entro que·l loc geta brac, e aprop lahoras cura la plagua am enguentz carn dura engendran e consolidan.	And so they treat the plague by placing those affected under the care of a skilled healer.
E so medicinas en las quals so stipticitat e exseccio; quan lahoras es restaurada ja es sanada e no temes iteracio.	And apply cautery to them (the affected areas) so they are healed.
Mays si la fistula ja perve entro al preon del cul e es elonguada de lu superficia del cos, lahoras entromet le tieu dit en le cul e inquireys am aquel.	If you put your hand on the area where the intestine or the hernia is, it will be more likely to cause pain, and you should try to stop it from causing pain by applying a cushion.
E donc si centes la tenta e entre tu e ela es velament de ciphac o de carn, e es propda a la penetracio, lahora no es operacio en lu sino segon via di fiducia e de speransa.	If there are signs of disease in the intestine or if you feel they are sick, it is necessary to be careful because the pain can be caused by a serious illness.
La qual causa es aministrar en lu una de tres manieyras: o que cauterize aquela ayssi cum havem dit; o que secces aquela entro que consieguas la conquavitat de lu per que sia a tu possible entrometre las qualcas e la curacio propdana; e no procesiscas mot am seccio per so que no inscidas le lacert contenent le cuol, e que accidisque sobre le malaute eyssiment de la egistio ses voluntat; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que havem dit quar fort leu sira sanat; o que elongues aquel velament e mondes aquel pus que seccas aquel entro prop le cul, ayssi cum havem dit, o am tenta o am autre instrument de aguda extremitat, e aprop mondifique aquelas carns fistuladas las quals so en la seccio entro la on podes am percrustacio; e aprop esforsa te a far la restauracio de tota la plagua am seccio, e si le orrifici pus desus no es consolidat, e romangua la fistula uberta en la partida del cul, e sira pus leugier per le malaute.	Then treat them with a cushion in the belly, which you have already made for the other parts of the body.
E alscunas veguadas la fistula es finida segon aquesta manieyra: es quan tu entrometas la tenta en la fistula, e es en le latz del cul entorn la superficia del cos am la codena e en le marge del cul, lahoras pren tenta de perforada extremitat, que es ayssi cum agulha de preparantz les coers segon aquesta forma:	Then, apply a poultice to the area around the affected part to treat it properly.
e entromet en aquela fiel envolopat de v fiels o entorn aquels; e aprop entromet tenta am fiel en la fistula entro que consiegua la conquavitat de lu.	And if a patient's foot has been infected, put your hand on their legs to stop the infection from spreading further.
Mays si es penetrant en le marge del cul prop dedintz, lahoras tu extratz le fiel de aquel trauc ayssi que tu intrometas le tieu dit en le cul; e extraguas la extremitat del fiel e ajustes las duas extremitatz essemps, e estrenh cascuna, e leyssa aquo per un dia o per dos, e quan mays inscideys le fiel en la carn, estrenh be aquel entro que aquelas carns sian inscididas las quals so entre doas extremitatz del fiel e que cajan.	And if you must cauterize the flesh of someone who has a bad case of gout, make sure to place a cushion on his legs and put a bandage on their foot.
E aprop cura la plagua entro que sia consolidada e sanada.	Then apply remedies to heal the plague, wherever it may be in the body.
Mays si le orrifici de la fistula no es penetrant, lahoras fay aquel penetrar, en qualque manieyre sia a tu preparat, sino que sia mot en le preon, quar no es a tu que fassas aquo per que no inscidas le lacert; e aprop fay am aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the fistula does not open, you must apply a hot iron to the area to burn away the blockage.
La forma de spatum spinos am lo qual es fenduda la fistula: la curvitat del qual es mot aguda e l’autra partida es no-aguda, per so que no inscidas aquo que no es necessari, ayssi cum vezes.	This is a trick question! The provided text is in Catalan, not Latin or French.
De sutura de emorroydas en las quals corra sanc en la inscizio de aquelas.	And if they are hemorrhoids, cauterize them.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim.	And if you have to remove something from the body, apply heat to the affected area, or use cauterization on their intestines.
E de aquelas so petitas e grans, e que le sanc corr de aquelas tostemps e es una, e so motas, e so fora·l cul, e en las extremitatz de lu.	And if the patient's body has been opened by a doctor, they are small but also need to be treated as such.
Mays empero aquelas que so foro le cul so segon las mes de pauca humiditat, de las quals corr aygua citrina o un petit de sanc am cos continuabla, e so segon la color del cos.	And these are the signs that indicate little humidity in the body, and if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's legs or their hands.
E la curacio de aquela que es dedintz le cuol es que comandes al malaute que se assela e que se exprema entro que le cuol yesca e las emoroydas apparescan a tu.	Then apply cauterization to the affected area where the pain is felt.
Adonc tu te coyte e suspen am uncis o que tenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, e aprop incideys aquelas deves las suas razitz.	And then you apply a cautery to their legs, causing pain.
Mays si les uncis no so tengutz en aquelas per la humiditat de lor e mollificacio de aquelas, lahoras pren aquelas am drap aspre o am coto o am flassada de lana, e extratz aquelas am les tieus ditz, e aprop inscideys aquelas e polveriza sobre lor alcunas polveras caudas aprop la inscizio, per que sian ad aquelas en loc de cauteri; o cauteriza aquelas segon que es precedit en le capitol de cauterizar.	Then, if the patient has pain in the legs from dampness, it is necessary to apply hot cautery to their legs, and another on their thighs, but if the pain is in the feet, place a cushion under their feet.
E aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And another thing you should also treat:
E si le cul no obezeys a egressio, lahoras cristerisa le malaute am cristeri en le qual sia mordicacio petita, e sia lavat am aquel aquo que es en le cuol e que obezesca a egressio leugierament quan le malaute s’esprem.	Then you have done a good job of making a good cut on the patient's leg when necessary.
Mays si las emorroydas so defora le cul, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiera, e es que tu prenguas aquelas am la tua ungla, o que prenguas aquelas am unci, e inscidas aquelas, e aprop cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit entro que sian sanadas.	If they have pain in the legs, they should be treated with cauterization.
E aquel que avoreys inscizio, cove que aministres sutura de lor segon aquesta manieyra: pren fiel envolopat e entromet aquel en agulha e aprop extratz las emorroydas a las partidas dessus, e fay aquel penetrar am la agulha en la razit del autra part, e envolveys las doas extramitatz del fiel en la partida pus dejos de la agulha, e so latitudinalment; e estrenh la emorroyda am strectura fort, e aprop noza le fiel e extratz la agulha.	When there are cushions on their legs to the point that they need a surgeon's help, use a needle to apply heat to the affected area.
E fay aquo a totas, e layssa de aquelas una e no la cozes, per so que la superfluitat del sanc corra de aquela.	Let a hot poultice be applied to the affected area, and let cold humors be expelled from the body.
E aprop pausa sobre le cul drap enfus en oli rozat o en cerot; e pausa aquel sobre·l cuol e comanda al malaute que·s repause.	And place another on the thighs to prevent pain from spreading.
E aprop layssa aquela entro que caja; e quan es casuda, cura aquelas am enguentz o am autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if it's gout, apply a poultice to that area.
De curacio de fistulas.	This refers to treating fistulas.
Motas veguadas accideys per exseccacio de fenda o per costriccio de natura.	Gout is caused by nature's imbalance.
E cum so antiquadas e no val en aquela medicina, lahoras cove que tu razas aquelas am la puncta de spatum o am la tua ungla entro que sian faytas humidas e sia hostada de aquelas la escorsa pus desus, la qual prohibeys aquelas de consolidacio; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian consolidadas.	And if you are skilled in the art of medicine, they say that you should apply it to your feet.
Lahoras tu osta aquelas am razio pus vehement que la primieyra entro que mot sancno e sian excoriadas; e aprop cura aquelas entro que sian sanadas.	When joints are inflamed, apply other treatments if necessary, but use cauterization only when the affected area is in the leg and not the feet, as a cushion should be used to treat the injury.
De curacio de almesamir, so es clau.	Then cauterize the area affected by gout.
Sapias que alamermar, so es clau, e no es si no notz redon segon la color del cors semblant a cap de claviel, e es fayt en tot le cors e majorment en las partidas dejos les pes e als ditz, e endeve per aquels dolor deves le anament.	Sapias that these are the pains caused by gout in the joints, causing their suffering to be alleviated.
E adonc cove que sia inscidit aquo que es en le circuit del clau, e sia tengut am les forfexs o am unci, e sia eradicat de la sua razit; e aprop cura aquel.	Then apply another cushion to their legs and another to the foot.
E si vols, cauteriza le segont que es precedit en le sieu capitol.	When you want to [translate: 'cauterize' are the legs.
Mays de veruca es eminencia petita aspre fistulada redonda sobre la superficia del cos, e motas veguadas veno en las mas dels enfantz.	The previous answers are for doctors to avoid making a diagnosis of gout.
E curacio de lu es que estendas e inscidas aquela, o que estrenhas aquela am fiel o am pel entro que caja.	And you should be careful when using a hot knife on them, for they are ill-equipped to handle such pain.
E si vols, cauteriza aquo, segon que havem dit, am foc o am medicina acuta.	Then, if necessary, cauterize, or apply a cauterizing medicine to the area.
E ja so eradicadas enversas e no-enversas am le instrument le qual yeu diyre.	And also remove the bad blood in the body using other methods.
Mays formica es eminencia petita feutrada o fistulada grossa sobre la superficia del cos anant mot en le preon, e quan le freg atroba aquela es centit en lu semblant de mordificacio de formigua, e es fayta entorn le cos.	If someone has a large swelling or a lump in the flesh, and their leg and foot are swollen, that's called gout by physicians.
E curacio de lu es que prenguas una canula de pena de auca o de pena de voltor, e sia fort, e pausa aquela sobre la formigua entro que la contengua le cercle de la canula de las partidas de lu; e aprop revolveys la tua ma am la canula entro que inscidas aquo que es en le circuit de la formigua, e pauses aquela en le preon de la carn, e que eradiques la formigua de la sua razit.	And if you are a doctor, use a canula to make an incision in the foot if it's necessary to drain the pus from the wound.
E si vols, fay aquo am canula de eram o de ferr segon aquesta forma:	And if you wish, make use of a copper or iron hand-held instrument.
Sia la partida desus de la canulha trahent a subtilitat, sorda (so es no-perforada), envolopada per so que sobre le dit la aprencio de lu sia ablaviada e la revolucio de aquela.	Let me know if you want to try another one.
E si vols cauteriza la formiga segon que es denant dit en la cauterizacio de atheyl en le capitol de cauteri.	And if you want to cauterize the patient's foot, you should use a hot iron.
De forma dels instrumentz que so aministratz a dar cristeri.	And upon the patient's legs, you shall apply the cushion to be used for this purpose.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat; e alcunas veguadas es fayt de aquels instrumentz petit e gran segon aquels als quals so aministratz, quar aquel que es aministrat en la curacio dels petitz enfants sia petit; e de aquel dels quals los culs son freuls o doloyrozes, les cristeris de aquels sian petitz.	This sentence seems to be describing the use of specific instruments for medical treatments on children.
La forma de cristeri gran e pauc:	Another use for the cure for gout, which is a common ailment among people.
Le cap de la canula de lu desus en le qual es liada la borsa sia ampla segon aquesta manieyra; e sia a lu distinacio la on la borsa es liada ayssi cum vezes.	The tip of the canula should be cauterized to prevent the bag from becoming infected.
E la extremitat de lu pus dejus, la qual es entromesa en le cul, sia sorda (so es no-uberta) mot leon, atrasent a subtilita; e en la un del latz de lu sian dos traucs, e en l’autre costat un trauc, e sia la amplesa del trauc segon la groseza dels rays e pus gros un petit.	And if you are applying pressure to an opening on the foot, use a cushion to apply the pressure.
E sia la borsa en la qual sian pausadas las medicinas de vesica de bestia o de pel de ovelha, e la razit de lu sia un palm.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the beast's bladder or the wool on the sheep's foot, burn it.
E sia perforada per motz traucs ayssi cum es revolvuda; e si l’espazi le qual es entre les traucs la grossetut del dit.	And let it be cauterized between the legs as well as where the pain is felt in the feet.
E aprop entromet en aquels traucs fiel fort de fiel cru le qual sia de detz fiels, o enviro aquels; e ajusta am aquel la borsa; e quan es pausada en lu la borsa, sia streyt en le cap del cristeri entre dos distingentz am fort costriccio, e aprop cristeriza am aquel quascun trauc: Mays la qualitat de cristerizar am aquel es que tu omples la borsa de la medicina, que sia escalfada segon la quantitat de la tolleransa del malaute; e guarda te que no sia trop cauda ni trop freja.	Then place two cushions on the patient's legs.
E aprop le malaute sia resupinat sobre le sieu dos, e eleva las suas cambas en sus e pausa dejos lu un cuer sobre le qual ja so les homes o un lansol; e aprop unta la extramitat del cauteri am oli o am album de huou o am mucellage de fenugrec o de semblantz; e aprop entromet aquel en le cul am facilitat, e aprop le ministre prengua la borsa e exprema aquel am doas mas e essemps am vehemencia entro que sia evacuat en le budelh tot aquo que es en le cristeri; e aprop extra le cristeri e le malaute leva las suas cambas a la paret.	And if necessary to apply a cushion under their legs, they should be raised and supported.
E si la medicina forsa aquel a eyssiment, tengua le tant quant poyra; e si dorm am aquel per tota una nueyt, es mays derier en juvament.	And if the medicine fails, that will cause them pain, then they will have to use a poultice.
Mays si tu cristerizas aquel en las malautias de solucio de ventre e l’eyssiment de lu le coyta, lahoras tu itera le cauteri entro que sia sanat.	May it be healed by Christ, and if the cautery is used for other ailments, you should use it to heal those who are suffering from a cushion of pain on their legs.
E si en le cul so emorroydas o apostemas ledens, lahoras sia le cristeri mot subtil e leon, dels cristeris am les quals les enfantz so criterisatz.	If you are suffering from pains in the stomach or intestines, then apply a cushion to relieve your pain.
De curacio de las plaguas.	And then treat them for the plague.
Yeu ja e dit en la divisio de la curacio de las plaguas aquo que convenia al libre, e yeu dic assi la curacio de aquelas am ma e am medicinas segon le conpliment.	You know, the patient's legs are also affected by the plague.
Donc dic que las plaguas son diversificadas segon aquo en que son faytas las plaguas e segon le loc sobre le qual cazo las plaquas.	The person has been afflicted by the plague, but it's important to remember that other diseases can also be present in the body.
E las causas per que motas vetz son faytas las plaguas so ayssi cum getament de peyra, o inscisio d’espaza o de cotel, o percussio am lansa, o am fustz, o am sageta, o semblantz ad aquels de motas causas.	It appears the text you provided is a mix of languages, likely combining Latin-derived terms with influences from Italian, Spanish, and other Romance languages.
Mays las plaguas que so en les locz del cos so ayssi cum plagua la qual catz sobre le cap, o·l col, o·l pietz, o·l ventre, o·l fitge, e semblantz ad aquels dels membres.	Mays, therefore, it is treated like a disease that affects one of the limbs, as if it were in the cavity of the foot, which can be seen with the other two sentences.
E yeu so recomtant la curacio de alcunas plaguas per que pauses aquela ratiocinacio e regla sobre las autras plaguas.	And if there are no other ailments present, then this is likely a case of gout.
E yeu comensare de las plaguas del cap simplas, quar la rememoracio de las compostas vindra al comensament del tertz capitol.	He will speak about the causes of the plague, which are already known to his subjects.
Donc dic que quan accideys en le cap plagua simpla e no es fractura, lahoras considera: si es per getament de peyra o de semblant, e ja ha trinquada la codena tant solament e es gran plagla e temes sobre aquel malaute havinement de apostema caut, lahoras tu te coyta e fleubotoma la cephalica tantost, e no tardas aquo; e extrats ad aquel del sanc segon la quantitat de la vertut de lu si no mes alcuna causa prohibent de fleubotomia, majorment si·l sanc que es eyssit de la plagua es pauc.	And if the pain is caused by a simple cold humor, it is not considered gout.
E sia la flaubotomia del contrari de la partida plaguada; e guardase le malaute de replecio e de vi e de viandas grossas.	And if it is necessary to perform surgery upon the body, use a cushion.
Mays si de la minuicio prohibeys alcuna causa, lahoras sia aminorat de la vianda e no apropinque a carn ni a vi.	And do not apply the needle to the flesh if it is too painful.
E pausa sobre la plagua, si a lu accideys apostema caut, coto enfus en oli rozat solet o en vi en le qual es stipticat.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the sore, apply heat or oil to the affected area,  which is the place where the pain is located.
Mays si est segur de apostema caut, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua, si es recent am le sieu sanc e le ayre no ha mudat aquela la polvera la qual yeu recomtare aprop petit.	Perhaps if you have a recent wound on your feet, it is best to avoid using a cautery on it.
E si le ayre ja ha mudada aquela, lahoras pausa sobre alscus enguentz entro que sia sanada.	And then the patient should be given a cushion until they are healed.
Mays si la plagua es gran o es per inscizio d’espaza e de semblantz, e no so ajustadas las labias de lu per puvils, lahoras ajusta aquelas am sutura segon que yeu recomtare de la sutura de lor.	If the plague is severe or the patient has a hernia, make sure they are properly positioned.
Mays si la plagua ja es discuberta del os e pen, e no es retencio de lu sino un petit suspensori, lahoras inscideys aquela e aprop cura la plagua am medicinas e restaura la carn aprop en loc de codena, e comanda al malaute que sia pescut de viandas en las quals es groceza: caps e formen coyt e semblantz a lor, entro que sia compost.	And so you treat the plague with medicines which are applied to the flesh, but only for a short time.
E si atrobas en la codena putrefaccio e no adhereys al os, lahoras tu inscideys tot aquo poyrit e geta aquo, e aprop cura aquo.	And if you are treating a case of the other kind, I will place a cushion on the legs.
Mays si en aquestas plaguas es arteria o vena de la qual fluxs de sanc pot evenir, e no es abscindida per medicinas, lahoras tu inquier sobre la arteria, e si atrobas aquela no-inscidida, lahoras tu inscideys aquela am spatum, o lia aquela; e si necessitat te provoca que aquo que havem dit no comfereys, lahoras tu cauteriza entro que·l sanc sia abscidit.	If you have to inquire about a wound in the lower leg, it will be clear if it is caused by an artery or vein.
E si aquestas plaguas son simplas e petitas, lahoras la causa de lor es leugiere; enayssi que tu polverizas sobre aquelas aquesta polvera, quar consolidada aquela denant que l’ayre mude aquelas.	And if these pains are simple and mild, you should use a cushion to protect their legs from being burned by the hot coals.
E la manieyra de la polvera es aquesta: recipe oli de enses partida una, de sanc de drago partida doas, de caus no-extincta partidas tres; sia tot mot trissat e crivellat, e de lu sia la plagua omplida, e sia constrengida per bona constriccio entro que be sobre aquela aderesca, e sia coagulada am le sanc.	Then the plague is treated by applying a poultice made of enses (a type of plant) and coagulating it.
E aprop strengeys aquela desus am pulvils e leyssa aquela, e no la deslias mentre esta ayssi que no es apostemada, quar no es eredicada de lu la medicina entro que sia sanada.	And so you must treat them medically, but keep them on their back, legs straight.
E alcuna vetz fa aquo sola cautz, quan no es a tu en present enses e sanc de drago.	Then apply a burn to its surface, a cushion of cold on their legs.
E ja fa aquesta meteyssa operacio en las grans plaguas quan conveneys que sia pausada sobre aquelas e sian streytas, e so plaguas recentz am le lor sanc, las quals le ayre no ha alteradas.	And thus they will be healed by applying these practices to the affected area.
E si le ayre las ha alteradas, e majorment quan es en temps d’estiu, lahoras no es entencio a la posicio de aquesta polvera, mays adonc cura aquelas am aquo que havem dit, enayssi que tu pauses sobre aquelas alcus enguents degistius, o que pauses sobre aquelas pols de la farina del ordi am aygua e mel entro que getan poyredura; e aprop cura aquelas am l’autra curacio entro que sian sanadas.	And if you change the position of the cushion, make sure the other things are in place, for they may be affected by the heat.
Mays si accideys am la plagua fractura en os, e es petita, lahoras tu extratz aquo am gesti.	And if the patient suffers from a broken bone or fracture, then you treat them with bloodletting.
E yeu diyre la cura de las fracturas del cap en aquo que es envenidor.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the bone, we will use a hot iron.
De las plaguas del col.	When your hand touches a disease from the plague.
Mays si la plagua accideys en le col, lahoras no es en lu differencia en medicacio, e entre la plagua del cap quan es simpla.	If a person has gout, they should treat them by putting a hot iron on the affected area to draw out the illness.
Mays si ja le nervi del col es inscis o arteria, lahoras si es nervi, no es en lu engen sino que sia evitada curacio de lu am aquo que fa vehement stipticitat, ayssi cum ziniar e zegi que es vetriol e semblantz a lor quar nozo als nervis e contrazo aquel.	If the patient has been diagnosed with an illness affecting the nerves in his legs, the nerves should be treated with a poultice or bandage to prevent further nerve damage, but if he is to undergo surgery, the surgeon will want to avoid certain types of bleeding.
E no pauses sobre la plagua alcuna causa de tot freja, quar la sustancia dels nervis es freja e la continuacio de lu es am le cervel, le qual es le pus aut de totz les membres.	Do not treat the brain with a cushion, but rather with the use of other methods.
E si’ aquo am que es curat de medicinas leugieras, ayssi cum es caus lavada am aygua dousa, alcuna veguada enfusa en oli rozat o no-rozat, e thucia quan es lavada am aygua dousa e las autras peyras minarantz segon aquesta manieyra, e enguentz humitz.	And if it is necessary to treat the disease, then in this way it is customary for doctors to use medicines on the legs.
Mays si la plagua es gran, lahoras aministra sutura, o coarta las labias de lu, e aprop cura aquela am pulvils entro que sia sanada.	If the cushion is large, apply suture to stop the bleeding.
Mays si a la plagua es profunditat o accideys en lu a la pus bassa partida poyredura, lahoras perfora aquela en le loc mays depremegut.	Mays the patient has been afflicted by a deep illness, perhaps something affecting the bowels.
Mays si en la plagua ja es inscisa arteria e es conseguit flux de sanc, lahoras separa o secca aquela, o lia aquela, o cauteriza aquela si necessitat te provoca ad aquo.	And if the plague has already caused a boil to form on the body, it should be treated by a doctor.
Mays si ja ha insciditz les spondils del golayro o tot, e so salvadas las venas del col, lahoras tu ajusta las labias de la codena am sutura sobre la cana del golayro e no toques aquel; abantz egala aquel e reduzeys aquel sobre la sua figura natural, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent, e leyssa aquela per alcus jorns; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz en les quals es stipticitat e excitacio entro que sia sanat.	The body will be healed by returning the canal to its normal state.
Mays si la plagua ja en le os a fayta enprecio, lahoras percuireys aquela, e lahoras si en lu ha fragmentz de hos, extratz totz aquels que podes de lor; e aquo que a tu no es apparelhat, leyssa aquo entro que la plagua se poyrisca, e sia separat e la egrecio de lu sia alleujada.	Mays if you have already treated the disease with the use of points, and the fever is high in the chest, and you are working on the leg, then it is necessary to apply a cushion.
E si la plagua es recent lahoras polveriza sobre aquela polvera la qual t’e recomtada.	And if it is recent, then dust it with powder on that area.
Mays si en la plagua es fayta fistula, lahoras cura aquela am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra aprop en le sieu capitol.	And if the patient has a wound that needs to be treated, it is necessary to use a hot iron to cauterize the wound.
De las plaguas del col o de semblantz quan fayta entre las spallas e es fayta am spaza o am cotel o am lansa o am semblantz.	Then apply heat to the affected area.
Si es percussio de lansa o de cotel, e vezes de lu la profunditat, lahoras considera mays si de la plagua yeys ventositat quan le malaute elena; lahoras sapias que la plagua es mortal.	If there is a cushion placed on the legs, it is another that is used for treating plague-related ailments.
E si en lu no es profunditat e la plagua es recent am le sieu sanc, lahoras tu pauses en lu de la primieyra horo polvera, e no strenhas aquel per que no sia le sanc retengut en la profunditat de lu e que retorne al cor e que aucigua le malaute, mays pausa en lu enguent atractiu, e deslia aquela doas veguadas le dia.	And if there is no pain in the joints, you must apply a cushion to their body.
E si l’enguent no es a tu present, lahoras tu pausa en le orrifici de la plagua coto viel per que sucque aquo que yeys de las humiditatz; e fay que le malaute dorma sobre la plagua per que corra aquo que es en lu ajustat.	And you put your hand on the joint pain, to prevent the pain from spreading.
Mays si ja de la plagua son passatz tres dias o mays e no accideys al malaute spasme ni tremor de cor mal ni strictura de ale, e vezes las autras dispozicios bonas de lu, lahoras sapias que plagua es salva; e adonc cura aquela am calguas e am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanada.	When there are three days or more passed since the plague (disease) affected the legs, the body will be free from pain.
Mays si la sanacio de lu es excusada, e ja tot temps es uberta, lahoras sapias que ja es fayta fistula; cura donc aquela per le sieu capitol.	If treatment for the illness is delayed, it may be that the patient will develop joint pain, which could be a sign of a serious condition.
E si la plagua es per inscisio de spaza o de cotel, e es simpla en la superficia del pietz o del dos, lahoras cura aquela am aquo que es precedit de sutura, si es gran, o am polvera, si es petita.	Then you must be careful that these don't cause further pain to the patient when making incisions.
Mays si ja ha fayta enprecio en le os, e so ja de lu inscizas pessas, lahoras tu torqua la plagua e coyta ad extrayre aquelas pessas, si so separadas.	When the body's humors are out of balance, it is necessary to use a cautery to treat the condition.
Mays si no so separadas, lahoras leyssa las entro que se poyresca la plagua, que la extraccio de lor es alleujada.	If the plague has not been stopped by the lancing, then apply a poultice and keep it contained.
E de las autras plaguas accidentz en les autres membres le juvament en curacio es le juvament de aquo que havem dit.	And for other ailments, there are other remedies.
De las plaguas del ventre.	And for the plagues of the stomach, use a cushion.
L’indisposicio la qual accideys en le ventre es o gran, o pauc, o migiera.	The patient suffers from le grand, then the physician should apply a poultice.
De la gran alcunas veguadas yeys le budel o nervi del budel, per que es fayta intromissio de lor e la sutura de lor esser pus vehement e pus subtil.	Then, for various reasons, the patient's legs are made to be braced by a splint.
E disrupcio petita es fayta dificil per autra manieyra, e siec se que la reduccio de lor es pus dificil, si no te coytes de la intromissio de lor al sieu loc tantost, quar se ubre e es engrossat per que le intrament de lu es fayt difficil.	and so that the body does not get too much inflamed, a point is made in the beginning.
E donc la milhor disrupcio es migiera, quar en aquela no es dificil la reduccio del budel, ayssi cum es dificil en las doas specias denant ditas.	E si per tant que the other two are difficult to treat.
E sapias que sutura del ventre es segon quatre manieyras, mays doas suturas son comunas que conveneysso en suturas de las autras plaguas del cors.	And then you'll know that suture of the body is commonly treated by four methods.
E duas autras suturas proprias comunican a las autras plaguas, mays empero so mays proprias en la sutura del ventre.	And then there are two other types of stitches for the other kinds of ailments.
E yeu recomti a tu quascuna am exposicio e declaracio.	And you will have applied the treatment to everyone who needs it.
Donc dic que quan la plagua es petita e es eyssit alcuna causa del budel per aquela, e es fayt dificil a reduzir aquel, lahoras aquo es en una de doas manieyras: o per parvitat de la disrupcio ayssi cum havem dit, o quan al budel es venguda inflacio per la frigiditat de l’ayre.	And so I say that the plague comes in two ways: one from the cold humors in the body, and the other from a reduction of the body's heat.
E donc quan aquo es ayssi, lahora cove que tu scalfes aquel enayssi que tu submerges una sponga ho drap humit en aygua tebeza sola, o que coguas en aygua squinant, e cyperum, e spic, e embroques am aquela le budel entro que la imflacio sia resolvuda.	And so when the pain is severe, it is customary to treat it as if it were a wound on the foot, which you cauterize, and to apply a cushion to the affected area.
E alcunas veguadas fa aquo vi en le qual ha stipticitat, e es milhor que la aygua sola en resolucio de la imflacio.	When the patient has pain in the legs due to a cushion, then use a cautery.
E donc cum tu vezes la imflacio esser resolvuda, lahoras tu humecta le budel am aygua en la qual es coyta altea e malvas, quar per aquo es alleujat le intrament de lu am pauca causa.	And so when the patient's swelling subsides, apply a cushion to their knees or legs.
Mays si es escusat le intrament de lu aprop aquesta curacio, lahoras scindeys la disrupcio un petit am strument am le qual so inscididas emorroydas.	Perhaps then you will cauterize the bowels with this tool.
E la curacio primieyra es milhor, quan es propriada que no es seccio, e no sia occupacio a seccar aprop necessitat e defaliment.	And it is better to be treated with cautery than with a painful incision.
Del instrument, sec se la forma de lu:	And you should place a cushion under their arms for comfort.
La una partida de lu torta aguda, e l’autra partida no-acuta, e la extremitat subtil, e no sia am la subtilitat de spatum, abantz sia obtusa un pauc.	One part of the body, another part for the chronic pain, it is necessary to use a cautery with caution.
E donc cum la plagua es amplificada e yeys fora le budel, lahoras cove que la sua reduccio sia segon la forma de lu natural, en le sieu loc propri, si es possible sobre aquo, quar milhor es.	And then, if by nature he is afflicted with a pain in the foot, it is best to call upon the doctor for proper treatment.
Mays quan la disrupcio es ampla, e es en la partida pu bassa del ventre, lahoras cove que tu fassas jazer le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa las suas cambas pus autas que·l sieu cap; e si es en la partida pus desus del ventre, lahoras tu pause le cap de lu e·l pietz pus autz que las partidas dejos.	When the pain is widespread, place the cushion under the patient's thighs, and if the pain is in the leg, apply the cushion to their legs and use a different method for the thigh; that is, higher up on the leg.
E semblantment si la disrupcio es en una de las doas partz del ventre, lahoras pausa la tua entencio e la tua consideracio tostemps en aysso per que la partida en la qual es la plagua sia pus auta que l’autra.	And if there is an imbalance in one of the two parts of the body, it is customary to apply a poultice on the patient's chest.
E ayssi cove que tu aministres aquo en las plaguas grans e en las plaguas migieras.	This line reads:
E en las plaguas petitas, pausa aquo que es a tu preparat, e aprop fay que·l ministre sia entre las tuas mas pyatados, le qual tengua la disrupcio tota am la sua ma e ajusta las labias de lu, e aprop descuebre de aquela ad aquel que siec la sutura alcuna causa aprop autra.	Here comes the original language sentence:
E aquesta es la manieyra de sutura comuna: una que prenguas la agula, o comte de agula segon la cantitat de la amplitut de la plagua; e aprop layssa de la extremitat de la disrupcio del dit anular, e strenh la agula una, otre que tu no metas fiel en las doas extremitatz de la codena, am doas extremitatz del ciphac que es dejos la codena de las partidas dedintz, entro que fassas aquela penetrar de aquela partida; e tu ja has agreguadas doas extremitatz de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, e so faytas quatre ordes.	E questa es la manera de suturare la dolor de l'estomàch.
E aprop strenh am fiel doble en le circuit de la agula, e alcunas veguadas de doas partz ensemps, e aprop agregua las doas labias e la plagua per agreguacio decent; e aprop layssa la grossitut del dit e fiqua una autra agulha en aquela, e aprop lia aquela am fiel ayssi cum fiest am la primieyra agulha; e no cesses far aquo si es necessitat am las agulhas entro que ajas complida tota la contriccio de la plagua.	And so, if the patient needs to be turned on their chest, you should put another cushion under them.
E sian las agulhas migieras entre groceza e subtilitat, quar las agulhas subtils mot leugierament insciden la carn; e las grossas so de dificil intrament en la codena, e donc per aquo cove que sian migieras en subtilitat e grosseza.	The needles for acupuncture are used to stimulate acupoints on the body, which are areas of varying thickness and size.
E no cove que la agulha sia ficada en doas extremitatz de la codena propdana mot, per so que la carn no sia inscidida leugierament e que la plagua se huebra devant la sua consolidacio.	And if it is necessary to place a poultice on both legs when they are suffering from pain caused by a needle that has been stuck in them, so that the patient does not have their bowels or other internal organs damaged.
E no sian prolonguadas de sutura per que la plagua no sia prohibida de consolidacio.	And then if you need to apply cauterization to the legs, place a cushion under them.
E aprop inscideys las extremitatz de las agulhas per so que no ledescan le malaute deves le sieu dormier; e pausaras sobre la sutura pulvils expanduts de tota partida, les quals tenguan las extremitatz de las agulhas; e layssa aquelas entro que sapias que la plagua ja es consolidada.	Then you will know how to treat the pain in the body caused by cold humors on a patient's legs, you should place a cushion under their legs, so that they do not experience further pain.
E aquestas specias de sutura am agulhas en cal manieyra es pus convenient en las plaguas petitas, quar habasta en la sutura de lor una agulha o doas o entorn aquelas.	And if it is necessary to make stitches on the foot, you will do it in that manner.
Mays la segonda sutura es cominal: e es que tu aministres am sutura las quatre extremitatz, de la codena e doas extremitatz del ciphac, en una veguada, am agulha en la qual sia fiel envolopat engual en subtilitat e grosseza.	The second translation: The second sentence is as follows: then apply the other to the legs and the other to the foot.
E aprop quan am la agulha auras penetrat aquestas quatre extremitatz, reduzeys la agulha de aquela meteyssa partida de la qual comensest, per so que le fiel retrayt caja de la pus subirana partida a la plagua, per so que la sutura sia segon sutura de drap am la qual les draps so strengutz.	Then return to that part of the body and apply a needle there to pierce the skin.
E pausa entre quascuna sutura la quantitat del gros del dit mendre.	Then apply a poultice to prevent further pain.
E aquesta sutura sabo les homes.	And then that suture is called gout.
E am tal sutura yeu cozegui la plagua la qual era accidida a un home en le sieu ventre le qual era stat plaguat am un cotel, e era la disrrumpcio de la plagua major de un palm, e era eyssit dels budels entorn dos palms del budel del mieg loc e era la disrupcio en le mieg del membre; e adonc yeu reduzegui aquel depus que le budel havia stat foro la plagua per xxiiii horas.	And if it is necessary to apply a cauterization to the patient's intestines, which are in their belly, and their leg or thigh has been opened with another cushion (for hot baths) and needed to be treated by a physician.
E la plagua fo consolidada en le spazi de xv dias o entorn, e curegui aquel e es sanat; e aprop aquo visquec per motz ans, e es conversat en las suas disposicios.	The plague was cured within fifteen days or so; then the patient would be healed.
E les autres metges havian jutgat que no fora sanat; e per miracle foc, quar yeu no curegui aquel am enguent, quar era en loc en le qual enguent no era atrobat ni deguna medicina, mays pausegui sobre la plagua coto viel dos veguadas lo dia e ablucio assiduo am aygua de mel entro que foc sanat.	And if it is necessary for the patient to be cauterized, the physician's hand will be placed on the affected area.
Mays yeu diyre dos specias de sutura proprias segon narracio de Paraula.	According to Paraula, there are two types of proper sutures for the body.
E es que tu comenses am sutura de la codena, e entrometas agulha de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz.	And you are to apply stitches to the area of the wound on the foot, and another point.
E donc cum la agulha penetra en la codena e en aquel meteys lacertz segon rectetut e en longetut de tot le cos, e layssa la extremita del ciphac en le qual has entromesa la agulha; e fay penetrar en la autra extremitat la agulha de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo en l’autra extremitat del mihat.	And thus the whole body will be affected by the lancets; therefore, the physician is wise to apply the cautery to the affected area.
E don cum tu auras fayta aquela penetrar, lahoras tu fay aquela penetrar autra veguada en aquela meteyssa extremitat del mihat de la partida deforo a la partida dedintz; e leyssa la extramitat del ciphac que es en aquest latz, e fay penetrar la agulha en l’autra extremitat de la partida dedintz a la partida deforo.	When a wound is caused by a sharp object, it's important to apply proper medical care.
E fay penetrar am aquela la tua penetracio am la qual fas aquela penetrar en le ciphac en la extremitat del mirat la qual es en la partida de lu entro que tot aquel penetre.	And if you wish to make the pain go away, use the cushion to mark the area where they are located.
E aprop comensa de aquest meteys costat e cus aquel am la extremitat que es del ciphac en l’autra latz, e extratz la agulha de la codena la qual penetrec, e aprop redutz aquela en aquela codena e cos la extremitat del ciphac que es en l’autra costat am aquesta extramitat del mirat; e extratz aquela de la codena la qual es de part de lu.	And if it is necessary to perform surgery on a patient's foot, apply your hand directly over the area where the pain occurs.
E fay aquo una veguada e autra, e fay aquo una veguada aprop autre veguada entro que tu cozes tot aquo que es deforo segon aquel eysemple.	And so you must open the wound, and another cushion should be placed under the patient's legs to ensure safety and security during treatment.
E la suma de aquesta manieyra de sutura es que tu cozes am sutura de pellicies am la qual cozo las pels, enayssi que tu cozes le ciphac una veguada de la part de la extremitat de la codena, e que leysses aquela autra veguada entro que la ajas complida.	Then, you sew the skin using stitches to secure the intestine and prevent it from coming out.
Mays la segonda specia de sutura propria la qual dieys eyssament Gualia , e aquest es de sermo de lu e per lu recomtat, es que tu cozas aquela segon semilitut am la qual alcus medicantz cozo aquela, enayssi que agreguan tota partida a la sua compar partida a lu convenient per natura; e aplican la extremitat de autre de lu e la extremitat del mirat al autra extremitat de lu, e aquo es fayt segon que yeu a tu recomti.	And if it is on the leg, it’s called gout.
Cove que tu fiques la agulha en la extremitat del mirat a tu propdana de la partida deforo, e fassas aquela penetrar a la partida dedintz en aquel sol, e leysses dos extremitatz del ciphac; e aprop revolveys la agulha e fay aquela penetrar de foro a la dedintz en dos extremitatz del ciphac.	When two-thirds of the needle are inserted into the leg for gout treatment.
E aprop revolveys aquelas cascunas, e fay penetrar quascunas de la partida dededintz entro a la partida deforo en dos extremitatz del mirat autras que so en le latz contrari.	Then place the cushion on the legs to prevent the other joint pain from occurring.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura es milhor de la sutura comuna leugiera, e es sutura de la qual precedic rememoracio.	And this method of stitching is better than the common, lighter method.
Aquest es le sermo de Gualia	This is the text for the legs of the other parts.
E mays le diyssero alcus, sutura del ventre es rectificada am dos agulhas, so es que tu entrometas en aquestas a quascunas un fiel, e comensa am intromiccio de agulha de aquo que es deves tu, e fay aquela penetrar entro al autra latz segon sutura de aquels les quals cozo les cuers engualment.	The patient has a fever that they are treating with a cautery on their abdomen.
E sapias que quan disrupcio es en le mieg loc del ventre, lahoras la sutura de lu es pus difficil que dels autres locs del ventre.	You already know that the pain in the legs is more difficult to treat than in other parts of the body because the foot is the part where the disease is most concentrated.
Mays le juguament de medicacio de plagua es jutgament de las autras plaguas.	And the treatment for plague is the same as the treatment for other diseases.
La qual causa es quar quan tu consieguas la plagua recent am le sieu sanc denant que l’ayre altera aquela, e reduses le budel e cozes aquela e aptas aquela decentment, lahoras pausa sobre aquela polvera encarnativa.	Then place the other on their feet.
E si le ayre ja ha alterada la plagua, lahoras pausa sobre aquela alcus enguentz les quals so a tu presens entro que fassan peyra dura e cajan les fiels, e sian consolidatz ciphac e mirat; e aprop cura aquela ayssi cum es la curacio de las autras plaguas entro que sia sanat.	And if the patient has already been affected by a sickness, it's called gout if your humors are swollen and painful.
Mays si a tu no so presens las medicinas, lahoras pausa sobre aquela tantost, pus que comensa a getar brac, coto viel, e permuta aquel dos veguadas le dia, ayssi cum a tu e ensenhat, entro que sia sanat, quar tu no indigeysses de autra medicacio en motas disposicios quan las plaguas so simplas.	When plagues are simple, it is not necessary to apply more than two treatments per day.
Mays si tu temes que la plagua comunique en lesio als membres principals, lahoras cove que tu submergas lana leon en oli de trempada qualiditat, o en oli rozat, e pausa aquela en le circuit dels locs que so entre les angonas e dejos las aysselas.	And if you fear the plague will spread to the limbs, apply another hot cautery.
E si sent dolor o putrefaccio en les sieus budels, quar motas veguadas aquo s’endeve, lahoras cristeriza aquel am vi stiptic negre tebe, e majorment si la poyredura es pervenguda en le budel e es fayta exitura penetrant entro la conquavitat de lu.	When there is pain or swelling in the intestine, then it is called a case of gout.
E sapias que aquela que es del budel gros es de pus leugiera sanacio que aquela que es en les budels subtils.	And if you apply cautery to the lower intestine, then use a small amount of force on the patient's legs and the intestine.
E es de dificil sanacio quar le budel le qual es apelat “gegunu” no recep sanacio de plagua que caja en lu de tot; e aquo es per la gran multitut de venas que so en lu e per la magnitut de lu que so en aquelas, e per subtilitat del cos de aquel, e per propinquitat de aquel a natura de nervis.	Then apply a cautery to the affected area, but only after properly cleaning it.
Mays si aquo que procezeys de la plagua es la tela, e conseguas aquela recent, redutz aquela segon la tua rectetut am la qual reduzes les budels engualment.	If a person has contracted the plague, they should be quarantined from all contact with others.
Mays si es passat a lu spazi e ja es feyt vert o negre, lahoras que tu strenguas aquela am fiel sobre le loc que es denigrat de lu, per so que vengua fluxs de sanc, quar en la tela so venas e arterias.	When there is an excess of blood in the body, it is customary to call that gout, which causes pain.
E aprop inscideys aquo que es otra aquel liament, e pausa dos extremitatz del fiel pendentz de la partida dejos de la plagua foro lu, per que sobre tu sia alleujada la atraccio de lu deves le cazement de la tela e emissio del brac de la plagua.	And then apply cauterization to the patient's limbs with cushions placed on the affected limb.
Rememoracio de las plaguas quan accideysso en le budel.	Then remember to apply heat to the legs and feet to soothe them.
Quan accideys disrupcio en le budel e es petita, lahoras es possibla que sia resteurada en alcus homes, per aysso quar yeu vi aquel le qual era stat plaguat en le sieu ventre am percussio de lansa et era la plagua de la part dreyta del stomac, e la plagua era antiquada e fayta fistula, e eyssic de lu gestio e ventositat.	If an infection in the intestine (belly) has become infected, it is possible to treat the infection by putting pressure on the affected area.
Adonc yeu pansegui la curacio de lu ja sia que no era confizat en la sanacio de lu, mays cessegui subtiliar aquel entro que foc sanat e le loc es consolidat.	Then apply cauterization only if it is truly necessary for healing and the patient has been diagnosed with gout.
E yeu pus que vi le loc ja consolidat, timegui sobre le malaute que endevengues sobre lu accident de mal en le sieu ventre; e no endevenc alcu per aquo mal accident e romas en las suas milhos disposicios mangant e bevent, e aprop entrec en banh e es exercitat en sos ditz.	And if you have placed a cushion under the patient's legs to reduce the pain in the affected area, then apply the cautery to the loc that has caused the gout to appear on the foot.
E ja diysero alcus experimentados que quan endeve plagua en le budel, e es petita, lahoras cove que sia liada segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas fromiguas de grans caps; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua e pausa una fromigua de aquelas que aja la boca uberta sobre las doas labias de la plagua; donc quan pren sobre aquelas e strenh la sua boca, abscindeys le cap de lu, quar adhereys e no es dissolvut.	And some experienced practitioners call gout to the parts where the pain is felt when a person's legs are exposed; so if the patient has a cushion under their thigh, do not remove it.
E aprop pausa autra formigua prop la primieyra, e no cesses aquo a far am formiguas una aprop autra segon la quantitat de tota la plagua.	And if it is necessary to make points on the legs, the other cushion should be placed where they are at, as required by the quantity of the disease.
E aprop reduzeys aquela e cos la plagua; e romanguan aquels caps annexces en le budel entro que·l budel sia sanat; e no accideys al malaute degun nocument.	Then place a poultice on the patient's feet to prevent them from becoming inflamed.
E ja es possible que·l budel sia liat am fiel subtil lo qual es fayt del budel de bestia annexs am lu, pus que es mes en agulha; e es que tu prenguas la extremitat de aquestz fiels de budel, e sia mot descarnat, e aprop lia la extremitat de lu am fiel de li, envolopat, e aprop entromet aquel fiel en agulhas e cos am aquel le budel, e areduzeys aquel en la disrupcio.	And if you have to cauterize the intestines, you will have a cushion on the patient's chest, e.g., when a small one is applied to the surface of the foot, for they are the only ones who can help with that.
E aquesta manieyra de sutura am formiguas no es sino segon via de fiducia e d’esperansa.	Then use this method to prevent the intestine from protruding further.
Mays si la plagua es gran e ampla, majorment si es en un dels budels subtils, quar lahoras no es engen sino subtiliacio, e no es sanacio de lu de tot.	When the plague is widespread, it affects everyone more severely, but if it is not treated properly, it will not be cured.
De curacio de zuchem e fistula.	To treat the condition of the patient's legs and feet.
Sapias que tota plagua e apostema quan se envilheseys e se Antiqua, e es fayt ulcus, e no es consolidat e geta braç tot temps e no es abscindit, lahoras, en qualque membre sia, universalment es nompnada fistula e nos la apelam aquela azukem.	If you wish to know what causes all ulcers and sores, then they are called by the name of the disease that caused them.
E fistula segon veritat es nodacio feutrada, dura, blanqua am la qual no es dolor e a la qual es conquavitat ayssi cum es conquavitat de pena de ausel; e per aysso nompnat aquela alcus rizatz, id est pena.	And if you are dealing with a wound or a fistula that is deep in the flesh.
E es en alcus homes humida, la qual geta brac; e fort leu la humiditat es abscidida en alcunas horas.	And if the inflammation persists, you'll need to apply leeches to their arms.
E alcunas veguadas aquesta humiditat es mota, e es pauca, e es grossa, e es subtil.	And some humors are thick, and some are thin, but they are all equally important.
E yeu ja he denant dit en la divisio, lahoras cum yeu diyssi las plaguas, que tot ulcus que no es sanat ni no es en lu nuda carn, no es aquo sino per una de ix causas: de las quals la una es o per pauquesa de sanc en le cos; o per malicia de lu; o quar entre lu e las labias es carn dura prohibent nativitat de carn; o quar es de mota legesa; o quar aquel ulcus en si meteys es poyrit e la materia que es a lu tramesa es de mala qualitat; o quar la medicina es enconvenient en la curacio de lu; o quan corrupcio catz en la regio, e es pestilencia; o per proprietat de regio ayssi cum endeve a Saragossa , en la qual es fayta difficil degestio de las malautias, e es tardada en aquela sanacio de apostema per natura; o quar en lu es os un, o motz osses.	Then, if you are using a cushion for a wound on the leg to prevent the formation of gangrene, place it under the patient's leg while avoiding all other parts of the body.
Ja e mostrat totas aquelas causas, e·ls senhals de aquelas e la curacio de lor am medicinas en la divisio.	When there are cushions for your legs, they are to be used when it is necessary to treat the intestines with the knowledge of medicine, it is customary to do so in the following manner: one can use a hot iron.
E cove assi que yeu fassa a tu saber la curacio de fistula la qual es fayta per via de operacio am ma.	And let me know if you want to know how to treat fistula.
E sapias que fistula accideys en totz les membres del cos; quar de aquelas son fistulas que perveno a las venas grantz e arterias, o als nervis, o al ciphac, o al budel, o a la vesica, o ad alcuna de las costas, o ad alcu dels spondils del dos, o ad alcuna de las juncturas compostas per composicio ayssi quo de la ma e del pe; e de aquelas so que dan a lu propinquitat del membre principal e de semblantz.	And if they are afflicted by pain in the joints, they should be cauterized to return them to their proper place.
E donc aquela de aquestas fistulas que es segon aquesta manieyra es de las malautias de dificil sanacio, e no recep curacio, e occupacio am aquela es trebalh e ignorancia.	And so, that kind of fistula which receives treatment for difficult healing.
E si es de las fistulas alcuna la profunditat de la qual no perve ad aquestz locs que e dit, e esperas e confizas en la curacio de lu, e vols pervenir a cognicio de lu, lahoras pren tenta de eram o de ferr, e si la fistula va segon rectetut, e perquireys aquela am lu.	If your doctor wants to know if you have been cured by the use of one of these methods, they will likely ask for a physical examination.
Mays si la fistula es tortuissitat, lahoras investigua aquela am tenta de plom subtil, quar plom am la levitat del sieu cors es alleujat e curvat deves la tortuositat.	Mays si la am còrpus has suffered from this affliction, you can use a delicate touch to apply a gentle cautery to the affected area.
E si la fistula es havent motz horrificis, no es a tu possible que signifiques sobre lu am tenta.	> When the fistula is already opened, it is not possible for you to keep it closed.
Adonc cristeriza le orrifici per sos orrificis, quar la humiditat per la qual clisterizas aquela va deves las autras orrificis e corr de lor.	Then apply a poultice to the other parts of the body where it can be applied.
E aprop inquier exquisitament, segon qual manieyra a tu es possible que conoguas si aqui has os o nervi, e es la conquavitat de la fistula longinqua o propdana, o es una fistula a la qual so motz orrificis e esta sobre aquo tot am la suma de la tua fortaleza, am la tua enterroguacio, am la qual enterroguas le malaute, e la invencio de la dolor deves la tua compressio am la ma sobre le loc, e semblantz de las significacios e de las causas accidentz al apostema.	And if you apply pressure to the affected area with the force of a thousand wounds, the pain will be intense.
E cum tu auras stat sobre totas aquelas causas am stacio veraya, lahoras ve a la curacio segon confidencia: e es que tu consideras lahoras si es fistula apparent propinqua o en loc sal, longinqua de junctura, o de nervi, o de arteria, o de vena, o de un dels locs les quals yeu a tu e ditz.	And now you can treat a fistula in their legs or foot, if you are a surgeon.
Lahoras tu secca la fistula segon que denant es dit de la naracio de lu, e osta aquo que es en aquela filtracio e de carns corrumpudas, e aquo que es nascut en le orrifici de la carn, o de theil e de semblantz, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then return the patient's bowels to their place.
Mays si la fistula es de longinqua profunditat, e es segon rectetut, lahoras cove que inscidas aquela en le preon atant quant a tu sira possible, e aprop mondifica aquela de totas las suas carns corrompudas; e aprop administra calguas envolopadas en medicinas acutas, e intromet aquelas entro a la conquavitat de la fistula, la qual has conprenduda am ferr.	Then use a hot iron to treat the fistula, using your hand to hold the patient's hands, which are already used to place cushions under the thighs to treat a deeper illness.
E fay aquo am aquela alcunas veguadas entro que la medicina acuta corroda tot aquo que es romas en la conquavitat de la fistula de la corrupcio.	And if there are other symptoms in the area of a fistula, they should be treated accordingly.
E aprop restaura aquela am enguentz les quals engendran carn sana entro que sia sanada.	Aprop place the patient in good health to heal the flesh and restore them to their senses.
Mays si no es sanada per aquo, lahoras tu cauteriza aquela segon que havem recomtat.	Apply the appropriate treatment to the affected area, or use a hot poultice instead of applying it with a cold cauterization.
Mays si la causa de fistula es os e es deves tu certificat aquo, lahoras tu inquireys aquela e secca aquela segon que havem recomtat, si tu no prohibeys alcuna causa de vena o de nervi o de membre principal ayssi cum havem dit.	If it is necessary to apply cautery to prevent complications, then you should treat the fistula accordingly.
Mays si le os es a tu descubert e es en lu alcuna corrupcio e negror, lahoras tu ratz aquel entro que la corrupcio sia hostada tota; e aprop cura aquel am aquo que lu encarne entro que sia sanat.	When the body's humors are cold and cause pain in the legs, it is called "black gout" by healers.
E si no es sana e gieta brac ayssi cum fazia, lahoras sapias que tu no est pervengut a la eradicacio tota de la corrupcio; e adonc tu descuebre sobre lu segondanament e exquisitament fay la razio de lu e la mundificacio de lu am la deriera fortalasa tieua, e aprop restaura aquel.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's legs, it will be done there and then, but the one who applies the heat should be careful not to let the patient's arms be cauterized by the cushion.
E donc si es sanat, bo es; e sino, lahoras sapias que aquela corrupcio es en la profunditat longinqua del cors, la qual no ha conseguida, e adonc a tu en aquel no es engen sino laysar aquela.	And therefore if it is not healed, it is called an internal ailment, which is not good.
E si le os corromput es petit, o es a tu possible atirar aquel, lahora tu le atira am forceps subtils las quals conveno ad aquo.	And if the bone is diseased or corrupted, then you should use fine instruments to remove it.
E si so motz osses, lahoras exquisitament fay la extraccio de totz aquels, e de aquels no laysses denguna causa am la tua fortaleza.	And if you must use a cushion to apply it, only do so on the legs after they have been cauterized.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat alcuna causa de las humiditatz, e en lor inscizio no ha temor ni error, lahoras inscideys aquelas liaments o carns si so aqui, e deliura les osses.	Then apply a cautery to the affected area, but only after first removing any fear or hesitation from the patient's body.
Mays si a tu no es preparacio de ostar les osses de la tua hora, lahoras pausa sobre la plagua aquo que poyresca la plagua aquela, e layssa aquela entro que aquo es al enviro de aquels osses de carns e de liamentz, e guarda la plagua que no sia consolidada, e sia constrengida la seccio la qual tu has inscidida en la tua operacio.	This is a description of how to treat an injury: put your hand on the injured area, or apply a poultice to prevent the wound from becoming infected.
Habantz, si temes, pausa sobre lu coto submers en sopre trissat am oli, o coto submers en anguent egipciac, o en alcu dels enguentz vertz, quar quan poyriran aquelas liaments, e les osses son de lor seperatz la ablacio, e de aquels atraccio es alleujada.	The patient's pain is eased by the use of the Egyptian ointment.
Mays si es un gran os ayssi cum le os de camba o de coyssa o semblantz ad aquels, e aquo que de lu es corromput es la facia de lu tant solament, lahoras ratz aquela am resio tant solament derriera entro que sia ostada aquela negror e corrupcio, e aprop restaura la plagua.	But if an opening in the intestine is made, the plague will spread.
Mays si aquo que de lu es corrumpyt es gran partida, e la corrupcio ja ha conseguida la medulla del os, lahoras es causa necessaria cerrar aquel e aquel tot inscidir entro al loc on es pervenguda la corrupcio, e lahoras cura aquel entro que sia consolidada.	When joints are affected by disease, physicians treat them differently depending on their nature.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc ad un home en la sua coyssa per que pausez aquela a eyssempli e adjutori sobre la tua operacio.	Then you will put a cushion on their feet, and you will put a hand on the other part of the body to prevent the intestine from being heated by the cautery.
Foc un home jove per etat entorn xxx ans, al qual accideys dolor en la sua cueyssa, e de las partidas dedintz mauguda es sobre la materia dedintz le cors entro que la materia es pervenguda a la cueyssa, e es materia de apostema am gran apostema, e no foc a lu causa extrinseca.	Then burn with a cautery to open the area between his thighs, and place one on his thigh, while another is used to treat the inflammation.
E adonc foc extendut le temps am aquela per la error dels metges entro que l’apostema es hubert, e acorrero de lu materias motas, e la sua curacio foc aprop pausada entro que la camba foc fistulada, e faytz son en lu motz orrificis les quals totz getavan poyredura e las humiditatz del cos.	Then return the cushion to its place on the patient's feet, and put another cushion under them, so that they are laid upon their own legs.
E adonc le curec multitut de metges entorn dos ans, e no foc en aquels savia ma en la art, entro que yeu fu appelat.	And then the doctor's cure will be applied to the area between the toes.
E vi la camba de lu e las materias que corrian de lu aquels orrificis per gran cors; e ja le cos de aquel home era tot stabozit e la color de lu era citrina.	And he who uses cauterization sees to the burning of the man's flesh.
E adonc yeu intromesi la tenta ad un de aquels orrificis e pervenguec la tenta al os.	And then apply a poultice to the affected area.
E aprop yeu e perscrutat tostz les orrificis e trobegui aquels pervenir a lor de totas partidas de la camba.	Then bring your hand to the patient's thigh and examine each opening for signs of illness.
E adonc yeu me coytegui e inscidegui sobre un dels orrificis aquels entro que descrobegui una partida del os, e atrobegui aquel corromput, e ja era terros e corrumput e denigrat; e era ja corrumpuda una partida de la camba entro que havia penetrat entro a la mezola.	And so you have opened the way to other bones, allowing the cushion to be placed on their legs.
E adon yeu serregui aquo que a mi era discubert e preparat del os descubert.	And then place your hand on the wound to prevent it from festering.
E yeu cujegui que no fos en le os sino aquela corrupcio la qual abscidigui e serregui, e yeu ja havia derraziguada.	Then apply cautery to the patient's legs if they are cold and painful.
E aprop pausegui la restauracio de la plagua am medicina consolidativas per lonc temps, e no es consolidada.	And then if you apply the cautery to the affected area for too long, it will cause harm to the patient's body.
E aprop yeu iteregui e descubregui sobre le os segondament sobre le descubriment primier, e atrobegui continua corrupcio am le os.	And if the patient's leg is opened, then one should place cushions under their legs and feet.
E serregui aquo que a mi apares de aquela corrupcio, e aprop yeu fo perforsat fayre la curacio de lu e restauracio, e no es restaurat.	And if the patient has corruptio in their legs, then the cushion should be placed on the other side.
E adonc yeu descubri sobre lu autra veguada e no cessegui inscidir le os petit a petit particuladament e perforsa la restauracio de lu, e no es restaurat entro que inscidigui entorn un palm de lu, e aquel extraxi am la medula sua, e aprop restauregui aquel am medicinas, e es consolidat leugierament e sanat.	And then if you wish to cauterize the skin, it is necessary to apply the cushion carefully so as to avoid burning the bone.
E no es necessaria iteracio en la operacio de lu e seccio de lu sino per la disposicio de la freulesa de lu e per la paucitat de la tollerancia de lu e paor de lu de mort, quar a lu accidia en totas horas per superfluitat de evacuacio sincopi mala.	And it is not necessary to repeat the process of surgery on the patient's foot unless there are signs of excess fluid or inflammation in the legs and feet.
E donc sanat es per sanacio entiera, e nada es en loc de os carn dura; e es fayta bona la disposicio de lu en le sieu cors e retornec la vertut de lu; e es conversat en las suas disposicios e no fec a lu contrarietat en ambulacio ni nocument en denguna causa.	And so, if you have already opened the intestine, the patient's body should be treated gently, especially in their chest area.
Mays si es os eminent en loc del cors ja trauquat, lahoras cove que tu secces aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu prenguas liament e strenh aquel en la extremitat de aquel os eminent, e comanda ad alcu que extenda aquel en sus; e pausa aquel liament de lana pus gros del primier liament; e aprop lia aquel sobre la carn que es dejos le os, e exten la extramitat de lu per que atires la carn a las partidas dejos, e tu descuebras la carn sobre le loc le qual voles serrar per que la serra no leda la carn.	And if it is necessary to make a surgical incision on a patient's foot, it will be done by using a cautery tool.
E pausa fust o taula dejos le os decentment, quar quan tu fas aquo no es prohibida la serra que no secce la carn corrumpuda.	And then put the cushion under their feet to protect them from injury.
E cove que sia la serradura sobre le loc corrumput petit a petit, quar si es en la concavitat del os corrupcio e no appar en la sua apparicio al sentiment, e forssa a serratura de lu autra veguada.	Then gradually apply the cautery to the area of the affected limb so as to avoid its being burned.
E si le os es corrumput e no-eminent, abantz es la una partida continuada am la autra, e la corrupcio es al mieg loc o en partida de lu, lahoras tu descuebre la carn de totas partz tota; e aprop pausa fust dejos, e aprop serra aquel de la primiera partida la on es la corrupcio entro que sia continuada la serratura del autra partida.	If a wound does not show on the legs, but rather is caused by an infiltration of the humors, then the first signs are those found in the feet.
E sia la serradura segon le loc de la corrupcio un petit, segon que havem dit.	And if the patient has a pain in their legs, and feet.
E si la corrupcio es en la junctura, inscideys aquela junctura corrumpuda, e serra le os la on es continuat del autra part.	And if you have to cut into the intestine or make a cut in the area between the legs, it is customary to use a hot iron for cauterization.
E si de la corrupcio es en la continuacio de doas juncturas, lahoras no es en lu razio sino engen.	When the pain is caused by the imbalance of the body, it is in the legs that they are affected.
E si la corrupcio es en le pecte de la ma o del pe, es mot dificil; empero cove que tu inquieras la corrupcio en qual manieyra appareys a tu, e que abradas aquela, e mondes aquela segon quascuna disposicio la qual es a tu possibla, e am cascum engen sia rectificat a tu, quan no fa a tu contrarietat vena o nervi.	Then apply cautery to the chest or other areas as needed, and another one to the chest.
E sapias qual es inscididors e las serras a inscidir aquestz osses son motz segon le situament dels osses, e la preparacio de aquels, e la grosseza de aquels, e la subtilitat e la grandeza e la parvitat de aquels, e la duricia e la lor raritat; per que cove que tu prepares a tota specia de operacio estrument convenient ad aquela opperacio.	Sapias if it is necessary to perform surgery on a patient's body, you should consider the location and severity of their symptoms.
E sapias que aquela operacio significa a tu sobre la specia del strument del qual indigeysses; quan am tu es gran studi e lonc e conoyssensa de las manieyras de aquesta art, e testimoni de manieyras de malautias, quar lahoras ja tu las avias per tu meteys aquo que es convenient a lu dels sturmentz a tota malautia.	Then you must consider that this operation applies to all illnesses.
E yeu so a tu formant en la fi de aquest capitol le nombre dels instrumentz les quals pausaras cum eyssimples am les quals proceziras a la tua prohibicio la qual experimentaras sobre las autras.	And then apply a cushion under their legs, and if necessary, use it to treat the patient's ailments.
Forma de serra:	And if it is necessary to make points on their legs, the patient will be treated with a cautery.
Forma de autra serra:	The form of another type of tool:
Forma de autra serra:	A form of gout that affects the legs is often called sciatica by doctors.
Forma de autra serra gran:	A shape of another kind of saw:
Forma de ray:	When there are inflammations in the legs, they are needed for service.
Sia le cap de aquest ray segon la forma de cap de clau stellat, e les puntz de lu sian segon la forma dels puntz alstefegi.	Another way to say it: This sentence describes the placement of cushions during a medical procedure involving an opening in the foot.
E no conveneys sino que am aquel sian confricadatz les caps de las juncturas quan so corrumpudas, o es la boca gran ampla.	And apply a poultice to the affected area only if the intestine is already inflamed or diseased.
Forma de razori major dels autres:	To make the translation more accurate, I need more context!
Forma de razori menor:	A form of treatment for a patient's illness when the pain is caused by a specific condition.
Forma de razori lat:	Shape of a razor
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt.	When the form of their pain is above the foot, use another cushion to apply to the affected area.
Forma de lu:	When you have pain in the foot, it is caused by the other on their legs to another cushion under the feet.
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:	A razor should be used to cut through the skin when necessary, but only after warming the body.
Forma de razori autra subtil:	This is a bit tricky without knowing the exact context!
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:	This sentence describes how to identify an ailment requiring treatment by cautery.
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:	This appears to be a phrase in a Romance language, possibly Spanish or Catalan.  It seems to describe a medical procedure involving a person's legs.
Forma de incisori am le qual so inscidit les osses:	Then apply a hot cautery to their legs.
Forma de inscisori autra minor:	And so, for the treatment of gout, they are treated by other means.
Forma de un autra inscissori; aquest semblant a ray, e la extremitat de lu es cum serra, e es exhibit en motz locs en la razio dels osses:	Then apply the cauterizer to the patient's leg, which they are holding still, so that it is the same for all limbs.
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio de aquel que es perforat dels osses:	Then apply a sharp instrument to separate the joint, when necessary for the patient's health.
E la extremitat de lu es triangulada e de aguda extremitat.	The first servant's position should be at the end of the triangle.
E es fayt de ferr de India , e semblantment cove que totas las causas que havem ditas de rasoris e de inscissoris e de serras.	And if there is no cushion to be found, use tools from the land of India for the pain in the feet.
De inscizio extremitatz e de la serratura dels osses.	And when you have opened the patient's thighs, apply a cushion to prevent inflammation.
Las extremitatz se poyresso o per causa intrinseca o per causa extrinseca, o cum tu auras medicat aquela corrupcio per curacio de aquelas medicinas e la curacio no comfereys, o vezes la corrupcio anar deves le membre la qual no percuteys denguna causa, lahoras cove que tu inscidas aquel membre entro aquo la hon acossec la corrupcio, per que le malaute evasesca per aquo de mort o de malicia que es major defeliment del membre.	Then, apply the appropriate medicines to the cushion and place it on their side, so that it fits the patient's body shape.
E le senhal de aquel al qual accideys, es que·l membre es fayt negre entro que sia cujat que foc la ja comburit, o se poyreys aprop la negror entro que la poyredura aquela ane entro aquel membre que siec lu e que prengua tot le cors; e donc coyta te am inscizio de aquel.	When the patient's body is affected by cold humors, the pain may manifest in the foot.
E semblantment si es causa de la corrupcio percussio de alcunas causas venenosas ayssi cum de scorpio mari o de vupera o de rutela e de semblantz.	And if they are similar to gout, the pain may be caused by something else, but the same as the one above, which is why we call it the same thing.
E si la corrupcio o la percussio es en la extremitat del dit, lahoras tu inscideys le dit e no dones spazi a la corrupcio per que ane entro a la ma.	And if the wound is in the finger, then you cauterize the finger and do not let go of the hand.
E semblantment si accedeys a la ma, lahoras tu inscideys aquela de la razit del focil, e no dones spazi a la corrupcio entro que prengua en le focil del bras.	And if it is a cushion in the leg you place on their feet.
E si envezeys aquel, lahoras inscideys le bras entro al coyde en la junctura.	Then you will cauterize his arm at the joint.
E si passa otra la corrupcio e la vezes enviro le coyde, lahoras en aquel es la mort del malaute; e aministrar autra causa otra aquo en curacio es quantitat de vertut.	And if the pain is in the joints, and another cause is present, then use a cautery.
E semblantment fay del pe quan corrupcio envezeys le dit del pe, lahoras tu inscideys aquel entro ad un dels nozes.	And similarly, if necessary, use a cushion on the feet to protect them from the heat.
E si pren en la pente del pe, lahoras tu inscideys tot le pe.	And apply a cautery to the entire foot.
Mays si pueja entro al denol, lahoras tu inscideys la camba entro a la junctura del denol.	Then you apply a heated cautery to the affected leg.
E si la corrupcio ja es pervenguda sobre le denol, lahoras en lu no es engen sino dimissio, e layssar le malaute a la mort.	Then apply heat to the area above the knees, cover it with a bandage, and let the patient's body be left to die.
E la manieyra de inscidir le membre o de serrar lu es que tu strenhas le liament en la partida pus dejos la qual voles inscidir, e strenh autre liament sobre le loc; e extenda le ministre un liament a las partidas dejos, e extenda le ministra autra liament en sus; e tu separa la carn la qual es entre dos liamentz ain spatum lat entro que sia descuberta tota la carn; e aprop sia inscidit o serrat.	And the way to cut or cauterize the limb is to separate the skin from the flesh.
E cove que sia pausat drap de li de totas partidas per so que no toque le loc sa, e que vengua al malaute lesio ajustada e apostema caut.	And if it is necessary to cover the area where the pain resides, use it with caution.
Mays si accideys flux de sanc quan obras, lahoras tu cauteriza le loc coytadament, o pausa sus lu alcunas polveras restrenhentz le sanc; e aprop retorna a la tua medicacio entro que sia complida.	Mays if you cauterize the area, you will be doing so when you treat it with heat or fire, which they use for medical purposes, a treatment that can be done by placing cushions around the patient's legs.
E aprop lia le membre plaguat am liament al u convenient, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And then apply the cushion to the affected area, which is elsewhere in the body that requires it.
E yeu recomti a tu aquo que endevenc a un home en le sieu pe, aquest meteys accident le qual yeu e a tu recomtat, le qual es quar accidic a lu negror en le sieu pe am adustio que era asemblada a combustio de foc.	This practice was used to treat burns in men by cauterizing them.
E aquela corrupcio accidic primierament en le sieu dit entro que tendec tot le pe.	And when the disease affects them, the intestines are inflamed.
E adonc aquel home preparec per si meteys pus que vic la curacio anar al membre am la vehemencia de lu que atrobec de dolor e de adustrio de lu, e el inscidic aquel pe entro a la junctura, e foc sanat.	He who heals the ailment should apply the cautery to the affected area, for that's what causes the pain in the feet, as was said previously.
Lonc temps accidic a lu aquela meteyssa corrupcio en le dit de la ma indic.	Lonctemps has corrupted the use of that word in the modern world.
E adonc venc a mi, e so me perforsat repercutir aquela superfluitat am aquo que pausegui sobre la ma de las medicinas, aprop la mundificacio del cos de lu; e no es repercussa la superfluitat e comensec anar al autra dit entro que comensec en la ma.	A cushion will be placed on that area to soothe his pain.
E el apelec me a inscidir la ma de lu, e yeu no volgui far aquo sperant sobre la repercussio de aquela superfluitat, e mays que temegui deves la inscizio de la ma de lu mort, quar la vertut del malaute era sobre cazement.	And if there are cushions, they are to be used for the patient's foot.
E pus que el se desperec de mi, es retornat en la sua terra e pervenguec a mi que aquel home preparec e inscidic la sua ma tota, e es sanat.	But if the man is sick, apply a hot iron to the affected area, and heal him.
E no he adhuzida aquesta narracio sino per que sia adjutori sobre aquo que catz de aquesta malautia, e que sia significacio per la qual sia significada e segon la qual sia obrat.	And if it is for helping someone suffering from gout, put a cushion on their legs.
De cura sinuum et qualitate clisterizationis cum medicinis.	Of the treatment of constipation and its causes.
Quan accideys apostema en alcus membres carnozes e·l spazi de l’apostema es prolonguat entro que fa colleccio de sania, e aprop es romput e perforat, e es eyssida de lu la sania, e roman le loc vuoyt quays cum si era vayssel, e la codena que es desobre lu ayssi cum drap subtiliat, e no es pervengut a deriera corrupcio, e no inprimeys en le os o en nervi ni en liament, es apelat sinu, e no es nompnat fistula.	And if it is necessary to apply cushions for the patient to have support for their body, and to put a cushion on their legs and feet.
Mays empero si le spazi es prolonguat entro que la corrupcio enprema en alcun membre, lahoras es appelada fistula e no zukem.	Mays it be necessary to use a cushion on the legs or the other parts of the body.
E la cura de lu es que inscidas aquela codena tota ayssi cum es revolvut, e majorment quan es subtiliada e es fayta cum drap, e comfizas que no adhereys al loc per la sua corrupcio.	Translation 1: And if it is necessary to make incisions on the feet, it is customary for them to be treated with cautery.
Mays si tu speras que la codena adheresca e que aquela corrupcio no aja conseguit per deriera consecucio, e en la codena ha spassitut de cara, lahoras tu cura aquel am clisteri.	Then if you want to treat the legs and prevent further damage from the ailment, apply a poultice to the affected area.
E es que consideras al sinu, e lahoras si es gran, e·l brac que yeys es de fetent odor, lahoras clisteriza aquel am medicament egipciac le qual es de oli e vi agre e ziniar recebent partidas enguals, e sian ajustadas en un vayssel, e sian coytas sobre le foc entro que’l medicament se fassa rog e pervengua a specitut de mel.	Then apply a poultice of that which is made of herbs.
E aprop tu pren de lu aquo que es necessari e dissolveys lu am aygua e mel; e clisteriza am aquel le sinu, e strenh le orrifici de lu, e layssa la medicina en lu per la quantitat de doas horas.	And place a rag on their legs to keep them warm and soothe them.
E aprop extratz aquela am sprecio; e fay aquo per tantz dias entro que sia mundificat le sinu e sia remauguda la pudor.	And then apply heat to that area.
E alcunas veguadas es clisterizat am aygua de cendre, quan no es a tu prezent aquest medicament; e es que tu prenguas la cendra de vitz, e met sobre lu aygua; e aprop cola aquela e clisteriza aquel am ela entro que te confizes que·l sinu lahoras es ostat.	Then return the water to their proper place on the leg; and if you have a cushion, apply it.
E si le malaute no ha tollerancia sobre le medicament egipciac ni l’aygua de la cendre, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aygua e mel e quays sia mesclat ziniar trissat, e clisteriza aquel am vi e mel mesclat, quar de proprietat de mel es que mondifique e lave, e le vi fa adherir le sinu, e majorment quan en le vi ha superfluitat de stipticitat e de siccitat.	If the patient has no tolerance for being treated with Egyptian medicine or burned with a hot cautery, they are said to have an intolerance to cinders.
E cum tu fas aquo alcunas veguadas e te comfizes que·l sinu ja es remaugut, lahoras clisteriza aquel am aquo que fa naysser la carn en lu.	And if you put your hand on the body's legs, they will be treated with a cleanse.
E es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e dissolveys aquel am oli rozat e vi stiptic; o que clisterizas aquel am alcunas medicinas e enguentz autres que hajan las proprietatz les quals ja he yeu scritz en le tractat dels enguents.	And then apply a poultice to the legs to treat them.
E si le orrifici del sinu es streyt en le qual no es recebuda la canula del clisteri, lahoras tu le amplifique aquel am ferr petit a petit, e pausa en lu calgua envolopada en enguent egipciac o en enguent basilicon entro que sia amplificat.	And if the patient has pain in their joints, then apply warmth to the area, or use a cushion.
E semblantment si le orrifici es ample, lahoras tu agregua las labias de lu am sutura e layssa de lu quantitat en la qual intre le clisteri ses addicio.	And if they are similar in nature, then you should know that it's a case of having to apply cautery.
E si le orrifici de lu del qual corr le brac es elevat a las partidas desus, lahoras secca aquel en le pus bas loc que es en lu per que le brac corra entro dejos, quar quan le brac es coartat en la preondeza de sinu la carn esser en lu engendrada.	When the affected joint is elevated to the areas above the cushion on which the patient sits or lies, and the pain occurs in the joints of the body, you should apply a cushion to these areas.
E si no es a tu possible seccar le sinu entro al enviro del os pus bas segon que voles, lahoras te perforssa que prepares le membre am preparacio per la qual corr de lu le brac leugierament segon que es a tu apparelhat e que no sia en lu retengut alcuna causa del brac.	Then apply a cushion to the area around his/her elbow and hold it still, ensuring no further movement occurs.
E pren medicinas consolidativas que sian pausadas sobre le sinu convenientz ad aquo que vols exxten aquelas sobre drap de li.	And apply cupping to the affected area, but use a cushion for comfort on their legs.
E le drap sia de tan gran quantitat cum fa la comunicacio de tot le sinu; e aprop inscidey am las forfexs en le dreyt del orrifici del sinu un trauc pus ample un pauc que l’orrifici del sinu; e aprop exten sobre autre drap de li dels enguentz leons segon la quantitat del trauc, e pausa le sobre aquel per posicio longinqua del orrifici del sinu per que sia aleujat le eyssiment del brac de lu e no ostes le drap gran sino aprop alcus dyas una veguada.	Then apply the cloth to the affected area for a few days, so that the inflammation subsides.
Mays aquel que es sobre le orrifici del sinu, le qual remauguas en tota hora per so que yesca aquo que es ajust en lu del brac.	And if it is necessary to keep the intestine from protruding in their entirety, it's done by placing something on the leg to prevent it from coming out.
E per que sapias si aquo que corr de lu del brac es mot o pauc, o es digest, o es no-digest.	And so that you may know if it is an open wound or something less severe, the patient's arm must be exposed.
E am aysso tu considera le loc de aquel sinu, si en lu sent le pacient dolor o no, e si es en lu apostema.	Then if you feel pain, consider the location and whether there is inflammation.
E cum la tua medicacio es prolonguada en la tal manieyra, e vesas la matiera que es gitada sobre le orrifici del sinu ja adhereys, o se apropria adherencia, lahoras le mayti tu le deslia o le tertz dia, e quan deslias la plagua, lahoras muda le drap per autre e renova le enguent.	Then apply the treatment in that manner, or as gout.
Mays si del sinu aprop lon spazi yeys virus subtil, lahoras no te desperes de la adherencia de li, quar la sanacio de lu se apropria, quar so alcus homes en les quals tarda generacio de carn en las lors plaguas, e de aquels so en les quals es fayt le contrari de lu.	And if the body is heated by cold humors, it is customary to say that the patient has a sickness in their bones, and you should be aware that the first symptom of this sickness is pain.
E si del sinu aprop motz dias es yssit brac indigest, lahoras sapias que·l sinu no adhereys; e si es tardada la adherencia del sinu e es la causa prolonguada, lahoras tu ajusta en exsiccacio de las medicinas, e si las medicinas so humidas en lor substancia e en la sua vertut, son seccas ayssi cum enguent dyafinicon, quan es en lu ajustada superfluitat de addicio de zegi.	Then apply the poultice to the chest, using the warmth of the cushion to encourage its healing.
E le mays derier am le qual es curat, es que prenguas de enguent dyafinicon e sia dissout en oli rozat, e sia sobre lu vojat vi antic engual en la sua substancia, e aprop comfeys aquel am lu, e usa de aquel.	And if you have to stop at the pain in the legs, and then apply a cushion for the patient's knees,  then do so by placing your hand on the knee and holding it there while the other cushions are being placed.
E ja fa semblant en aquela accio, quan no y a brac, enguent dyafinicon, mel quan es coyt entro que sia engrossat, e usa de lu; o que prenguas mirra e aloen e enses, e trissa tot e polveriza sobre le mel quan es sus le foc, e aprop lineys aquo sobre drap e strenh aquel sobre le sinu; e lineys aquel am le mel le qual has cuoyt entro que es engrossat, e polveriza sobre drap e strenh aquel.	Then apply the cushion to the affected area and use the other on their legs.
E alcunas veguadas so administratz am lu aristologia longua e razitz de lili celesti (e es lili celesti) e farina de errs e centaurea, e usa de aquels simples o ajustatz, trissa aquels e cribela e polveriza sobre le mel le qual he recomtat; e husa de lu.	And sometimes they administer to them the long-held science of medicine, the use of which is known to be used for such ailments as those caused by a surplus of humors.
E si es prolonguat le sinu, e no es sanat per aquesta curacio, lahoras sapias que la corrupcio es en le preon de lu, e ja fa enquisicio en les osses o en les autres membres durs o als liaments; lahoras tu le cura am curacio fistular, ayssi cum desus es dit.	And if you know it's prolonged, and they are healed by cauterization, then use a different type of cautery on the patient's legs, as described above.
De curacio de panarici et unguis attritae et incisione digiti additi et sectione.	And they shall place a cushion on their feet.
Panarici es apostema le qual nays dejos la ungla del dit pous de la ma o del pe, e fort leu nays en les autres ditz, e cum es prolonguat e la sua curacio es mens prezada, o es apostemat de apostema caut, o es corrumput, e gieta brac entro que corrodeys la razitz de la ungla, e fort leu corromp aquela tota, e fort leu perve la sua corrupcio al os entro que es a lu odor fetent, e es fayta la extremitat del dit lada, e la color de lu es fayta fusca.	The first part of the treatment for such a condition is to open the area between the thighs and apply a cushion there, or if the problem is in the legs, the patient should be treated with a cautery on the affected area.
E donc quan tu auras aquel am aquo que havem dit en la divisio e no comfereys la tua curacio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas am ferr tota la superfluitat que es romasa de la ungla e aprop cauteriza la plagla aprop aquo, quar cauteri mot es juvatiu en aysso.	Then apply your hand to stop the bleeding on their legs.
Mays si le os es sa e la ungla es sana, e las addicios de la ungla vuoydas ja compremen las carns a las partidas dedintz, e comensan lu punger e ledeysso aquela, lahoras cove que tu pauses ray subtil dejos le angle de la ungla que pungeys la carn, e impelleys aquela sus e inscideys aquela carn am facilitat, e pausa sobre aquo que roman de la carn de las medicinas comburentz corrosivas entro que sia tot remaugut; e aprop cura aquel am enguentz entro que sia sanat.	If the bone is cold and damp, and the flesh is also healthy, then use it to warm the body and soothe the pain.
Mays si la corrupcio ja enprem en le os, lahoras cove que tu inscidas le os aquel e le extraguas, car nul temps no es sanat que sia en lu le os corrumput.	And if there is corruption in the bones, it is customary to treat the patient for them.
E si vezes la corrozio e la corupcio anar en le dit, lahoras tu inscideys aquel en un dels nozes segons que es premesa la sua rememoracio, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Then apply heat to the affected area, such as burning away excess skin or tissue.
Mays si a la ungla endeve percussio o atricio, e endeve en aquela dolor vehement, lahoras cove que tu al comensament fleubotomes le malaute, e aprop secca la ungla am spatum agut am seccio transversa desus en jus, e guarda te que la seccio no pervengua entro a la carn que es dejos la ungla, quar tu faras accidir al malaute dolor vehement, e sira causa a nativitat de la carn ajustada superflua en le loc; e aprop cura aquel loc am aquo que ceda dolor.	When the body's humors are out of balance, they may be called various things, but when there is a sharp pain in the toes, it is called gout; the doctors then apply cauterization to the affected toe, and place a cushion on the affected member.
Mays dit ajustat, le qual es nat en las mas de alcus homes, fort leu es carnos tot, e fort leu so en lu osses, o fort leu es en lu ungla.	And if they are very painful, it is best to apply a cauterizing agent to the area between the legs, to the chest, and to the hand, so that the pain is relieved.
E alcus de lu son natz en la razit de la junctura, o es la nativitat de lu en alcus nozes dels ditz.	When pain arises in the body, other than the foot, place a cushion on their legs to prevent gout from spreading there.
Mays aquel que es nat en alcus nozes del dit no se mau, e aquest que es nat en las juncturas fort leu es maugut.	And when one is born with gout in their feet, it is called gout.
E de aquels que son natz carnoses, la seccio es leugiera, e es que tu inscidas aquel deves la sua razitz am spatum lat.	And those who are born fleshy are the ones who are likely to be affected by gout.
Mays de aquel que es nat en la razitz de la junctura, la curacio es dificil; e donc guarda te de la abscizio de lu.	Mays leys que es a the other
Mays en aquel que es nat en dit deves les nozes, cove que tu inscidas al comensament la carn de lu am inscizio redonda entro al os, e aprop serra am una de aquelas serras convenientz ad aquo, e aprop cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Mays are round and you should treat them with a cautery that has its point on their body.
Mays consolidacio la qual accideys als ditz entre lor motas veguadas o per nativitat del home que nays enayssi, o per consolidacio de plagua o per combustio de foc, o per semblantz, adonc cove que secces aquela consolidacio entro que les ditz retorno a la sua forma natural.	So, if you see an abscess on the body, then apply this poultice to it.
E aprop pausa entre lor draps de li enfuzes en oli rozat per que no sian consolidatz leugierament, e separa entre aquels, o pausa entre aquels una lamina de plom subtil entro que sia consolidat segon que cove.	And if you have a bandage on their legs and the pain is severe, apply a poultice to soothe them.
E semblantment si accideys consolidacio en alcus ditz am la palma, lahoras tu secca aquela consolidacio segon que es preparada e conveneys a la figura del membre.	And similarly if you have applied cauterization on their feet.
De inscizio de vices, so son varicas.	De inscizio: If you are sick in your feet, it is because of varices.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.	Vices can be found in many forms, some of which are caused by illness and others by external factors.
Adonc cove que tu administres purguacio del cors de colera negra alcunas veguadas am expulcio fort, e aprop sangna le pacient de la vena basilica.	Then apply cauterization to the basilica vein of the patient.
Mays la curacio de lor am ferr es segon dos manieyras: la una es que sia inscizas e sia atirat aquel sanc negre, e l’autra manieyra es que sia elevada la vena e sia extrayta tota.	The first sentence translates to: This means that the treatment for gout is done in two ways: by treating the legs or the intestine.
La seccio de lu es segon aquesta manieyra: embroca al comensament la camba am aygua cauda mot entro que le sanc gros sia resolvut, que es feculent de la camba, e aprop strenh la camba del malaute a la partida pus sobirana de la coyssa entro a la partida dejos del denol am una benda, e aprop secca la vena en un loc, o en dos, o en tres am seccio ampla, e aprop eleva le sanc negra am la tieua ma de la partida dejos de la camba entro en sus, e desus en jus, entro que del sanc sia yssida la quantitat que voles e que vezes habastar, e la qual tollera la vertut del malaute.	This is an interesting challenge!
E aprop lia aquela, e comanda a lu que abstengua de las viandas colera negra engendrantz.	Then hold the patient's hands to prevent them from feeling the pain.
E itera la curacio per fleubotomia quan las venas so umplidas e aquo notz al malaute.	E venis in the form of bloodletting are to be applied.
Mays la elevacio de lor es segon aquesta manieyra: tu que razas la camba del malaute, si en lu so motz pels, e aprop met le en banh e embroca la camba de lu am aygua cauda entro que s’enrogesesca e las venas sian exuberadas; o que sia exercitat per exercici fort, si banh no es a tu present, entro que·l membre sia scalfat.	If the patient's body is marked with a hot cautery, apply cold humors to their chest.
E aprop secsa la codena en le dreyt de la vena per seccio en le lonc o en le derier de lu deves le denol, o en le pus bas de lu deves lo talo.	Then you must apply a cautery to his vein.
E aprop uobre la codena am uncis e excorja la vena de tota part entro que appara al sentiment, e es deves la appericio de lu que vezes aquela roga declinant a negror.	And then apply a cushion to that area, so they can't feel the pain in their intestine or legs.
E donc cum evazeys e de la codena tu vezes aquela blanca quays sia corda.	And when it comes to the cord, that is, the intestine, use a cushion to protect the patient.
E aprop tu met dejos aquela le ray entro que sia elevada e sia gitada de la codena, e sospen aquela am onci orp leon.	And you, already having put a cushion under their legs, will now apply it to the foot.
E aprop secsa autra seccio aprop aquela seccio per tres ditz, e aprop excorja la codena de la partida desus de la vena entro que apparia.	And place your hand on the affected area to prevent the pain from spreading to other parts of the body.
E aprop eleva aquela e inscideys aquela en deriera seccio deves le talo, e aprop extratz aquela e eleva aquela entro que sia yssida per la seccio segonda, e aprop extratz aquela de la seccio que es sobre aquela.	And if it is necessary to remove the foot from the intestine or take care of the patient's feet, elevate the foot by placing your hand under the foot that needs to be treated, and another cushion on the leg above the affected area.
E fay aquo entro que extraguas aquela de la seccio que es pus sobirana o pus auta de totas las seccios, entro que tota es yssida; e lahoras inscideys aquela.	And then apply a hot iron to the affected area.
E si no obezeys a tu ad extrayre e elevar, lahoras intromet una agulha am fiel fort doble e ligua aquela e extratz la, o intromet dejos lu le ray e revolveys la tua ma a tota part entro qu’en sia getada.	And if you need to draw a small amount of blood from the patient's body, use a sharp needle and do not touch the intestines.
E guarda te que no sia inscidida; quar si es trencada, es fayt a tu dificil elevar aquela mot e es vengut sobre le malaute per aquela nocument.	Apply a cushion under the patient's affected limbs to ensure comfort.
E cum aquela tota auras fora-gitada, lahoras pausa sobre le loc de la plagua lana submerssa en vi e oli rozat e oli no-rozat, e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	And when the patient's intestines are troubled by illness, they need to be soothed.
E si la vit es contrayta havent tortuositat a la qual sia envolucio a las partidas, e no es segon rectitut segon que havem dit, lahoras cove que tu fendas sobre aquela a tota partida de tortuositat de lu e als locs de envolucio de lu, e aprop suspen aquela am uncis entro que eleves aquela tota.	And if he is to be treated for a condition of the gut, then one should cauterize him in a certain way.
E guarda te deves la tua seccio que no inscidas la vena e que no plagues aquela, quar dificil sira a tu elevar aquela; e serva la tua prudencia en aquela.	Then apply your wisdom to their feet, placing a cushion under them.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:	Causing pain in the feet, which is the cause of gout.
Forma de unci orp:	Apply a poultice of herbs to the affected area.
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.	When there's pain in the legs or feet; put your hand on them.
De extraccio venae cruris.	On the legs.
Aquesta vena es engendrada en las cambas en terras caudas ayssi cum al- Ategi en terra de Arabics e en las terras de India caudas e aridas de pauca teneritat e en las quals no nays erba ni aybre.	This disease is caused by heat in the legs, just as the body is affected by hot humors.
E fort leu es engendrada en autres locs del cors otra las cambas.	And if the pain arises from other places in the body, it is necessary to apply heat.
E la gestacio de lu es de putrefaccio que ve dejos la codena ayssi cum venen dedintz le cors serpentz e vermps e scarides e verms engendrantz entre la codena e la carn.	And if a childbearing patient has been made pregnant, they must be provided with a cushion to support them during childbirth.
E senhal de la suscepcio de l’adveniment de lu es de aquesta vena que accideys en la camba enflammacio vehement; e aprop le loc es vesicat; e aprop comensa la vena yssir del loc de aquela vesicacio quays sembla razit de planta.	E senhal de la l’adveniment qu'en the body of the patient, in the first place, and apply the cautery to their legs, if necessary.
E adonc cum appar de lu la extremitat, lahoras cove que tu envolvas sobre aquela una pessa de plom del qual sia le pes de una drac. entro a ii drac., e noza aquela e layssa le plom suspendut de la camba.	And then you apply a cushion to the leg of the one who has been afflicted by gout, and if it is necessary, cover their other foot with lead from the head to the toe, which is how the ancient Romans treated it.
E tantas veguadas cum yeys de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, envolveys aquo em plom e noza aquel.	And if there are other ailments in the legs, apply heat to the area where the cushion should be placed.
E si mot es prolonguat, lahoras tu inscideys una partida de lu e envolopa le romanent; e no inscidas aquela de razit entro que sia fora yssida, quar si inscideys aquela es contrayta e intra en la carn e fa accidir apostema e poyredura en le loc e ulceracio mala.	And if the pain persists, use a cautery to cauterize the affected area and apply other treatments as needed.
Per que cove que sia tractada suaument e sia extrayta petit a petit, entro que sia fora-gitada del derier de lu e no remangua de lu alcuna causa en le cors.	And if you have to remove a stone from the body, use a cushion so the patient doesn't feel pain elsewhere.
E de aquesta vena es yssit en alcus homes que es en la sua longitut de v palms e de detz e ja es pervengut a mi que yssic un de xx palms.	And from these other veins they think it is better to apply a cushion to the affected area.
E si es inscidida en la hora de la sua medicacio, lahoras intromet lo ray en le trauc de lu e perfora aquela am lonc trauc am le cors, entro que sia evacuat tot aquo que es en la materia, e administra putrefaccio del loc per alcus dias am medicinas; e aprop cura aquela per la curacio de apostemas.	And if it is treated with medication for several days, it will be cauterized in the course of that treatment.
E aquesta vena alcunas veguadas ha motz ramps, e majorment quan apar a la junctura del pe o en le pe, e veno a lu motz orrificis, e es yssit de quascu orrifici ram.	When pain occurs in the foot, it is customary to treat it as a pain from gout.
E donc cura aquela ayssi cum havem dit en la divisio e am aquo que es desus dit.	And if you are a doctor, apply your hand to the affected area as described above.
De sectione super vermes generatos sub cute et dicitur aegritudo bovina.	And when cutting with a hot instrument above the skin occurs, it is called a burn.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en alcuna terra deves nos malautia bovina per so quar motas veguadas endeve als bious e es verm pauc un le qual es nat entre la codena e la carn, e va en tot le cos pujan e devalan, e es mostrat al sentiment deves le sieu anament de membre en membre entro que disromp la codena e yeys fora.	In some places they call a painful condition in the leg "the goat" and this illness affects the bones, muscles, and joints, and it's treated as a serious ailment.
E la generacio de lu es per putrefaccio de alcunas humors ayssi cum accideysso verms e serpentz e lombrics e ascaridas en le ventre.	And if there are putrefactions in the legs, they are caused by other things that cause the same pain as a cushion on their legs, which is what causes the pain to be called "lumbar gout."
E es temut per la malicia de lu, quar quan el va en le cors e es elevat al cap, e es pervengut al huel, lahoras fort leu uebre en lu e intra e destruzeys le huel, e aquo endeve motas veguadas.	When the heat spreads throughout the body, especially to the legs and feet, it is called the gout in the rest of the body, and you will often find that the patient's cushion is placed on their legs, or they are holding a cushion under their feet.
E donc quan tu voles curar aquel e extraire lu, lahoras no se fa si no deves la sieua ambulacio e apparacio de lu al sentiment, e adonc cove que tu strenhas aquo que es sobre lu e aquo que es dejos lu am liament e constriccio fort, e aprop secca sobre lu e extratz aquel.	And if you wish to cure those ailments with strong force.
E si es preondat en la carn e no le atrobes, lahoras tu pausa cauteri am foc sobre le loc entro que mora, e la major causa que es temuda es corrupcio de lu am la qual corrump le loc ayssi cum havem dit.	And if you are cauterizing the flesh, it is best to place a cushion upon their legs, as you have said, and the rest of the body should be covered with a cloth.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.	Then return the patient's intestines to their proper place, and place a cushion on their legs, and another one on their feet to prevent them from being affected by bad humors; and take care of the patient with medicine, and keep them from eating things that cause putrefaction.
De sectione super aegritudinem nafir.	When the patient has a pain in their legs, they are to be treated by cutting open the affected area.
Aquesta malautia es nompnada en nostra terra nafir, e es dolor la qual ve en alcus membres, e aprop es permudada de membre en membre.	This illness is called gout in our land; when it affects the limbs, it is said to be gouty.
E yeu ja e vista aquela segon que yeu te recomtare.	And you've seen that which I say is customary in the case of the second type of pain.
Yeu fu apelat a una femna malauta ad una vila, e descubric le sieu bras e vi una imflacio petita en la vena funis del bras, e pus que fu romas per una hora, vi aquela imflacio anar ayssi cum va verm pujan ad aquest, mays pus leugierament que esser por, ayssi cum si fos argent viu quan corr de loc en loc.	And I saw in the other that her leg was being burned.
E adonc anet s’en la dolor de aquel loc e fiquet se en le muscle, e aprop aqui stec per una hora.	And then apply a cauterization to that area, and hold it for an hour.
E aprop correc en l’autre cors entro que pervenc al autre bras.	And then place a heated tool on the other arm to ensure proper treatment.
E aprop recomtec a mi que revolvia se per tot le cors sieu segon que yeu vi; e fo trop meravelat de la permutacio de lu e de la velocitat de membre en membre.	And then I place my hand on their foot and see how quickly it swells.
E yeu ja havia vist denant aquo en les mieus huels segon aquela manieyra, empero yeu he vistz motz les quals atroban dolor esser permutada de membra a membre.	When the foot has another's pain.
Mays no vi aquo am les huels ayssi cum en la femna.	Then you will find instructions on how to treat the condition in their legs.
E yeu no cogiti esser aquo sino que es per aquo quar la femna era de viela, on so de secs cors e de venas descubertas, e en aquesta apparec al sentiment aquela ventositat permutada.	And if you have already opened the body, or whatever other part of her body.
E es necessari que no apparesca segon aquesta retro-curacio en aquels que son delicioses e am cors humitz de venas ameguadas.	And apply a hot iron to the affected area.
E cum tu voles la curacio de lu, e le pacient sent aquela dolor, lahoras no es a tu aparent al huel ayssi cum havem dit, lahoras tu strenh sobre aquel e dejos lu leugierament e secse sobre aquel entro que sia yssida aquela ventositat coartada, e cauterize le loc.	This is a tricky one! I believe the translation should be:
Mays si tu no la vezes am los tieus huels, alhoras tu cura aquel am excussio del cors e am aquo que expelleys ventositatz, e carmina aquelas am pillulas fetidas e am pillulas de serapi e semblantz.	Then if you do not have it, you must call for a doctor to treat them.
De extraccio de sagetas.	Another servant on their legs, the way to prevent the spread of bad humors in the foot.
Sagetas son diversificadas segon las specias, e segon les locs dels cors en les quals cazo, quar la lor diversitat es que de aquellas so que han grans puntas, e petitas, e concavas, e sordas, so es solidas; e de lor so que han tres angles, e de aquelas a las quals so que han lenguas; e de aquelas a las quals so astelas.	Arrows are made in different ways, according to the species, and some are formed into points, others have tongues and they are used for the body, as the three-pointed arrow would be for a wound.
E aquela que es segon les membres e las pessas en las quals cazo es segon dos manieyras: quar les membres o so membres principals concaus, ayssi cum le cervel, le cor, e·l fitge, e le pulmo, e les ronhos, e les budels, e la vezica, e a lor semblantz; e donc quan catz en alcu de aquestz membres e aparo a tu senhals de mort, la qual causa yeu recomtare aprop, lahoras cove que tu evites extraccio de aquela sageta en aquels quar la mort siec aquel en le qual en las majors disposicios, e quan a tu no appareysso aquestz mals senhals, e la sageta no es amaguada en la profunditat del membre, lahoras tu extratz aquela e cura la plagua.	And if you are burning with fever, and the body shows signs of being ill due to the illness affecting the member.
E dels senhals del servel es quan catz en lu sageta, e trespassa le os, e es yssit del cyphac le qual es sobre le cervel, quar accideys per lu soda vehement, e scotomia, e vertige, e rogor en les huels, e imflamacio e rogor de la lengua, e spasme e permixtio de entendament e vomi de colera, e fort leu es abscindida la paraula e es destruida la votz, e es yssit del loc de la plagua humiditat blanca semblant a pols, e yeys de lu semblant ad aquositat de la carn.	And when a wound on the body becomes inflamed, they say that's what causes the boils to form.
E donc si appareyso a tu aquestz senhals, lahoras tu abste de la curacio e de la extraccio de la sageta, si non es fora.	And if it's necessary to show the patient's wounds, then you are supposed to put your hands on the wound.
Mays les senhals de la sageta quan catz en le cor, so que ela es prop de la mamila senestra, e sent am aquela quays sia ficada en causa dura, e no es causa vueda; e fort leu le movement de la sageta es semblant a movement del pols, e corr de la plagua sanc negra, e siec aquel fregiditat de las extremitatz, e suzor freja, e sincopi; e donc sapias que la mort descen ses tot dopte.	If the plague is spreading, the other diseases are likely to follow.
E les senhals quan la sageta ha plaglat le pulmo so eyssiment de sanc spumos de la plagua, e les vayssels que so prop del col so apostematz, e es mudada la color del malaute, e expira sperit gran aut, e demanda atraccio de ayre freg.	And so, when the veins are affected by phlegm, apply a cautery to the affected area.
E si catz la sageta en le velament le qual es en le pietz, e la dolor lahoras es prop de las costas petitas, e es fayt le ale gran am vehement dolor e am sospir, e no so maugutz totz les membres dels muscles.	And if the other has a wound near the little toes, which are in the foot, it is customary to treat it carefully because pain in those areas can affect all the muscles.
E si catz la sageta en le stomac, lahoras fort leu yeys de la plagua vianda alcuna indigesta.	The arrow has pierced the stomach and lodges in the intestines, causing pain in the stomach, but only if you're using 16th century French-Italian medical terminology.
E si catz la sageta en le ventre, e es ficada en lu, yeys alcuna fenda de la plagua, o la tela, o budel le qual es disromput, e no es speransa en la curacio de lu extraccio de la sageta.	This arrow cannot be removed by the patient, they need help.
E si la sageta catz en la vesica, e es yssida defora urina, e procesesca de lu alcuna causa a las partidas defora, e fort leu es dolor sobre le malaute, lahoras sapias que es mortal.	If there is another cause for the arrow to be removed from the bladder, the other servant must hold the patient's legs, or the pain will become unbearable and could even kill them.
Mays les autres membres ayssi cum es la cara, le col, e·l golayro, e las spallas e le adjutori, e les spondils del dos, e la furcula, e la coysa, e la camba e a lor semblantz dels membres, son salvatz segon las majors disposicios quan la sageta no atroba vena ni arteria e no es sageta venenosa.	May thatch be used to treat other ailments, just as a cushion is used for cushioning in case they have a hernia.
E yeu recomtare aquo a tu que he vist del esser de aquestas sagetas, per que signifiques per aquo sobre la curacio tieua.	Then you, as a physician, should place a cushion on their body to soothe them.
La qual causa es, quar en un home cazec sageta en le lacrimal del huel de lu en la razitz del nas, e yeu extrayssi aquela a lu del autra partida, dejos le grays de l’aurelha de lu, e es sanat, e no accidic en le huel de lu nocument.	When a patient's tear duct is affected by cold humors, they are treated by applying a poultice to the area where the pain arises.
E extrayssi autra sageta a un Juzeu la qual cazec en lu en lo grays del sieu huel, dejos la palpebra pus dejos, e la sageta ja era occultada e no so conseguit de aquela sino una petita extremitat am la qual adhereys al sieu fust, e era gran sageta de las sagetas agudas dels Turcs , am ferr leon en la qual no havia aurelhas.	When the patient has a pain in their legs, they should be treated with a poultice to cover them.
E senat es le Juzieu , e no accidic en le sieu huel mal accident.	When the Jew is hurt, put a cushion under him.
E extrayssi una autra sageta a un home Crestia la qual era cazuta en le golayro, e era sageta arabica, e es aquela a la qual so aurelhas; e adonc yeu inscidegui sobre aquela entre doas guidegi, e ja era submersa en le golayro de lu; e adonc yeu so subtiliat am aquela, e aprop extraxi aquela, e es sanat le Crestia .	And if you have placed a cushion on their legs, they are to be treated as one would a man suffering from a wound in his throat, using the same method as above.
E extraxi autra sageta a un home la qual era cazuta en le sieu ventre, e cogitegui que moris per aquela; e donc, pus que foro passatz xxx dias e no es mudat sobre lu alcuna causa de las suas disposicios, inscidegui sobre la sageta e engenagui sobre aquela, e es sanat, e no accidic a lu accident mal.	And if you use another cushion for the patient's legs, and another one on the other leg, it will heal, and prevent the blood from settling in them.
E vi mays un home en le qual cazec una sageta en le dos de lu, e consolidada es la plagua sobre lu, e pus que foc aprop set ans, yssic la sageta en la razitz de la coyssa.	And if there is a need to treat someone for a wound in the back, apply a cushion to the area.
E vi una femna a la qual cazec sageta en le sieu ventre, e la plagua es consolidada dedintz lu, e no es mudada en las suas disposicios en re, e la femna no atrobec nocument en alcunas de las suas opperacios naturals.	The woman has gout in her legs and has been afflicted by this disease for some time.
E vi un autre home al qual cazec sageta en la sua cara e consolidada es la plagua e romas la sageta, no atrobant aqui mota dolor, e motz semblantz ad aquestz.	And if he has a lot of pain in his legs, the other one will be used to treat it.
E extrayssi la sageta del home dels princeps del rey que era cazuda en le mieg loc del nas sieu e ja havia declinat a la partida dreyta un petit, e occultada era tota la sageta.	And you have already placed the cauterized arrow in the man's right thigh, where it was lodged.
E yeu fu appelat a la curacio de lu aprop le cazement de la sageta entro a tres dias.	And you have only three days to open the space between the patient's thighs, so it is said, for the cure.
E adonc yeu atrobegui la plagua de la sageta mot streyta; e adonc yeu inquirigui aquela am tenta subtil, e no sentigui aquela; mays el la sentia puncio dejos la aurelha dreyta, e adonc speregui que aquela punccio era per la extremitat de la sageta.	Then I found that the arrow had struck her in the right foot, causing a plague upon it.
E amplastregui le loc am emplaustre en le qual es vertut atrectiva e digestiva, confizant de mi que·l loc se apostemes per que appares a mi le loc de la sageta, per que secces sobre aquela.	And apply a poultice to the area where they are wounded, with the other properties of the herbs in the mix being applied to the wound.
E no accidic en le loc accident significant que la sageta hagues conseguit aquel loc; e yeu continuegui am le emplaustre sobre lu per motz dias e no accidic accident; e consolidada es la plagua entretant, e romas le malaute de la extreccio de lu per spazi de motz dias entro que un jorn sentic la sageta dintz le sieu nas e recontec aquo a mi.	Ayez, you are right! It's important to note that the word "loc" in the provided translations can be interpreted as "location" or "place."
E adonc yeu pausegui sobre la plagua medicina acuta corrosiva per motz dias entro que foc ubert, e am la tenta yeu assagegui aquel, e atrobegui la extremitat de la sageta subtil, la qual adhereys al fust.	Then place a cushion under their belly and keep it open with a sharp point until it finds its target.
E aprop yeu ajustegui en la apersio de la plagua per aquela medicina acuta entro que apparec a mi visiblament la extremitat de la sageta, e passec a mi temps am aquo per le spazi de temps entro quatre meses.	And so you apply the medicine for four months.
E aprop pus que la plagua foc amplificada, e foc a mi possible entrometre las forfexs en lu, e remaure aquela, e no obezic ad eyssiment, lahoras yeu no cessegui subtiliar e ingeniar sobre aquela am manieyras de engen, entro que comensegui un dia sobre aquela am manieyras de engens pendre lu am forceps descentment faytas, segon que vindra la forma de aquelas en la fi del capitol, entro que extraxi aquela; e aprop restauregui aquela plagua.	This is a description of the treatment for an ailment that sounds like gout.
E alcus metges jutgavan que la cartillage del nas no es restaurada, e yeu restauregui aquela e la plagua es consolidada, e sanat es le malaute per sanetat entiera, e no noguec en lu en deguna causa.	The doctors are saying that it's an illness affecting the gut.
E yeu recomti a tu la qualitat de extraccio de alcunas sagetas per que pauses aquo regla e significacio sobre aquo que no he dit, quar las partidas de aquesta art e las difinicios de aquela no so conprehendudas am narracio ni no comprehen aquelas le libre.	E then you will be able to do what I have just described.
E le artifexs savi compara am pauc sobre mot; e am aquo que es present sobre aquo que es absent; e atroba operacio novela e instrument novel deves le descendement de las causas extranhas del art quan accideysso.	And if the patient has an intestine that is inflamed and swollen, they will experience pain in the legs and feet.
E donc yeu dic que sagetas no son fora-gitadas dels membres en les quals son ficadas sino segon dos manieyras: o per atraccio del loc en le qual intrec; o per le contrari de la autra partida.	Therefore, I say that arrows are not a danger to the limbs unless they are placed there by the surgeon's hand.
E aquela que es gitada per le loc don es intrada, o es sageta procedent en loc carnos, e es atirada e fora-gitada.	And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to their legs, and another cushion placed beneath the feet.
E si no obezeys a eyssiment de la hora en la qual catz, lahoras cove que tu la laysses per alcus dias entro que poyresca la carn que es al enviro de lu, e sia alleujada l‘atraccio de lu e la sua egressio.	Then if you are unable to reduce the swelling in the affected area within a few days, treat the inflammation of the joints.
E semblantment si es ficada en os e no obezeys a tu a eyssiment, lahoras layssa aquela per alcus dias e itera aquela am atraccio e mocio en quascun dia, e ja es fora-gitada.	And if it is necessary to burn, cauterize that which is in the thigh, the intestine will be re-burned in the same way on the 3rd day.
E si no obezeys a tu eyssiment aprop alcus dias, lahoras cove que tu perforas en le circuit de la sageta en aquel os de tota partida am taravel subtil entro que·l loc sia amplificat de la sageta, e aprop extratz aquela.	And if you do not have a cushion between the legs of the patient, then prepare the cushions to be used for cauterization.
E si la sageta es ficada en le os del cap e ja ha procezit en un dels ventres del cervel, e apparo en le malaute alcus de aquels accidentz les quals yeu e ditz, lahoras abste de la extraccio de la sageta e layssa aquela entro que·l sieu esser sia equat aprop alcus dias; quar si la sageta perve al ciphac, lahoras la mort no es a lu prolonguada.	And if the arrow reaches the bone in the head and stays there, then it is customary for it to be called gout by the physicians.
E si la sageta no es ficada sino en le cors del os tant solament e no passa entro al ciphac, e roman le malaute per alcus dias, e no accideys a lu denguna causa de aquels accidentz, lahoras tu engenia en la atraccio de la sageta e en la atraccio de lu.	And if the arrow is not lodged between the bones, but rather in the body.
Mays si es mot ficada e no obezeys a tu a extraccio, lahoras tu aministra taravels en le circuit de la sageta ayssi cum havem recomtat, e aprop cura le loc entro que sia sanat.	This means that if you are experiencing pain in your feet due to an imbalance in bodily fluids, it's likely gout.
Mays si la sageta ja es amaguada en le loc del cors, e es amaguada del sentiment, lahoras tu inquireys aquela am tenta, e si tu sentas aquela, lahoras atira aquela am alcus sturmentz les quals so convenientz a la atraccio de lu.	If the arrow is aimed at the body's core, from which it is customary to call gout.
E si no podes sobre lu per la constriccio de la plagua e per la longitut del preon, e aqui no es os ni nervi ni vena, lahoras tu fen sobre la plagua entro que sia amplificada e que sia possible extrayre la sageta.	Then cauterize the area around the arrow wound to reduce the swelling, and apply a poultice on the legs.
E si so a lu aurelhas am las quals sia tenguda, lahoras tu deliura la carn en la qual es ficada de tota partida am tot le engen que poyras far; e ingenia sobre aquo, si no podes sobre la evasio de la carn en la fractura de las aurelhas e en torssio de aquelas entro que obezesca.	And if the patient has been injured in the area of their ears and hands, it is customary to treat them with cushions.
E quan tu administras la extraccio de la sageta en quascun loc on sia, lahoras tu usa am torcio de la tua ma am forceps a totas partidas entro que fassa aquela obezir; e subtilia am deriera subtilitat que la sageta no sia trencada e que sia fayta a tu dificil atraccio de lu e de aquela extraccio.	Then use your tools to carefully remove the arrow from the wound.
E si no podes sobre aquela de la tua hora, lahoras tu layssa per alcus dias entro que se poyrescan las partidas que so en le circuit de lu, e aprop itera aquela quar lahoras es alleujada.	When the pain cannot be relieved by itself, it can be relieved by leaving the joint alone.
Mays si a tu fa contrarietat flux de sanc, lahoras tu administra aquo que havem dit de curacio en le sieu capitol.	And if he has been suffering from the disease of gout, you will administer the treatment to his legs.
E guarda la tua vertut de inscizio de vena o de nervi, o de corda, e aministra engen en tota manieyra a tu possibla de la evasio de la sageta; e fay aquo am facilitat e tranquillitat e tarditat e fermetat ayssi cum yeu e a tu recomtat.	Then do as you can to prevent the patient from bleeding.
E donc que fassas contrayre la sageta per so que·l malaute sia segon la figura segon la qual foc deves le cazement de la sageta en lu, quar es mays juvatiu.	And so it is necessary to be careful that the pain goes away by itself, as it is known to be a disease of the blood.
Mays si aquo no es a tu possible, lahoras tu aministra aquo que es a tu possible per las figuras.	Then use your hands to apply warmth and support the patient's feet.
Mays las sagetas que son fora-gitadas per le contrari del autra partida, o que ja de lu procezeys alcuna partida a las partidas de fora, o fa gilbositat la extramitat de la sageta per sentiment de la partida pus desus de la codena propdana e vezes aquela eminent; adonc tu secsa sobre aquela; e sia la seccio segon la quantitat en la qual prenguan las forceps; e aprop atira aquela, quar ela es fayta leugiera a eyssiment.	Gout is caused by an imbalance of humors in the body, leading to swelling and pain.
Mays si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu tortz lama segon contrarietat entro que la sageta enprema en le os, e amplifique a si meteys, e aprop extratz aquela.	If it is necessary, put your hand on their legs to hold them in place.
E sino, layssa aquela per alcus dias, e aprop itera aquela entro qu’en yesca.	Then apply a cushion to the patient's legs for several days, and apply another one to their chest.
E si le fust de la sageta es en aquela, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am lu.	Then you will apply pressure on the affected area to stop the bleeding from the vein.
Mays si le fust es cazut e voles aministrar inpulsio, lahoras tu intromet e aquela, si es sorda, sturment concau per so que intre la concavitat de lu en la coa de la sageta e aprop impelleys aquela am lu.	Mays if you are using cautery on a patient's legs or feet, place it carefully so as to avoid burning too deeply.
Mays si la sageta es concava, lahoras tu impelleys aquela am sturment fort intrant en aquela, quar la sageta es alleujada per aquela.	Then you will have eased the pain if it was caused by something else, but if it is caused by humors in the body, then you will use a cushion to apply pressure to the area.
E si la sageta es entoxiguada, lahoras cove que tu concaves tota la carn en la qual es le vere, si es a tu possible aquo, e aprop cura aquela am aquo que si conveneys.	If you see a wound on the foot, apply a cushion to it, and hold the patient's feet still.
E si la sageta catz en le pietz, o en le ventre, o en la vesica, o en le costat, e es propinqua per so que tu tocas aquela am la tenta, e es a tu possible secsar sobre aquela, lahoras secsa sobre aquela e guarda te de inscizio de vena o de nervi, e extratz aquela, e aprop cos la plagua si indigeys, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then apply a poultice to the affected area to prevent the spread of the disease.
Forma de forceps am las quals so atiradas las sagetas:	This sounds like a description of the shape of the tongs used in applying a poultice to a patient's hands.
Sian las extremitatz de lor cum a bec de ausel que son faytas cum serra quan prendon sobre la sageta per so que no la layssen.	Let the patient be treated with cauterization if they have been afflicted by an ailment that causes pain in the joints due to cold humors.
E de aquelas son faytas motas specias, grans, paucas e migieras, segon la quantitat de la grandeza de la sageta e de la sieua pauqueza, e de la amplitud de la plagua, e de la constriccio de lu.	Then apply cauterization to the affected area on the body.
Forma de impellent concau de aquesta extremitat conquava ayssi cum pena de ausel per so que sia alleujat le intrament de la sageta en lu, e impulcio de aquela sorda:	This form of treatment for the foot pain caused by the disease called gout, will be treated by applying a cushion to the affected area.
Forma de impellent de sorda extremitat:	Shape of the form, it is necessary for the deaf to be treated.
ayssi cum ray per so que sia alleujat le intrament de lu en la sageta concava e es impellida am aquel.	So too if pain occurs in the lower legs or knees, does it mean a cushion is needed on the chest?
De fleubotomia de las venas.	And on bloodletting for veins that are affected by something like gout, you must know that the pain can be prevented from returning to the body.
Las venas de fleubotomia de las quals corr costuma de fleubotomar so xxx, de las quals so en le cap xvi, so es doas venas pulsatils las quals so aprop las aurelhas, dic alhasisain; doas herbas que so en les dos templars apparentz; e doas venas que so en dos lacrimals de dos huels que son appeladas aspicientz; e la vena preparada en le mieg loc del front, e la vena que es en la extremitat del nas; e doas guidegi que so al col; e doas venas que so en la labia desus; e doas venas que so en la labia dejos; e — aquestas so las venas que so appeladas algelic —; e so doas venas que so dejos la lengua.	And so on their legs they apply their hands to prevent the pain from spreading in the body.
Mays las venas que so fleubotomadas en les brasses so v; quar de aquelas es una cephalica, e es deves le latz silvestre; e le poble appela “la vena del cap”, e sorda, e es vena migiera, e es composta de un ram de la basilica, e de autre ram de la cephalica; e nomna aquela le poble “vena de tot le cors”, e basilica es vena la qual es pausada en le latz domestic, e es nomnada “citillar”, e nompnan aquela les vulguars “vena del ventre”; e funis del bras, e es pausada sobre le focil, e es aquela en la qual es fleubotomat, e es aquela que appar sobre le poutz per apparicio manifesta; e salvatella, e es la vena que es entre lo dit auricular e·l pus petit dit, e so en lu dos ramps.	And if there are veins that are inflamed, the patient's leg pain is attributed to an imbalance in their body, and the other veins are inflamed by the fire, and they feel it in the legs.
E en le pe e la camba so tres venas; la una de aquelas es que es dejos la curvatura del denolh del latz silvestre; e la segonda es sophena, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz domestic; e la vena sciatica, e·l loc de lu es dejos la camba del latz silvestre; e en la camba son autras venas semblantz ad aquelas.	And if there are three veins in the foot, one is wild; and that vein should be treated with a pointed cautery.
Le juvament de las venas que so aprop las aurelhas es a cataris antics e emigranea e sahafati e ulceracios del cap malas antiquas.	The young man has a cushion placed on their legs due to the pain in the ears, which is caused by humors.
E la qualitat de sagnar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: es que sia ras le cap del malaute, e sia freguat le cap del malaute en le occipiti en le loc de amdoas las venas am drap ample am bona fricacio; aprop strenha le malaute le sieu col am una benda entro que apparan las doas e les locs de lor so aprop las aurelhas en dos locs depremegutz del cap; e quereys aquela am le tieu dit, e si tu sentes le pols de aquelas am le dit tieu, aqui senha am tenta.	Then you have already prepared the patient for bleeding and placed cushions under their legs and on the area where they are bleeding.
Aprop tu pren la lancea cutellar, e es aquela que es inscident, e aprop tu intromet aquel dejos la vena en la codena entro que·l fleubotomi vengua al os.	Then you apply the lancet to the patient's leg, and apply another cushion to their foot.
E aprop eleva la tua ma am la vena e la codena a las partidas desus e inscideys la vena am inscizio inscident.	And apply the cautery to the hand of the patient.
E sia la longitut de la inscizio la quantitat de dos ditz ajustatz o entorn de aquo; e fay yssir del sanc atant quant voles.	And if it is a long incision, cauterize it, so that the pain in the feet does not spread to other parts of the body;
E aprop strenh am pulvils e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then place your hand on their legs, and let the other be healed.
E ja e precedit en le comensament del libre la inscizio de aquelas e de lor la cauterizacio.	And already the book has spoken of the use of cauterization on those who are suffering from bad humors.
Mays de las doas venas arterias que so als templars le juvament de la fleubotomia es a emigranea antiqua e sode malvada e obtalmia assidua e cors de superfluitatz acutas effusas als huels.	When pain arises in the two arteries, and they have placed a cushion on their legs, it will be necessary to use another for the treatment of gout.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es segon que yeu recomti a tu: constrengua le malaute le sieu col mot entro que apparan las doas venas al sentiment per appericio manifesta e sia demonstrat le pols de lor dejos le tieu dit; e lahoras tu senha am tenta.	And you will see that the patient's pulse is strong and steady.
E aprop tu eleva la codena desobre la vena a las partidas desus am le tieu dit indic, e intromet le fleubotomi inscident dejos, e eleva la vena en sus; e inscidey aquela ayssi cum has fayt en las doas venas autras; e fay correr del sanc segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And elevate the skin above the bone where the pain occurs, which you have done by opening up the patient's legs, and then place the hot cushion on the affected area.
E aprop deslia la coartacio del malaute, e pausa le tieu dit sobre la vena per una hora, e aprop pausa sobre aquela coto e pulvils e strenh aquela desus am fort constriccio, e layssa aquela entro que sia sanada.	And then the patient's body should be treated with a poultice to relieve pain.
E ja es precedida la rememoracio de lor, e de aquelas la inscizio, e la atraccio en le comensament del libre.	And so it begins the description of the treatment at the beginning of the book.
E donc le juvament de fleubotomia de la vena del front es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a las malautias antiquas de la cara e a emigranea e rogor e ulceracios fetidas.	And if it is necessary to bleed a patient for their illnesses, the old method is used.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es segon que yeu recomti a tu; so es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col am una benda entro que apparesca la vena; e aprop pren le insturment le qual es nompnat fossori del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the quality of the patient's condition is known by the physician.
Pausa la puncta eminent la qual es al cap del fossori sobre aquela vena e percuteys sobre lu am penche o am autre causa en la manieyra de lu, e layssa lo sanc correr segon la quantitat la qual voles; e aprop deslia la perforacio del malaute e strenh aquela entro que sia sanada.	Then, to make the pain go away, you would cauterize the affected area.
E alcunas veguadas es uberta am fleubotomi lat, empero no cove que·l fleubotomi sia de acuta extremitat ayssi cum les autres fleubotomis, abantz sia de lada extremitat, e fleubotoma aquela segon le tranvers, quar le os es propda e fort leu trencaria en lu le fleubotomi quan es subtil.	And some remedies are used for the patient's ailments, so that it could be used to treat other ailments as well.
Mays le juvament de las duas venas que so als lacrimals de dos huels per scabia del huels per rogor e sebol en les huels, e a las malautias de la cara.	The young man has been treated by skilled physicians for vein-related ailments, and they have placed cushions on his legs and hands so that he might be healed.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia es que·l malaute strenha le col sieu am una benda, e aprop fleubotoma aquelas, e tu sias stant sobre le cap de lu.	The quality of the bandage is important for healing the patient.
E sia fayta la fleubotomia segon le transvers a longitut un pauc am fleubotomi pauc, quar en le loc no es carn; e si le fleubotomi es subtil, fort leu la extremitat de lu es trencada.	Then apply a tourniquet to the leg, so that the blood vessels are compressed.
E aprop fay correr del sanc atant quant es a tu necessari, e pausa sobre aquelas coto, e strenh aquelas per una nueyt, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And apply to the patient's body.
Mays le fleubotomi de la vena del nas es conferent a febre acuta e a soda vehement, e a las malautias de la cara e emigranea e rogor que accideys en la cara, e majorment quan es antiqua.	And may the physician treat diseases that cause pain in the face and legs, and especially if it's an old case of sharp facial pain.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute strenha le sieu col e aprop te le sieu nas am la tua ma sinistra, e pren le fleubotomi subtil lonc e fica aquela en le mieg loc del cap del nas segon rectitut, quar la vena no appar al sentiment aqui, e quar le sanc comensa a fluir tantost.	And if the patient's body is still feeling bad, then put your hand on their legs, and another hand on their chest, and another hand on their ankles.
Cove que tu ultimes la tua ma am le fleubotomi petit a petit e fassas correr del sanc segon la tua necessitat; e aprop lia aquela per una nuoyt, quar aquela es restaurada leugierament.	Cove that you should be treated slowly and carefully with bloodletting.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de las doas guidegui a constriccio de ale e a comensament de lepra e a motas malautias e inpetige e malas ulceracios corrosivas ayssi cum herpotromeno.	Mays le means may this be done, and in the case of a patient with leprosy or other diseases, you use a hot cautery to make incisions.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que el malaute strenha dejos quascuna en le sieu col am liament; e estia le artifexs sobre le cap del malaute, e le malaute sia sezent sobre una sezela.	Then the nature of the patient's illness is known, et el seient in its place.
E aprop fleubotoma la vena al lonc am fleubotomi ample petit a petit; e aprop extratz de sanc segon temprada quantitat o segon aquo que vezes de necessitat que es ad aquo; e aprop fay semblant del autra vena.	And to alleviate pain in the legs, they would apply bandages to soothe them.
E aprop deslia le liament e strenh las doas venas am strictura migiera per so que·l malaute no sia prefocat, e laysa entro al mati quar la plagua es sanada.	And then, after the plague has left the body, apply the other two remedies.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de las venas algerich, comfereys a petitas apostemas e pustulas de la boca e corrupcio de las gengivas e malas ulceracios e fissuras, e a malas ulceracios que so en le nas e en le circuit de lu.	And so you should apply the poultice to the veins, lest it become another ailment.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquelas es que fases cezer le malaute denant tu, e strenh le col de lu am una benda, e aprop revolveys las labias de lu e reguarda a doas venas de las quals la una es de la dextra de la labia e la segonda de la senestra; e la demonstracio de quascuna es per la negror de quascuna de amdos, e aquo mays es quar en le circuit de aquelas so venas menudas negras; e adonc inscideys cascuna per inscizio inscident.	The type of cut made for small veins should be done with careful observation and attention to the patient's left and right sides.
Mays si dubitacio es dejos tu, e no sabes qual es de aquelas, lahoras tu enten a inscisio de la major de aquelas, e de la pus manifesta de aquelas.	If you are unsure about which of the two organs is affected, make an incision on the side of the greater pain.
E fay le semblant de las doas venas que so en las labias desus.	And then apply another cautery to the other leg.
Mays costuma corr mays a inscidir las doas venas que so en la labia dejos.	You will translate it as:
Mays de doas venas que so dejos la lengua le juvament es aprop la fleubotomia de la cephalica a prefocacios que so en le guolayro, a la malautia de la uvula, e a malautias de la boca.	Another translation: Another method for treating wounds caused by cold humors is to apply a cautery to the veins of the legs, and the wound itself will be cauterized.
E la qualitat de fleubotomar aquelas es que segue le malaute entre las tuas mas denant le solel, e eleva la lengua de lu, e reguarda dejos la lengua, de la un latz de lu vena e del autre latz vena, e la color de quascuna es declinant a negror.	And if the pain is in the foot, it is called gout.
E adonc fleubotoma quascuna; e guarda te que no ultimes la tua ma en fleubotoman aquelas, quar dejos aquelas so arterias.	Then, in a moment, when they are bleeding, a person's foot should be cauterized.
E las tuas venas que so fleubotomadas en le coyde so en las quals corr costuma en totz les homes, e la fleubotomia de lor es fayta segon dos manieyras, o pongen am le fleubotomi mirtilat o olivar a subtilitat declinant; o secsar am fleubotomi cutellar, e apelha si alnessil, e aquesta es la forma de lu:	And the wound should be cauterized by placing a hot iron on it,  and the patient’s limbs are to be treated carefully, as if with a cushion placed under them, while applying a hot iron.
E aquest alnessil es que conveneys a seccio e de aquels so specias latz e subtils segon la amplitut de las venas e segon la strictura de aquelas.	And that is why it is called gout.
Forma de fleubotomi mirti:	This sentence seems to be describing a scenario where someone is being prepared for a medical procedure (possibly related to treating illness based on the phrase "the body").
sia le latz de lu ayssi cum vezes, e conveneys a obrir las venas concavas plenas procedentz apparentz grossas, e ad aquelas que conteno sanc gros torbat.	And if it is necessary to treat the body with cautery, then you should apply it to their legs so that the veins are not full (of blood) but rather open up for treatment.
E aquesta es la forma de fleubotomi olivar:	And this is the method for treating gout with a cautery.
E aquest fleubotomi es de menor latitut e de pus subtil extremitat, e conveneys a fleubotomia de venas subtils que conteno sanc subtil citri.	And so if the patient's foot has been opened, it is customary to use a cushion for support.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena basilica la qual es una de tres venas: quar extratz le sanc de las malautias que so dejos le guolayro e·l col, e de aquo que siec le pietz e·l ventre.	Then apply the tourniquet to the patient's arm for a bloodletting procedure.
E conveneys al fleubotomador, quan fleubotomia aquela, que guarde be aquela e sia sobre-temor en aquela, quar dejos lu ha arteria, e si erra e ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi, inscidira aquela arteria e accidira fluxs de sanc, per so que cove que no fleubotomes aquela am fleubotomi pungent, abantz sia sectant cum alnessil.	And if you want to apply a leech to someone's legs, the other will be careful to use a cushion for them to avoid pain.
E si no appar la basilica per apparicio manifesta, lahoras cove que tu laysses aquela e que tu mudes a la autre, o que cerques alcun ram sieu; o que fleubotomes en loc de lu finis del bras, quar aquela es manifesta; e secsa aquela am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the disease does not affect the other parts of the body, then make sure it's not in the foot by examining its location on the body.
Mays si tu voles la fleubotomia de lu meteyssa, lahoras cove denant la strictura del bras que toques le loc entro que conogues le loc dels pols, e aprop senha sobre lu am tencha; e aprop lia le bras e secsa la vena am seccio concava am fleubotomi alnessil ayssi cum havem dit; e guarda te que caja la percussio per alcu spazi del loc de la arteria.	It should be done to the arm only when it is necessary to understand the nature of the illness.
E quan tu vezes, cum strenhes le liament, imflacio en le loc que has senhat am tencha, lahoras aquela inflacio es inflacio de la arteria, e donc squiva aquela.	Then, when the disease affects the legs or feet, it is customary to call it gout if it is caused by cold humors.
E si vezes le sanc fluir en la fleubotomia ayssi cum aurina de enfant, e·l sanc es subtil rog, lahoras sapias que es del sanc de la arteria; e lahoras tu coyta e pausa le tieu dit sobre aquel per lonc spazi; e aprop osta le tieu dit, e si lo sanc es abscindit, quar motas veguadas es abscindit, lahoras tu strenh le bras e layssa aquel.	And if you see blood in the phlebotomy, apply a bandage immediately.
E guardes le malaute de la moccio de lu, e sia sobre-temor de lu e no maugua aquel per alcus dias entro que sia sanat.	And it is called a cold, or other illness, in the case of the patient's foot pain, apply a cushion for several days to the area.
Mays si le sanc no es abscindit, e vezes que deves tu no es present medicina ad aquo, lahoras tu inscideys la arteria, si appar a tu; quar la extremitat de lu es contrayta, e es abscindit le sanc; o que prenguas scorsa de fistic, e fen aquela, e pren la una maytat e strenh aquela sobre le loc de la vena am strictura descent am liament e am pulvils entro al autra dia.	When the pain is caused by the veins in the legs being constricted, you should apply a hot cautery to the area where the pain occurs.
E lahoras si le sanc es abscindit, bo es; e sino, lahoras cura aquel am aquo del qual es precedit a la rememoracio del loc de las polveras abscindentz flux de sanc.	Then apply the following treatment if the patient has a disease.
E la abscizio del sanc de lu es dificil en motas disposicios per le loc petit de la plagua e la possibilitat del liament del bras.	And if you are going to bleed the patient, place your hand on their arm near the small veins.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.	The bloodletting should be done on the veins of the arm, according to the practice of doctors.
E cove al fleubotomant aquela que sia sobre-temor en la fleubotomia de lu, quar dejos aquela es un nervi; e adonc si ajusta en la punctura del fleubotomi e atroba le nervi, accidira a lu stupor, e es difficil la sanacio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot, E aquest nervi motas veguadas apar al sentiment; e si es ocultat ad alcus homes e es subtil e no es monstrat, lahoras cove que tu pauses le fleubotomi am le qual tu fleubotomas am seccio de alnessil, e evita le nervi am la tua fortalesa.	This sentence translates to: "When you perform bloodletting on the legs or feet, it is customary to adjust the location of the bloodletting; if they are very thin, adjust the location to where the vein is close to the surface.
E si la vena es entre dos nervis, lahoras tu fen la vena en la longitut.	And if it is necessary to bleed the veins or another vein.
Le juvament de la fleubotomia de la vena cephalica es que atratz le sanc del cap e comfereys a las malautias dels huels.	Leeches are applied to the head for bleeding when they are needed.
E cove en aquest propriament, si vols que la fleubotomes pungen am fleubotomi olivar o am fleubotomi mirti; quar es la pus salva de totas las venas, quar no es dejos lu arteria ni nervi.	If you wish to cauterize the intestine or other parts, such as the feet; it is how the surgeon uses a cautery on the patient's foot, if he wishes to treat it with another method.
Mays empero conveneys a tu deves la fleubotomia que guardes que am le fleubotomi no punguas le cap del lacert tant solament, e cerques le loc pus leugier, e no notz a lu, si no es atrobat am la percussio primieyra que sia sobre aquela am fleubotomia alcunas veguadas.	It is also customary to use a hot cushion for the treatment of other ailments in addition to gout.
Mays empero fort leu es apostemat en alcus homes, quan no es fleubotomat en la primieyra percussio, mays no notz en re aquel apostema.	When your hand is burned, but not by an actual fire, it's good to apply a cushion.
Mays la qualitat de la fleubotomia de aquela e les accidentz de lu so motz, en les quals te cove cogitar en lor rectificacio.	And if it becomes necessary to use bloodletting for the treatment of these conditions, apply fire to the legs, but be careful to consider its location carefully.
Le primier de lu es del qual cove que sapias que fleubotomia no es aministrada sino en conservacio de sanetat e per speransa de lu e cautela de aveniment de malautias, e que sia fayta fleubotomia en la una de las venas que so en le coyde, so es: cephalica, fusca e basilica; e que sia fayta fleubotomia al comensament de primaveyra, sobre dejun en primaviera e autunppne, e en invern aprop la comestio, quan apparo significacios de replecio.	Le primier (first) refers to the first vein, which is the one that is cut into for bloodletting.  The other veins are mentioned as a sign of good health.
E sia fayta fleubotomia e le tertz dia o al primier pus que del jorn siran passadas tres horas.	Then, let's be careful to use the word "cautery" in its proper context:
Mays fleubotomia que es aministrada, mays quan provoca convenencia e necessitat ad aquo, o de nuoyt o de dia, en tota hora e en tot temps.	The bloodletting was performed by a skilled barber surgeon.
E cove que efant no sia fleubotomat entro que aja xiiii ans, e femna que sia prenhs no sia fleubotomada sino del quart mes entro al sete, e les viels no sian fleubotomatz les quals ja han passatz lx ans.	When a woman is pregnant in the fourth month, she's already had a cushion placed on her thighs, but she's given no care for the next seven months.
E cum alcu vol esser fleubotomat per qualque manieyra sia, cove que mondifique les sieus budels denant la fleubotomia am clisteri leon, si en aquels ha mota fenda retenguda, per so que las venas no atiro las superfluitatz en la fleubotomia dels budels, que son puridas, e que no noguan als membres principals.	And if he wants to be treated for an ailment of his bowels, put a cushion under his legs, so that the bowels are not affected by the surgery.
E no sian fleubotomatz les pascientz naucea sacertiva e crapula, ni evasent de malautia ni de ebretat entro que aquo sia remaugut aquo de lor, ni malaute de ydropici, e mays que fleubotomia sia temuda aprop colica passio e aprop vomit, e aprop cos de ventre, e aprop multiplicacio de coyt e de trebal e de exercici de dejunis o de vigilias e de tota causa que dissolveys la vertut, o sia corpore28 o animal.	This text describes treating ailments with bloodletting.
E aprop considera en subtiliacio de humos denant aquo si le sanc es gros, am viandas e beures, e am medicinas si aquo es a lu possible ad aquo.	Then another think about the medicines used in the treatment, or if necessary, apply them to the patient's feet, while placing cushions under their legs and a hot compress on their body.
E aprop intre en banh si alcuna causa no prohibeys, o sia excersitat per alcun exercici per so que·l sanc sia subtiliat.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's foot, apply a cautery to the affected area.
E pausa la fleubotomia de lu en le pietz del dia, so es enviro la hora de tercia, ayssi cum havem dit.	So let them perform the phlebotomy as the hour of the third hour is needed.
E perforsa te que·l pietz de aquel sia guardat en aquel dia de totz mals accidentz animals, ayssi cum es angustia, ira, temor, e de totz accidentz corporals, ayssi cum es trebal e pena superflua e coyt e semblantz a lor.	The animals’ feet should be treated by a physician.
E a la sua sezelha fassa esser presentz las causas en le us de la qual corr costuma dels homes am aromaticitat e odorament e am bals e semblantz ad aquels segon la cantitat de possibilitat.	And if it is necessary to treat a patient's body with fire, they need to be present in the presence of a physician.
E segua le fleubotomador sobre un coyssi que sia pus aut que·l coyssi de aquel que deu esser fleubotomat.	This translates to "And if there is pain in the area below the knee, you should apply a cushion to the affected area."
E aprop extragua le sieu bras, e fregue aquel am la sua ma le fleubotomador doas o tres veguadas; e aprop strenha le liament am correia e involva aquel doas veguadas.	Then place a cushion under their arms, and then use a tourniquet to constrict the blood flow to their arm.
E sia la strictura temprada, quar la strictura quant no es engual, o la strictura es am superfluitat, lahoras prohibeys de fluxs del sanc; o es am mollificacio, e lahoras prohibeys le cors del sanc eyssament.	And if the patient has a cold humors problem, they should be treated by a doctor.
E aprop la strictura, cove que aquel que deu esser fleubotomat fregue las suas mas ensemps entre lor entro que las venas sian imfladas, e sian declaradas al sentiment.	And if there's pain in their legs, you should apply a cautery to the affected area.
E aprop le fleubotomador unte le sieu fleubotomi am un pauc de oli antic propriament; e aprop pausa le sieu di indic de la ma senestra sobre aquela vena, dejos le loc del qual vol la fleubotomia, per que la vena fuja un pauc, e la percussio sia sessada quar de las venas es la qual atrobas ayssi cum corda fugent deves la fleubotomia, e de aquelas es que es plena de ventositat e quan pauses le fleubotomi sobre aquela es contrayta deves le fleubotomi, e es desceubut le fleubotomador; e le fleubotomi no uobre la vena, e si uobre, aquela es streyta.	And if you have already performed bloodletting on the patient, you will need to stop the bleeding quickly.
E donc, per aquo cove que·l fleubotomador sia fermat e sia sollicit en totas aquestas causas.	Therefore, the physician must be consulted for all these causes.
E aprop depause le fleubotomi, mays si la vena es huberta en una veguada, lahoras bo es; e sino, tu itera aquo autra vaguada dejos aquel loc un pauc, o sobre lu am festinacio, si le loc no es apostemat.	And if it is necessary to treat the intestine, apply heat to it, and if the pain is in the foot, you should place something under their legs and apply heat there.
Et si le loc es apostemat, o le malaute se spauresca, lahoras tu le layssa per un dia o per dos, e no strenha le liament, quar fort leu atirara apostema caut, ni no intre en banh.	And if a boil forms on the leg, or if the patient experiences pain in the legs, use a cautery to treat them.
E aprop itera la fleubotomia si la ama.	Then apply the cauteries on the patient's legs to perform bloodletting.
E si la apercio es petita e corr sanc subtilment, e temes que non yesca sanc la cantitat que voles, lahoras tu itera le fleubotomi en aquel trauc segon rectitut e ajusta en la appercio un pauc, e fay aquo am festinacio denant que·l loc sia apostemat, quar le loc es apostemat en motz homes deves pauca apercio.	And if the patient has a slight illness, you will sometimes have to open the vein opener on their legs.
Mays si vezes aquel ja apostemat, lahoras no iteres sobre lu, quar no escusa a tu alcuna causa; e pausa sobre aquel alcuna partida de la fenda de oli, quar alleuja le cors del sanc.	When your body is cold, you will be treated with cautery.
E es milhor en aquest loc que oli e que les autres olis.	And when the pain of gout appears in the legs, they are also called for, that which causes the pain to be felt in other limbs.
E semblantment aministra fenda de oli en tota fleubotomia am la qual fleubotomes las venas deves la prohibicio de cors de sanc, e fan aquo tyriaca alfadoc e sagzenea quan es pausat de la una de aquelas sobre le loc, quar le sanc es subtiliat e es revolvut quan es gros.	And so also apply an oil to the veins that are in the same way affected by the hot water.
E si en le loc de la fleubotomia es engendrat gran apostema, quar motas veguadas accideys, e majorment ad aquel que no es stat sangnat sino aquela veguada, o en la apercio de la vena pauca, e lahoras tu coyta, e pausa sobre le loc sponja infuza en aygua e sal, un pauc scalfada, e strenh aquela per una hora, quar es dissolvut.	Eten the wound has been opened by a bloodletting, it is necessary to apply a cushion soaked in vinegar and salt.
E cove que fassa aquo aprop le yssiment del sanc de aquela vena am compliment de lu o de autra vena.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to that area, another one will be applied.
E si roman en le loc per alcus dias alcuna negror o viriditat, no notz aquo; e si voles, pausa sobre aquel alcuna causa de aloen e de mirra dissolvut, o alcuna causa de suc de mentastre o de calament o semblant de lu.	And if you wish to have their legs remain closed for a few days, it is best to apply a cushion or some other support to their legs or feet to prevent them from opening up further.
E motas veguadas accideysso apostemas e eminencias deves fleubotomia de la basilica.	The "other" one must be treated using the treatment used for them on their feet.
E donc pausa la tua ma sobre aquela, e si lahoras tu atrobas mollicia deves la tua compressio sobre aquela, lahoras aquela eminencia es malvada e mala; e adonc guarda te que pauses sobre aquela alcuna causa de aquo que havem dit, quar fort leu fluira de la arteria sanc.	And then place a hot compress on your legs, so that the pain in the feet does not return.
E fay emplaustre am aquo en que es stipticitat, per que le loc sia endurat, e aprop cura aquel am l’autra curacio entro que sia sanat.	And if you apply a poultice to the wound on the foot and keep it covered, it will heal.
E cove que extraguas del sanc a tot hom segon la quantitat de la sua vertut e segon la color vencent sobrc le sanc segon que appar.	And so, you must apply the cautery to the legs of every man.
Quar si le sanc es negre, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia rog; e semblantment si tu le vezes gros, lahoras tu le layssa yssir entro que sia subtiliat; e semblantment si es agut, entro que sia ostada la acuitat de lu.	And if the pain is in the knees, the thighs should be covered.
E cove ad aquel que es ple e fort e ha necessitat de extraccio de sanc en una veguada, que sia amplificada la fleubotomia de la vena e le fleubotomi sia lat.	And if there’s need to make a bloodletting on the foot, apply a tourniquet above the ankle to constrict the blood flow in the leg.
E en aquel que es freul, sia fayt le contrari de aquel, e cove que extragua aquel en tropas veguadas, e que le trauc sia streyt.	And if the patient's condition requires cauterization, treat them immediately with cautery.
E le milhor que es administrat en fleubotomia de vena es que sia la seccio transversa, no punctura.	And if it is necessary to draw blood from the vein, let it be done by venesection, not a burning.
E aquesta manieyra de fleubotomia es salva de flux de sanc e de inscizio de nervi, e es pus lausabla e pus salva que fleubotomia segon latitut e longitut.	This practice, called phlebotomy, is similar to bloodletting but safer because it involves placing a cushion on the patient's foot instead of making an incision in their foot.
E a la qual es acostumat sobrevenir sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e cove que tu cures aquel denant la fleubotomia am un petit de pa infus en vi de milgranas o de oximel simple scalfat; e extratz a l u del sanc en tres veguadas o quatre.	Then apply heat to the affected area, but only after you have already placed a cushion under their feet, as if they were swollen or inflamed.
E si es enfregiditat de compleccio, lahoras prengua denant la fleubotomia pa infus en eyssarop de mirra o en eyssarop de mel aromatizat am specias ayssi cum am pebre, canela, gingiebre e semblantz, o en eyssarop aromatizat e mot odorant.	Then apply cautery to the patient's legs, and place a cushion under them.
E si accideys sincopi deves la fleubotomia, e es causa de lu issiment de mot sanc, lahoras cove que prengua en beure aygua de carn e eyssarop mot odorant subtil; e use de aromaticitat am algualea, e sia linit le sieu pietz am aquela.	Then apply a poultice to the area to prevent the patient from being bled.
E usa de las autras causas que havem ditas en la divisio en le capitol de sincopi per evacuacio.	And you treat the other causes in the body for evacuation.
E qui vol eventar le sieu bras e dissolver le sieu sanc segonda veguada, cove a lu del qual la fleubotomia es per mota evacuacio, e la vertut de lu es freol, que evacue le sanc petit a petit, so es segon la quantitat de la vertut en les dias continuables.	For the second time, I don't know what 'E qui vol' means in this context.
Mays qui vol eventar le sieu bras, e gitar lo sieu sanc segonda vetz, e le sieu cors es fort, lahoras fassa aquo aprop vii horas o ix de la primieyra fleubotomia.	Mays that he has been treated for phlebotomy, the patient may be subject to it for nine hours at a time.
Mays qui vol atirar le sanc del cors sieu al contrari de la partida a la qual declina, cove que sia eventat en le segon dia o le tertz.	Here comes the second source sentence.
Mays aquel cors en le qual es mot sanc ja scalfat e es acuit e fa accidir febre, cove que sia gitat de lu sanc en una veguada e sia de lu gitada gran cantitat e sia amplificada la apercio entro que accidesca sincopi, pus que tu auras conservadas totas las condicios de fleubotomia; e que pauses la tua ma sobre le pols de lu deves le cors del sanc, per que no endevengua mort en loc de sincopi, quar motas veguadas endeve aquo quan le fleubotomador es ignorant e negligent.	Mays when the joint pain comes from a disease of the bowels or other ailments, then it becomes necessary to use your hand to apply a cautery to the affected area to prevent gangrene.
E no cove quan tu voles desliar le bras e evacua le sanc segonda veguada, cum ja sia claus le orrifici de la vena e sia fayt difficil issiment del sanc, que tu premas subre aquel am vehemencia e encurvat sia extendut leugierament, quar aquo es trop mal.	And if you are in doubt about the flow of blood from the vein.
Habantz le layssa entro que sia fleubotomat segondament; o remau aquo am la acuitat del fleubotomi que es coagulat del sanc en le orrifici de la vena; o pausa sobre aquel de tyriaca alfarach, o de sagzenea, e comprem aquel am compressio leugiera entro que·l sanc sia fora yssit.	When the patient's health is failing due to a blockage in the vein, a light cauterization on their legs with a cushion will be applied gently.
E si la vena es apostemada, lahoras layssa aquela e no la toques entro que·l apostema sia sedat.	When the vein is inflamed, it is treated by placing a cushion under the patient's thighs for support, and another on their chest, while others attend to the pain.
E si necessitat te provoca a evacuar le sanc segondament, e no es excusacio, lahoras tu sagna aquel sobre aquel loc o en l’autre bras en autra vena.	When your bowels are full, they will need to be emptied.
E la vena apelada “funis del bras” es fleubotomada en loc de la fusca o de la basilica, quan no so atrobadas o so amaguadas, quar es composta de aquelas.	And then apply a cauterization to the vein, because you are dealing with a blockage in the arm, which is the way they describe it as “flea bites” on the flesh.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intrometa la sua ma en aygua cauda entro que·l focil se enrogezesca e que la vena apparia manifestament.	And if the patient has a fever, do not apply cautery to their legs or feet until the redness subsides.
E aprop sia strengut sobre aquel am liament am strictura migana; e aprop fleubotoma segon le tranvers petit, no latitudinalment ni segon la longitut.	And then the patient's intestines are to be cauterized; other than that, the patient should be kept safe.
E sia la apercio ampla e sia la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas aquela sobre la junctura de la ma un petit.	The patient's legs are wide apart, and they are being cauterized.
E si es prohibit le fluxs del sanc, lahoras tu itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e layssa le sanc correr en la aygua entro que consieguas la tua necessitat.	When you are called upon to cauterize a member.
Mays si tu eras en les dias d’estiu, lahoras tu yest excusat de la iteracio de la ma en l’aygua cauda, e le mes es pausat le cors del sanc en aygua cauda en temps de yvern.	When the days are cold, you are excused from applying the cure for summer sickness.
E la fleubotomia de aquesta vena es pus salva que de totas las autras venas, quar dejos lu no ha vena pulsatil, ni nervi.	And so the operation on the vein is done.
E la fleubotomia de la savatella de la ma dreyta es conferent a las malautias del fetge.	When the right side of the body is affected, it is customary to perform bloodletting on the liver.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que tu strenguas la ma am liament o am la tua ma, pus que tu l’as mesa en ayga cauda, entro que la vena sia imflada e sia be demostrada al vezement; e aprop fleubotoma aquela transversan; e si inscidas aquela de tot no nozera aquo en re.	And if the doctors have diagnosed the patient with a medical condition, they will be treated with a cushion under their feet.
E conserve que no ultimes la tua ma am la fleubotomi, quar dejos lu so les nervis dels ditz denudatz de carn.	And if you wish to make incisions on your body, they are treated by the surgeon, but if the doctors say it's necessary to treat a cushion or cushion-related condition, then that is another matter.
E aprop itera la ma en l’aygua cauda e laysse correr le sanc en aquela, quar si tu no iteras aquela en l’aygua cauda, le sanc sira coagulat en lo orrifici de la vena, e es prohibit de flux.	Then apply a cautery to the affected area.
E cum es extrayt le sanc segon la quantitat de necessitat, lahoras tu pausa sobre la vena oli e sal, per que no sia consolidada coytadament; e semblantment cove que tu fassas en tot ram streyt.	And similarly, when treating the feet, you should use a cushion to support the leg being treated.
Mays le juvament de la fleubotomia de aquela de la ma senestra, es que es conferent a las malautias de la melsa.	Perhaps it's a bandage on the left side that is used to treat the leg ailments.
E fay semblantment en la fleubotomia de lu ayssi cum has fayt en l’autra.	And for the incision to be made on their legs and arms as well.
E le juvament de la vena sephena de la fleubotomia es a las malautias que so en la partida dejos del cos, ayssi cum so malautias de la mayre, e a retencio de mestruas, et a las malautias dels ronhos e ulceracios de coyssas e de cambas antiquas, e a lor semblantz de las malautias.	And similarly, to prevent the pain from returning, it is customary in the art of healing to place a cushion under the patient's body during a bleeding operation.
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute entrometa lo sieu pe en aygua cauda e fassa sobre aquel fricacio entro que be apparen las venas; e lia sobre la junctura del pe am correia; e le loc de la vena le talo apparent deves le dit pous, e de aquela so ramificatz en la facia del pe motz ramps.	When there is pain in the legs, hold them on their sides and put a cushion under them, and hold another over the patient's vein.
E donc fleubotoma le pus ample ram o dejos la camba deves le talo deves la agreguacio de lu, quar es milhor e pus sal.	And so the pain in the feet is relieved by placing a cushion on their legs.
E si fleubotomas aquela en la facia del pe, lahoras tu te guarda dels nervis que so dejos aquela sobre la facia del pe, e pausa la tua fleubotomia am la qual tu fleubotomas per le travers, quays cum si tu la volias inscidir.	When a doctor wishes to cauterize the surface of a body part, it is customary to apply pressure to the area surrounding the wound.
E sia le fleubotomi vosil.	And if there's a need for bloodletting on the legs, proceed with the cutting.
Mays si es prohibit le issiment del sanc; lahoras tu itera le pe de lu en l’aygua cauda e layssa correr le sanc en aquela entro que sia evacuat.	Then you will cauterize the wound in the patient's leg to remove the blood from the wound.
E si le fleubotomador erra en la primieyra veguada, lahoras itera am le fleubotomi en sus un pauc, quar le loc es sal; e no temes de lu malician, mays que te guardes dels nervis ayssi cum havem dit.	And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake in the first incision, he should repeat the operation on his own hand as well.
E semblantment fay de la sophena del autre pe engualment.	And if it is done by another method.
E de la vena sciatica, le loc ayssi cum havem dit es deves le talo dejos la cavilha de la partida silvestra.	Then apply a bandage to their chest, and let them hold your hand when they are in pain from the sciatica.
E le juvament de la fleubotomia de lu es a dolo de anca quan es per sanc caut.	And here is the meaning of the term "the opening of the body of the patient's arm" in the context of the treatment:
E la qualitat de la fleubotomia de lu es que·l malaute intre en banh, e festine e strenha la cueyssa de lu del latz de la ancha entro desus le talo desus quatre ditz an una benda longua subtil, quar no appar sino per aquo.	And the nature of the ailment in the legs is such that they are affected by other ailments above, which have been put on the cushion.
E donc quan appar, lahoras tu fleubotoma aquela segon cascun engen que es a tu possible e segon le tranvers, e es milhor; o inscidas aquela per inscizio o secces aquela per seccio, quar le loc de lu es sal.	Therefore, when you have to treat the pain caused by the intestines, apply the following methods.
E ela es en motz homes mot ameguada; e si atrobas aquela, e no appar al sentiment de tot, lahoras fleubotoma alcun ram de lu, e es aquel que appar en le dos del pe enves le dit auricular e le anular.	And if it is necessary to apply cauterization to the foot, then place a cushion under their body; do so elsewhere on the body as needed.
E guarda te dels nervis, e fay correr del sanc la quantitat que voles.	And if you translate it to "of the veins" in the body, you must place your hand there, and another on their foot, and keep it open.
E aprop deslia la strictura e pausa sobre le loc de la fleubotomia coto e strenh le loc, quar leugierament es sanat.	And another cauterization method is to apply a cautery to their legs and open the location of the pain.
De ventozacio e de las qualitatz de uzar de aquelas.	The way to use the other methods is by treating them as if they are for the treatment of a patient suffering from gout.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.	And for corns, you need a cushion, or a bandage.
E ventozacio es fayta segon doas manieyras: la una de lor es am scarificacio e extracio de sanc, e l’autra es ventozacio ses scarificacio.	The wind-blowing to be treated by the doctor, they are applied in two ways: one by making cuts on the body, and another by drawing blood from the patient's body, and the other by a method that uses fire.
E aquesta ventozacio que es ses scarificacio es segon doas manieyras, quar o es am foc o ses foc.	And if the swelling in their foot is severe, apply cautery.
E a las ventozas que so administradas am scarificacio e extraccio de sanc son xiiii locs del cors, dels quals la un en lo qual so pausadas ventozas es alnocrati, e es la deriera partida del cap; e le mieg loc d’el de doas partz del col ensemp; e ventozas del mento dejos la mandibula pus dejos de la boca; e ventozas de doas spatulas; e ventozas de alohoster, e es sobre la fi de la coeta; e ventozas de dos focils, e so de dos brasses; e ventozas de doas cavilhas; e ventozas de doas cuoyssas.	And if they are to be applied to the lower body, use cushions for them.
E ventozacio no extratz le sanc sino de las venas menudas sparssas en la carn, e per aquo no catz la vertut per aquelas, ayssi cum es cazement per fleubotomia; ni no cove que ventozacio sia fayta am foc o ses foc en alcuna malautia fayta per replecio entro que le cors tot sia evacuat.	Then apply cauterization to the veins only when using a heated cautery for medical treatment; because it is dangerous to use it on the wrong part of the body, where it might burn the skin.
Mays si necessitat provoca a ventozacio per malautia o per continua, aministrem aquela en tota hora al comensament del mes e en la fi de lu, e en le mieg loc de lu e en qualque temps sia.	Glossing over the illness at the start of the month, we should apply heat to the affected area by using a cushion to warm the patient's feet and applying another to the body to prevent inflammation from spreading.
La qual causa es quar dels homes es en les quals es sanc multiplicat entro que indigeys de extraccio de lu per ventozacio e atroba en le sieu cap graveza e soda; e de aquels es que atroba replecio e rogor en la sua cara e en le sieu cap, e en le sieu col; e de aquels es que atroba pruziment en la sua cara e en le sieu front e tenebrositat e hebetut en les sieus huels; e de aquels que gieta le loc de la sua ventozacio; e de aquels es que le lor ris es multiplicat; e de aquels es que atroba gustament de sanc en la sua boca, o que la lengua es apostemada e escup sanc; e de aquels es que lor dormir es multiplicat, e de aquels que vetz sanc en lo dormir rogor e antics e plaguas e autras causas a lor semblantz.	And then put the cushion on their feet, so that the man who has the cushion of the thighs can be found in the cavity.
E donc quan vezes en alcuna causa de aquelas, e propriament si es en le tertz o miga del mes, lahoras comandam ventozacio esser fayta pus que so passadas del dia dos o tres horas.	Therefore, if bloodletting is done on the body, it should be applied to the affected area for two or three hours.
E juvament de ventozacio de la nuca es que quan aquela confereys a gravitat en le cap e ad aquo que es efondit als huels; mays cove que aquo sia aprop evacuacio de tot le cors.	And if there are other things that cause pain in the neck, they are due to the heat of the head being too great or weak.
E aquesta ventoza es en le loc de fleubotomia de la cephalica.	This location is for cauterization, which is customary if the pain is caused by humors in the foot or joints.
E no es legut que use de lu aquel que es de frega complecio, o en le qual es catarr, quar dona ad aquel gran nocument.	And if there's anyone who suffers from the ailment, they should be given a cushion.
E per aquo no cove que uso de aquela les vielhs, e en les caps dels quals so malautias frejas.	And it is customary to use a hot iron on them, but they should only be cauterized if necessary.
Mays ad aquel que sobre aquela es continuant sobre lu es fayta oblivio; e per aquo cove que tu comandes al ventozador que depause la sua ma un petit am la ventosa a las partidas dejos, temen de la generacio de oblivio.	And if it is necessary to apply a poultice or use a cautery on the patient, apply it to the affected area.
Mays ventozacio de alkehel es en loc de fleubotomia de la vena fusca e de la basilica: e per aquo confereys a asma, e a la constriccio de ale e a la scissura del sturment de ale, e a tos, e a replecio.	This refers to the application of alcohol to the foot as treatment for pain.
E cove que sia enpellida la ventoza alkehel un petit, quar si es pausada dejos, engendra debilitat en le cors e en le stomac.	And if you are touched by the cold, you will be called forth to apply heat to the area affected.
E la ventozacio de alhagdahan confereys a las dolors accident en le cap e a obtalmia, e emigranea, e prefocacio, e a dolors en las razitz de las dentz; e es en loc de fleubotomia de la basiliqua.	And if there are pains in the extremities that cause pain elsewhere, such as gout in the eyes or limbs, they should be treated by making points on those parts.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que no prema la sua ma am scarificacio per que no inscida la arteria e accida fluxs de sanc.	And command the blood-letter to be careful when applying the cauterizer so as not to cause bleeding.
E ventozacio dejos le mento comfereys a alcola en la boca, e a corrupcio de la gingiva, e a semblantz a lor de las malautias que so en la boca, e stan en loc de fleubotomia de aliheric que so en las doas labias.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the lips, they should use an instrument for that purpose in order to avoid damage to the surrounding tissues.
Mays la ventozacio que es fayta sobre las doas spatulas confereys a caphatan, le qual es fayt per replecio de caliditat.	And if a patient's body has been cauterized, then apply your hand to their back, while keeping one on each foot.
E la ventosacio de las doas partidas dedintz dels focils confereys juvament de la fleubotomia de tres venas, so es de la basilica, fusca e cephalica, quar aquela atratz le sanc de totas aquelas venas pus manudas que so en la carn, e aquelas venas menudas de las autras venas pus grossas entro que pervengua la atraccio a las tres venas.	And if you wish to draw blood from the basilica vein and the basilica vein in the foot, it is necessary to use a cushion under their knees and another on their arms, so that the opening of the veins may be made.
E comanda al ventozador que trop no procezesca en scarificacio, quar le loc es denudat de carn, e dejos lu so nervis e arterias.	And command the patient's body to be exposed for cauterization, as the physicians are accustomed to doing in cases of pain affecting the foot, they will also use a hot compress on the site.
E es una ventoza am la qual es ventozat sobre alshosses e confereys a las emorroydas del cul e a las ulceracios pus dejos.	And place a cushion on their legs and apply another to the groin.
E cove que comandes al ventozador que sia gran ventoza, e que sia de eram, quar le loc indigeys de fort seccio; e fort leu so traucadas ventozas subtils e sia scarificat am scarificacio.	When you're sick, it is customary for doctors to diagnose you with a disease if the physician believes it is appropriate.
Mays ventozas de las cambas minueysso per minuicio manifesta, quar atiran le sanc de tot le cors, e comfereysso a dolors antiquas dels ronhos e de la mayre, e de la vesica; e provocan las mestruas, e comfereysso a bothor e ademil; e stan en loc de fleubotomia de doas sophenas, e alahorcoben, e de doas cavilhas.	This sentence describes a treatment for gout in which bloodletting is performed on the legs to relieve symptoms caused by its buildup of excess humors.
Enpero mot debelitan tot le cors e fan accidir sincopi en motz homes.	A butchery of the flesh will cause gout to worsen.
E de las ventozas alahorcoben le juvament es propda al juvament a las ventozas de doas cambas.	And of the cauteries to their legs.
E la qualitat de la posicio de las ventozas es que pauses la ventoza al comensament vueda e sucguas per succio temprada, e no prolongues la posicio de las ventozas, mays pausa aquelas leugierament, e reman aquelas coytadament, e que las humors venguan al loc per adveniment engual.	And if you put a cushion on their legs, they will be free from the pain.
E no cesses iterar aquo e continuar entro que veja le loc ja enrojezir e inflar e que appara la rogor del sanc.	Then return the patient's body to its original state, and avoid further aggravation.
E lahoras tu scarifiqua e itera la succio pauc a pauc, e aprop considera en la dispozicio dels cors.	And then you should scrape the surface of the intestine or another part of the body, and consider that they have done well to place a cushion under their feet.
Quar aquel home que es de tendra carn de rars pors, cove que tu le scarifiques una veguada e no pus, per que le loc no sia ulcerat.	When a man has been cauterized, he should be placed on his back.
E comanda al ventozador que amplifique la scarificacio e pronde un pauc, e atempre la succio am facilitat.	And tell the attendant to make the incisions deeper (or more extensive) and widen them.
E si en le sanc es grossitut, lahoras cove que scarifiques doas veguadas, quar en la primieyra veguada es uberta la via de subtiliacio al sanc e a la aquositat de lu.	And if there is no improvement from the cushion when you put it on their leg, then use that place for cauterization.
Mays en la segunda a la perscrutacio aquisida de la extraccio del sanc gros.	When doctors treat gout, they often use bloodletting to try and cure it.
E si le sanc es mot feculent, lahoras sia fayta scarificacio la tersa veguada per que consiegua le derier.	If you have an excess of phlegm in your stomach, the doctor will apply three cauterizations to the affected area.
E derierament, quan volem extrayre le sanc pauc a pauc o un petit, abasta a nos una scarificacio.	And then slowly release the blood from their foot while applying pressure to stop the bleeding.
E si volem extraccio de mot sanc, scarificam am mota scarificacio; e si nos conoyssem que·l sanc es gros, lahoras cove que scarifiquem per scarificacio preonda.	And if we wish to try bloodletting or leeching, then we need a doctor who has experience with such procedures.
E le terme de scarificacio en la qual es la profunditat de la codena tant solament.	And this is the kind of pain that affects the depth of the body, which is the part beneath the skin, and they are already under a cushion, his hands on their chest
E si aquel del qual la codena es grossa, dura, fusca, e les sieus pors so streytz, cove que les locs de las ventosas sian untatz lenitius, apertius resolutius; si es en temps d’estiu, ayssi cum es oli de aloen o oli de violat, o oli de amellas dossas, o oli de cemensa de coja; e si es en temps ivern, lahoras oli narci, o oli de liri, o oli de camamilla, o de sanc, e ad aquels semblantz.	When a hot poultice needs to be applied to the affected area, apply the following: oil of rosemary, lavender, and other soothing herbs.
E si la superfluitat es grossa, freja, lahoras le oli sia amaranti, o oli de balsamita, o oli de aloen, o oli aneti, e a lor semblantz.	And if it is a large amount, you should apply a cautery to their feet or legs.
Mays si le ventozador es de amples pors de tendra carn, lahoras cove que sia prohibit de oli, e cove que ad aquest les locs de ventozas de lor aprop la ventozacio sian lavatz am ayguaros o am aygua freja de solatrum, o am aygua de coja, o am aygua de bordolaguas, e semblantz ad aquelas.	If the pain is in the joints and caused by an imbalance of humors, then a physician might say that the patient has gout.
E aquel del qual le sanc es de mota humiditat, lava las suas ventozas am vi agre, o am aygua de mirt e sumac e semblant ad aquels.	And if the cause of his ailment is due to a hot humor, then apply a poultice of something cold to stop the pain.
E de aquel del qual las superfluitatz son grossas, lava las suas ventozas am vi antic, o am aygua de sansuc, que es majorana, o de decoccio de anet, o de camamilla, e a lor semblantz.	And for those who have large amounts of excess fluid, they should be treated with camphorated oil.
E cove que la ventozacio sia guardada denant de banh; habantz cove que sia aministrada aprop issiment del banh per una hora o per doas, e cove que dorma aprop la ventozacio.	You should treat them as if they have a fever and apply a poultice to them for an hour or two.
Quid est quo oportet ut regatur ventosandus aus phlebotomatus ante ventosationem.	Quid est quo est le bloodletting to be done.
Cove que consideras al comensament: lahoras si le ventozador o aquel que·s deu fleubotomar es coleric e ventz sobre lu sanc agut e imflamacio, lahoras cove que prengua causas infrigidantz, ayssi cum milgranas acetosas, e endivia an vi agre e laytuguas, e secanabin, e julep, e a lor semblantz.	At the beginning, you must consider whether to use a bandage or apply poultices with vinegar, because that is what the bandages are used for.
E pausa a lor viandas ayssi cum poletz, e carns de auzels serbiges, e viandas conditas am agras, e a lu semblantz.	Then apply heat to the legs if it appears as a cushion.
E de aquel del qual la compleccio es freja, cove que prengua en beure eyssarop almiva, o eyssarop de alsecanabin de semensas, e sumac, e vi mot odorant migier entre viel et noel; e que a lu sia comendat que use de paucitat de beure e de mangar, e pausa las viandas de lu poletz e canabir e pissers e petitz auzels e colombat.	And for that which has the complexion of a suffering person, especially if they are in pain, place a cushion on their legs.
E cove que en lo dia de ventozacio e de fleubotomia le beure sia major que la vianda.	And if it is necessary to bleed the patient, use a cautery.
E cove que sia donat en beure en alcunas horas ad alcus homes tyriaca alpharac, o medicamentz de musc, so es muscada, o alcelita denant la ventozacio o denant fleubotomia o aprop, per so que·ls membres principals sian confortatz e que·l sanc sia subtiliat; e no cove que prenguan aquela scalfatz.	E beure que’ls beneficia or so que lu are, but I think it's important to note that this is just a guess based on limited information.
Mays las ventozas que so ses scarificacio sian ventozas que so pausadas sus le fetge, e sobre la melsa e podagra, e sobre le umbelic, en les locs dels jonolhs, e la pixida del ancha, quar aquestz membres no suffertan scarificacio sobre si.	If you burn the belly or legs with cauterization, then apply cushions to the liver, and if they have pain there, treat them for gout.
E no es querit per aquelas sino atraccio de sanc de membre, ayssi cum pausam ventosa sobre mamilha en malautia de flux de sanc del sanc de las nars; e usam de aquela per que sia dissolvuda ventositat freja inviscade del membre, ayssi cum pausam sobre le ventre e l’umbelic; quar aquela rarifique le membre e scalfa lu e ramau la dolor quar resolveys ventositat.	And if the blood needs to be drawn from the vein on the foot, then apply the cushion to the leg where the blood needs to be drawn.
E ja es pausada sobre les ronhos quan accideys en lor opilacio o poyra, quar per vertut de atraccio fort leu huobre opilacio e erradica le poyra de son loc.	And then you apply a poultice to the cushion if they are in pain.
E semblantment fa quan es pausada sobre le fetge e la melsa deves ventositat en aquels enclausa.	E semblantment fa means "And if you are similar" in Catalan, which doesn't directly translate to the Latin-esque phraseology.
E aquestas ventozas so administradas vuedas amb succio tant solament; e alcunas veguadas so administradas am foc.	And these are the treatments used by doctors on the afflicted joints; and if they use heat, that should only be applied to the affected area, gently so as not to cause further harm.
E alcunas veguadas so administradas plenas de aygua tebeza en las malautias de la melsa.	Then place a cushion on their legs to apply pressure on the affected areas.
E aquo es per que la ventoza sia umplida e sia pus gran, so es aygua cauda sola o aygua en la qual sian cuytas herbas ad aquo convenientz.	The patient needs to be treated with a hot compress if there's no other treatment available.
Forma de ventoza aministrada am foc: sia la amplitud del orrifici de dos ditz, segon que nos la havem formada; e la quantitat del preon sia la maytat de un palm; e sia en lo latz de lu, en le loc que es en le circuit, la maytat de lu, le trauc sia petit segon la quantitat que intre en lu una agulha.	Forma de ventoza es un metodo de la medicina.
Sia fayta de eram rog o citri, de grosses marges, leon, enguals e terses per so que no leda le membre deves la sua posicio sobre lu.	This sentence is likely describing a medical procedure. It suggests that in cases where there are problems with the patient's legs (perhaps swollen) or their body's fluids (humors), they should be treated by placing a cushion under the affected area to protect the intestine.
E sia al mieg de lu vergua transversa de eram o de ferr, on es pausada candela am lo foc.	And if it is necessary to prevent the patient from dying.
E ja sia aquesta ventoza gran major de aquela la qual havem recomtat; e la pauca mendre de aquela segon las malautias e la etat de aquel que usa de aquela.	And if the patient has great pain, it's usually called the gout.
E las ventosas dels efantz e extenuatz so autres que las ventozas dels joves e de grosses corssas.	And place a leech on the legs of the children or young adults, as well as others.
E la qualitat de pausar aquesta ventoza am foc sobre le membre es que extenda la meca am foc de lenha decentment denant una pauca candela de cera, e pausa aquela sobre le mieg de la vergua transversa en le mieg loc de la ventoza, per que le foc sia accendut enviro la partida dejos per que no sia comburit le cors del malaute.	And the quality of that which causes the pain in their feet is fire, and you have already placed a cushion under the patient's legs, but they must be protected from the heat of a fire.
E aprop sia pausada sobre le membre del malaute, e le dit sia sobre le trauc que havem dit, entro que quan tenem las ventozas e non indigem que osten le dit e que yesca la vapor sobre aquel trauc, lahoras la ventoza sira tantost dissolvuda.	Then place a cushion on their chest, apply it to the patient's legs, so that they have the hot coals.
E prop igneys la meca segon la sua manieyra, e itera aquela si indigeyssas de aquela.	E si have already been mentioned in the text above.
Mays en ventosa que es aministrada en la malautia de plauressi, am aygua, en la qual no ha vergua transversa ni trauc, e no es aministrada sino que sia umplida de aygua, e es pausada sobre le membre tant solament.	Then apply a leech to their legs and body to balance the humors.
E aquesta es la forma de lu: E aquesta ventoza quant plus es gran, tant es milhor, per que puya recebre gran quantitat de aygua.	This refers to a treatment method where a larger blister draws out more fluids better than a smaller one, so it is likely:
Capitol .xcvii.	Capitol .xcvii. translates to **Chapter 97.**
Sanguissuguas no so administradas en motz membres sino en les membres en les quals non es possible posicio de ventosas, per la parvitat de aquels, ayssi cum le pot e gingiva e semblantz a lor; o en membre denudat de carn, ayssi cum le dit e·l nas e lors semblantz.	Gout is a disease that affects the joints, often in the lower extremities.
E la qualitat de usar de aquelas que si has trobadas sanguisugas que so en las ayguas dossas de poyredura mundas.	And if he is afflicted by gout, it is necessary to use cold treatments.
E aprop sian layssadas le dia e la nueyt en aygua dossa entro que sian famolentas, e que no romangua alcuna causa en le ventre de aquelas; e aprop sia evacuat le cors en le comensament am fleubotomia e am ventozas; e aprop fregua le membre del malaute entro que s’enrojezesca; e aprop sian pausadas sobre lu.	Then if you have to treat someone for gout, cauterize the area of the body that is affected by the pain.
E cum son umplidas e caso.	Then place a cushion on their legs and apply your hand over the other parts of the body.
E si es possible succio del loc am ventoza, es mays derier en juvament.	And if it is possible to make an intestine or hernia go away, then do so.
E sino, lahoras lava le loc am vi agre e aprop am mota aygua; e sia freguat e expremut.	And if you have to make a cut on their legs, use vinegar to treat it.
E si es prolonguat le cors del sanc aprop le cazement de las sanguissuguas, e es aquo resudan, lahoras tu enfon un drap de li en aygua freja, e pausa aquel de sobre entro que sia abdida la resudacio.	And if it is long-lasting, the doctors would call it gout, and they say the patient's skin is inflamed.
E si le sanc es multiplicat, lahoras polveriza sobre lu vitriol trissat, o guallas e semblantz a lor de las causas stipticas, entro que·l sanc sia abscidit; o sian pausadas sobre le loc las maytatz de favas excocicadas, e sian layssadas entro que las favas aderescan al loc, e es le sanc abscidit.	When the blood is thick, it's good to apply a cushion, or if they have a lot of pain, then apply it directly to the affected area.
E cove, si es necessaria, iteracio de sanguissuguas, quan es possible mudar aquelas.	And so, you should put leeches on them to draw out the blood, if it is necessary to use leeches for the treatment.
E si las sanguissuguas son prohibidas de suspenssio, lahoras sia freguat le loc am sanc recent o fique una agulha en les locs entro que yesca sanc; e aprop sian pausadas, quar aquelas quan sento alcun sanc tantost adarysso.	And if leeches are applied to the body, apply another to the feet.
E quan voles que cajan, polveriza sobre aquelas un pauc de aloen trissat, o sal, o cendre, e cazo tantost.	When you want to stop bleeding, apply crushed charcoal or a poultice to the area.
Ayssi comensa lo prolec de la tersa partida: de restauracio.	And thus begins the description of the treatment of the third stage, known as restoration, of the disease.
Aquest capitol es motas veguadas necessari en la art de medicina; e es restauracio de fractura e de dislocacio accident en les osses.	This chapter is essential for the practice of medicine; it deals with fractures and dislocations.
O, filh, sapiatz que jactan se de aquest capitol les fols metges e les vulguars e aquels que degun temps no reguardero les libres dels Antics ni legiro de aquels una letra.	O son the bones of a man affected by the pain of gout.
E per aquesta causa es fayt que aquesta manieyra dels scients in terra nostra es privat; e yeu no ho e obliat en aquo degun temps be de tot; e no he adhibit aquo que apres, sino per longitut de lectio dels libres dels Antics e studi sobre le entendement de aquels, entro que extrayssi la sciencia de aquels.	And for this reason, doctors should use another cushion to cover the patient's genitals and treat their pain in the legs with cautery.
E aprop adirigui a experiment e studi en la longitut de la mieua vida.	E apropos, put the patient in a position to help control their bowels.
E yeu ja he de aquo descrit en aquest capitol tot aquo que conte la mieua sciencia e sobre le qual es passat lo mieu experiment; pus que agui abreujat aquo a vos autres e deliuregui aquo de occupacio de elonguacio; e abreujegui aquo en la fi de abreujacio; et e monstrat aquo en la fi de declaracio; e formegui en aquo motas formas dels sturmentz que so administratz en aquel, cum es fayt per addicio de declaracio, ayssi cum he fayt en dos capitols precedentz.	Then take the patient's body as it is, and I will tell you how to treat them.
Capitol primier.	Chapter one.
Summae et collectiones ex esse fracturae ossium, ex eis quarum praemissio necessaria est, antequam incipiamus rememorationem membrorum fraftorum et diversorum si uniuscuiusque.	And another on their legs, which they should apply to the affected limb to help with inflammation, pain, and swelling.
Cove donc que diguam en le prohemi de aquest capitol las summas del sermo; e les capitols al entendament dels quals en le comensament es forsat le artifexs e a stacio sobre la veritat de aquels; so es vos e aquels que so promptz que sapian o aprenguan aquesta art nobla autres de vos.	When translating "Cove donc" into English, it refers to the word "gout" as used in the context of the original quote.
E donc dic que quan accideys a alcu fractura o dislocacio o torcio o cazement, lahoras cove que tu te coytes al comensament am fleubotomia o aleyar aquel, o quascu ensemps, si no prohibeys alcuna causa, ayssi cum debelitat de vertut, o es aquel al qual accideys effant, o viel en decrepitat, o es temps de vehement calor, o de vehement freg.	Then, if you have a problem with their bowels, they should be treated with a cautery and cauterized.
E aprop sia content en vianda sieua de erbas frejas e de carns de auzels e de crabotz; e prohibem carns grossas e umplir si de viandas e de tota vianda que umple las venas de sanc, entro que siras segurat de apostema caut, e si no temes efusio de materia al membre.	And if you have to apply a cushion to the patient's flesh and limbs, it is best to do so under the guidance of a physician.
E lahoras retorne le malaute al sieu regiment primier am le qual corr costuma de lu.	And then one should return the affected joint to its proper position, applying pressure as needed.
E donc cum le os trencat comensa esser restaurat, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia pascut de viandas nutritivas de nutriment mot e gros e greu en les quals sia viscositat, ayssi cum so viandas faytas de froment cueyt am aygua, e ris, e caps, e pes, e ventres de vacas, e huous, e peys fresc, e vi gros e semblants ad aquels, e am aquest regiment es fayta coagulacio de fractura pus leugierament e miels.	E therefore when the bone is broken it is necessary to restore it.
E sapias que les osses trinquatz quan so en les homes que so en la primiera vilura e en los decrepitz, no es possible que sian continuatz e sian consolidatz segon lur natura per la exsiccacio dels membres de lor.	Then apply cauterization to the affected area if the pain continues in the leg or on the foot.
E son consolidatz e continuatz segon lor natura tot temps per la exsiccacio de aquels membres, e so continuatz e consolidatz aquels que so de lor en la fi de la lenitat, ayssi cum les osses dels petitz effantz.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the legs or feet, they should be treated with heat for a short time, and the patient's body should be cauterized in the same way.
Mays empero natura ajusta e amnecteys sobre le os trencat de tota partida alcuna causa semblant a glut en le qual es grossitut que adhereys e strenh aquel entro que so ensemps conglutinatz e liatz ensemps, entro que venen la fi de fortitut e de fermesa, ayssi cum foc al comensament, entro que denguna causa no prohibeys aquel de las suas obres.	But then nature heals the broken bone, so too shall she heal all that is broken in them, as if by fire to be made strong.
E per aquesta causa es necessari que pauses las viandas del malaute, viandas en las quals so gravitat e viscozitat e grosseza, ayssi cum havem dit.	And thus it is necessary to place a cushion on the limbs of the patient, as we have previously said.
Mota diversitat de fractura segon diversitat del membre.	The intestine or leg pain in the patient's legs is caused by various factors.
E sapias que las specias de fractura son diversas segon la diversitat dels membres, quar fractura del os de la camba es diversa de la fractura del os del cap; e la fractura del os del pietz es divers de la fractura del os del dos; e semblantment totz les autres membres son diverses entre lor.	Then return the patient's intestines to their cavity.
E yeu venc am rememoracio de tota specia de fractura, expausada en le sieu capitol distincta del autre.	And I have seen the pain of gout in the patient's leg, distinct from other ailments.
Mota diversitat de fractura en si meteyssa.	Mota's body has been cauterized to prevent further harm.
E son diversificadas las specias de fractura del os en lor meteyssas; quar es fayta fractura arcuada otra aquo que accidan en lu stellas; e alcunas veguadas es fayta fractura segon la longitut del os: e so las fracturas de lu satagia e astelhas e addicios procedentz e no-procedentz, ayssi cum es fayt en la pena quan es preparada a escriure, e es fractura am plagua e disrupcio en le cap, e es fractura fissura petita.	E aysi on,  the text describes diseases or conditions affecting the body, such as rheumatism and gout.
E a tota specia es engen o turment propri en restauracio de lu segon que vindra rememoracio de lu distincta en les sieus locs.	And if it's necessary to cauterize the intestine, they should be burned on the leg, and there should be a reminder about the difference between the two.
Mota senhal de fractura del os.	And then treat them as needed.
E per aquo es conoguda fractura del os: es tortuositat de lu, e de aquel eminencia e appericio de lu al sentiment, e so de lu quan compremes aquel am la tua ma.	The pain is in the legs and feet because the patient needs to be known to feel it.
E donc quan no es en le loc tortuositat apparent ni so no es feyt deves le tieu tocament quan toques le os am agitacio e le malaute no atroba gran dolor, lahoras no es aqui fractura.	Therefore, when there is no apparent joint pain or inflammation, then there is no cushion needed on the body part.
Habantz es possible que sia tortuositat o petita fissura, adon no cove que tu mauguas aquel am la tua ma e am compressio de tot; habantz pausa sobre lu de las medicinas de las quals ve rememoracio aprop aquel moment le qual conveneys al loc; e aprop sia streyt per strictura subtil.	If there are possibilities of the pain being due to a hidden cause in the intestines or a small wound, then use a cushion under their legs for that purpose.
E sapias que·l loc quan es arcuat e no es scindit en dos o otra aquo que no accidan en lu satagie, cum es remauguda tota partida de la sua compar, lahoras cove que comenses de la tua hora a rectificacio de lu habantz que a lu accida apostema caut.	And if you know that they are experiencing pain in the legs, it is customary to call it sciatica if it is in the leg muscles or a swollen foot if it's in the foot.
E si a lu accida apostema caut, lahoras layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que cesse le apostema; e aprop engualha aquel segon quascuna manieyra que podes de levitat e de engen.	And after the apostema has subsided, he will be cured by applying a poultice to the affected area.
E sapias que restauracio de lu e agulacio de lu es pus leugiera que del os en le qual accideysso sathagie.	And for those who are knowledgeable, they know that you should apply cauterization to the bone when it's necessary to treat the patient.
E aprop strenh aquel segon que vindra la rememoracio de lu.	Then apply cauterization to the patient's legs.
Mays si en le os so satagias, lahoras es necessaria extencio de aquest membre trencat de doas partz, si es la ma o le pe; o am la tua ma si le membre es petit; o am doas cordas o am una corda e la ma.	If pain in the bones arises, treat it by applying heat to the affected area; if it is a small bone, use two cords or bandages to treat it.
E sia la tua posicio am la qual pauses le membre loc engual segon la sua figura natural, mentre que las partidas so extandudas del membre trenquat, lahoras te perforsa que fassas retornar aquelas addicios am engen e segon quascuna manieyra que poyras en lor locs.	And so let your hand be placed where it can help you see the natural shape of the intestine and its natural treatment methods.
E guarda te segon la tua forssa que no accida sobre le malaute per la tua operacio delor ni lesio; e perforsa te segon le tieu poder que tu appliques la un os am l’autre son companho segon lors milhors formas.	And be careful when using cautery, so that you don't burn the healthy tissue while applying it to the affected area.
E cove que en aquela hora aprofitablament tu toques am la tua ma aquel, e si vezes aqui alcuna causa diversa, rectifiqua aquel e enguala aquel per la quantitat de la tua vertut.	Then do you see that the patient's bowels are well covered by your hand?
E exquiva vehement extenssio e compressio, ayssi cum fan mots fols metges que motas veguadas fan accidir apostema caut per la sua operacio, o fan accidir contraccio en le membre ayssi cum havem vist aquo per la operacio de lor motas veguadas.	Then keep the patient's legs still so as to avoid inflammation and pain.
E aprop annecteys, aprop equacio e decent operacio e strictura de aquel membre, e repaus e tranquilitat; amoneste le malaute sobre aquo e fay le squivar que no maugua aquel en la hora de las suas vigilias e del sieu dormir, e ves la sua revolucio e agitacio, e deves la sua egestio, e deves totz les sieus movementz am tota la sua vertut; e aguarda se que la posicio del membre sia posicio am la qual sia asegurada la dolor, la qual causa es quar quan sent en la disposicio de la posicio del membre delor o lesio; lahoras cove que permutes aquel ad autra disposicio de aquela am la qual non senta dolor; e guarda am aquo que la posicio de lu aquela sia dreyta e engual, per so que al membre non accida tortuositat quan es restaurat.	The cushion is placed under the patient's feet during their sleep.
E la qualitat de la strictura del membre tranquat es aquela que yeu recomti; per que sapias que·ls membres trencatz so diversificatz en lor parvitat e en lor grandeza e en la forma de aquels.	Translation 1: The quality of the narrowing of the body is the one that causes the pain in the joints; so if you have to treat a constricted joint, the treatment depends on the type of narrowing.
E de aquels que son petits ayssi cum le bras e·l dit e·l focil e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras cove que la envolucio sia de drap mol subtil.	And for those who are small, like the arm or leg, use a cushion to cover them.
Mays aquels que so grosses ayssi cum la cuoyssa o la camba, cove que en aquels sia envolucio lada e dura, quar la liadura lada connecteys le membre gran e strenh aquel de tota part am strictura engual, enayssi que en lu no intre macula.	And if you cover those that are thin or swollen in the legs, it should be treated as a disease of the larger joints.
E aprop comensa, aprop la tua evacuacio de equacio, pausar liament convenient ad aquo, sobre le loc de aquela fractura am tres envolucios o quatre segon que·l membre mereys; e strenh la tua ma un petit am le liament.	Then you can begin treatment for those who have been afflicted by the illness.
E aprop ve am aquel a la partida pus sobirana del loc de la fractura, e strenh mens que no foc la tua strictura am la qual has strengut le loc de la fractura.	And if necessary, open the leg for a wound to be made on the site of the fracture.
E aprop elongua te am envolucio del loc de la fractura un pauc, e mollifiqua la strictura petit a petit, entro que prenguas del loc sa una gran partida.	Then gently open the area around the fracture.
E aprop pren una autra benda e envolveys aquela autra veguada sobre le loc trenquat am envolucio, e aprop ve am las envolucios a la partida pus dejos de la fractura; e sia la tua operacio en la strictura de la envolucio e en mollificacio de aquela segon que havem dit en la envolucio primieyra desus.	Then take a bandage and wrap the injured area to prevent swelling.
E aprop pausa entre las volucios de stopa leon o drap am le qual sia engualada la tortuositat de la fractura, si en lu es tortuositat; e sino, no pauses en lu alcuna causa.	Then you should pay attention to the patient's skin, for if there are signs of a twisted or broken ankle, it will be necessary to take care of it.
E aprop pausa sobre lu autra benda, e aprop enguala sobre aquestas envolucios stelhas decentment faytas tantost, si en le loc no es imflacio o apostema caut, e lahoras pausa sobre lu aquo que sede le apostema aquel e que oste la imflacio; e layssa aquela per alcus jorns; e lahoras tu strenh sobre lu las stelhas.	Then, when the patient has a flare-up of pain, apply heat to the affected area.
E sian las stelhas de la maytat de canna lada raza, e be formada saviament; o sian de fust de pi; o de ramps de palma ; e sia le ample de quascuna stelha segon aquesta forma e aquesta figura:	And be wise in choosing the proper way to cauterize the intestine, as it were.
Empero cove que la astelha que es pausada sobre aquela fractura sia pus grossa e pus lada un petit que las autras astelhas, e la longitut de la stela segon qu’es legut al membre en magnitut e parvitat; e aprop strenh sobre las astelhas am autra benda segon la tua primieyra strictura; e aprop lia desus am fiel decentment segon que havem dit de strictura, e es que sia la tua strictura segon le loc de la fractura mes, e quant mes es alonguat de la fractura, es mendre la strictura.	And if you have a fracture in the foot, then apply a larger bandage to the area.
E cove que les fils sian migiers en grossesa e subtilitat, e sian de li mol; e si les fils so grosses, ayssi cum yeu he vist per la operacio de alcus fols pausantz les lors fils de cordas de li tort, e es error gran, quan catz la strictura fora equalitat.	Then you see if they are milder in size and delicacy than normal.
E eyssament fils subtils no so convenientz, quar tu no consaguiras per strictura am aquels aquo que voles, e no cove que entre astela e astela haja mens de un dit.	And then you will place the cushion on their legs.
E si le malaute es ledit per las extremitatz de las stelas aprop la strictura en les locs sas, lahoras pausa dejos aquelas de stopa leon o lana carmenada entro que aquo no li fassa lesio.	And if a patient has pain in their legs or feet, they are said to have a bad case of gout.
Alcunas veguadas fractura es am plagua, e accideys disrupcio en la codena, e yeu vindre am rememoracio en aquela en le capitol segon singularitat.	Some people may have a wound in the leg, which is why you should apply a cushion to it.
E sapias que ges tot membre trencat no es streyt am stelhas al primier dia; la qual causa es quar le membre, quan es gran, no cove que pauses sobre lu stelhas sino aprop v dias o vii o mays, segon la tua seguratat de adveniment de apostema caut.	You see that cushion there, you should know that it is placed on the affected area, which is why it is called "another cause."
E aquesta es la manieyra dels emplaustres am les quals les Antics restauravan, les quals so pausatz sobre fractura e dislocacio e torcio.	This refers to the use of a cushion as a tool for applying pressure in a medical context, likely during childbirth or surgery.
Manieyra de emplaustra comu abruejat de restaurament de fractura, convenient a motas compleccios e majorment a las femnas e als efantz, quar es de aquo sobre le qual no ventz calor ni freg: e es que prenguas de polvera de moli, e es la medula de la farina que pen deves le movement de la mola en las paretz del moli.	And if you have to apply powder to the legs, etc., it's on the body, use the cushion to make the leg stay in place.
E comfeys aquel ayssi cum es, sino que cribelles aquel am album de huou, e pausa la comfeccio de lu no-spessa ni subtil; e aprop usa de aquela.	And if the patient has pain in their legs or feet, they should be treated by a skilled surgeon.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre restaurant fractura e dislocacio e torcio: recipe de assafetida, de lapdanum, de acacia, de enula, e migrach, que es razit de milgraner salvage, de totz ana drac. x; de mirra e aloen ana drac. v; alochil ana drac. xx; totz sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian mesclatz am aygua alichil o am album de huou si la compleccio del malaute es scalfada; e aprop usa de aquest emplaustre, quar es de bona composicio e restaura les osses trencatz leugierament, e confereys a motz homes.	Then use a poultice of this type to heal the body.
Autra manieyra de emplaustre le qual comfereys a fractura e torcio: recipe migrach e met de altea blanca ana drac. x; de mirra e de aloen ana drac v; de acacia drac. vi; de bol armenic drac. .xx.	A cushion under the patient's hands will help them to avoid pain.
Totz sian trissatz en mortier am mota contricio, e sian cribellatz, e sian comfitz am aygua o am album de huou e sia administrat.	Then apply a cushion under their feet to prevent them from having a gout attack.
Manieyra de emplaustre a juncturas e osses separatz de lors locs, e seda dolor accident en aquels e a fissuras e fractaduras: sia presa lana sutza e sia submersa en vi agre e oli cuyt e sia pausat sobre le loc.	And if you have to place your hand on the legs so they are covered in a cushion of warmth.
Mays en aquest emplastre no es vertut de restauracio, de apostema caut e expelleys dolors propriament.	Then return the hand to its proper position.
Autra manieyra de emplastre que restaura os trancat: pren fuelas de figuier sort e fuelas de papaver salvatge; contereys tot e fay emplastre de lor.	Another method to treat the pain: take fig leaves and poppy, make an ointment of them.
Manieyra de emplastre abreujat aministrat deves la restauracio de fractura de os e quan tu voles resolucio del romanent de apostema: recipe razitz de altea, de camamilla e flors de violes, de farina de ers, de totz ana partida i; sian totz trissatz e sian cofitz am vi, si·l membre no es scalfat.	Take a small amount of marshmallow root, one part altea, one cushion of rye, and one of chamomile and apply to the affected bone with wine.
Mays si es scalfat, lahoras comfeys aquel am aygua de coliandre humit o am aygua e usa de lu.	And if he has to be cauterized, put a cushion on his legs, and another on his feet.
Autra manieyra de emplastra pus fort en resolucio que aquest primier, quan accideys apostema dur deves la restauracio del membre: recipe de razitz de altea e de semensa de li, e de balaustia, e mellilot, majorana, flors de viol, de camamilla, de totz ana partida i engual; totz sian trissatz e sian cofitz am aygua de sauze o am aygua dousa o am vi, tot aquo segon la qualitat del membre e le repaus de la color de lu.	When a patient has a painful inflammation, it's best to treat them with a poultice made from these herbs: mallow, melilot, chamomile, balm, etc.
Mays Ypocras no diyssec en le sieu libre que sia pausat sobre le membre trenquat deves la restauracio de lu sino cerot fayt de cera e de oli e no autre causa; e recomtec que sia migier entre grossitut e subtilitat.	And if the patient has a wound or injury that requires cauterization, use a sharp tool to cut away the inflamed tissue.
Mays a Gualia es vist que sian pausatz sobre le membre trencat deves la restauracio de lu e las causas en las quals es exsiccacio am petit de caliditat so ayssi cum mirra, enses e semblantz a lor de aquelas causas que havem recomtadas.	This statement describes how to treat a broken bone in a way that sounds similar to the treatment of a broken leg:
Manieyra de emplastre que comfereys a lesio e dolor: recipe migat, de cezes, de pels de home inscizes o pena de auzel, e de altea, e sal, partidas enguals; sian trissatz e cribellatz e sian cofitz, e sia fayt emplastre.	This text describes how to treat someone who has suffered an injury or illness resulting in pain in the legs and feet.
Mays la quantitat segon la qual cove que romangua la liadura e aprop sia disliada, es que consideres si no es accidit dolor ni pruziment ni le os es trencat no es maugut de son loc, lahoras tu no deslies de motz jorns.	"If you have pain in your foot, and if it is caused by the cold humors that cause swelling or gout, I'd say you're likely to be seen by a physician."
E si accideys al loc dolor vehement o prusiment o imflacio, lahoras tu te coyte o deslie aquel en la hora, e osta le emplastre de lu.	Then apply the cautery to the patient's location or use it on their place and if necessary their legs.
E pren drap de li e spongia marina leon humida, e submergeys aquela en aygua tebeza, e am aquela lava le loc entro que cesse aquel pruziment e la dolor sia sedada; e aprop layssa repausar le membre per una hora; e aprop pausa sobre lu lana sutza submersa en vi agre e oli o oli rozat, e lia sobre lu per una nuoyt entro que sias segur de apostema caut, e que repause la imflacio del membre, e sia remauguda la dolor de lu.	And apply a cushion to the affected limb and keep the patient's legs elevated for an hour.
E aprop itera aquela strictura subtil e emplastre petit e no·l strenhas per la tua constriccio primieyra, e subtilia am aquel entro que sia sanat.	And he put the small cushion back on their legs and applied another one.
E si vezes que le apostema e la rogor e la dolor e la imflacio e tots les accidentz ja so remaugutz de tot, e indigeysses de emplastre e de strictura, lahoras tu itera aquel ayssi cum has fayt al comensant engualment.	Then place your hand on the affected area to treat the patient's illness.
E si no accideys al membre alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no deslies aquel sino aprop tres dias o quatre o v o vii; e alcunas veguadas tot aquo es layssat per xx dias segon que a tu appar per la desliadura del membre, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que la fractura adhereys, e se acosta a la coagulacio de la carn sobre aquel.	When the limb is affected by the ailment, allow it to rest, for it is customary for the injury to be called "gout" when the joint pain occurs.
E lahoras ajusta en la strictura mays que en la tua strictura primieyra tota, e ayusta en la engrossacio de la vianda del malaute, segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu.	E ayusta in the place of the cushion.
Mays si tu vezes le loc de la fractura ja desiccar e extenuar mays que no cove, lahoras sapias que·l nutriment es prohibit pervenir ad aquel; e donc embroca aquel am aygua tebeza deves tota veguada que delias aquel; e sia aquo en totz tres dias; e alleuja la strictura un petit, e per aquesta operacio corr al membre le nutriment, e es sanat leugierament.	This Latin phrase means: "And if you place a cushion on them (the fractured area), it is prohibited for food to reach this area."
Mays aquo que fan les fols restauradors de la fractura del membre autra veguada quan no es restaurat al comensament, segon que cove, e es restaurat segon tortuositat, es error segon la operacio de lor, e temor gran, e si fos dreyturier aquo agrandit les Antics en lors libres e agueran am aquo obrat.	This is a complex task, but I'll give it a shot!
E yeu no he vist ad alcu de lor aquo far, per que es pus razonable que aquo no fassa.	For I have never seen a person's bowels be so inflamed as they are by those who are prone to gout.
Capitol segon: De fractura quan accideys en le cap.	Of course, there are cushions for its support.
Las specias de fracturas son motas, e las figuras de lor son diversas, e las causas son distinctas, quar de fracturas alcuna es fayta per percussio de spaza, e la percussio osta tot le os entro al ciphac, le qual es dejos le os, ayssi cum fay ayssa en le fust, e per aquo aquesta specia es nompnada ascial; o la spaza inscideys alcuna partida del os, e inscideys la carn de lu e no passa la inscizio entro al derier de lu; e aquesta specia de fractura es nompnada levatio absoluta.	And the causes of fractures are varied, some being caused by a blow to the bone, while others are due to other factors.
E la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca, e de fractura que es contricio o atricio; e causa de lu es percussio am poyra o cazement sobre peyra, e a lor semblantz.	And for the treatment of the ailment, a cauterization should be done to prevent the spread of the disease.
E aquesta fractura o es penetrant que ja apropinqua al pannicol le qual es dejos le os; o es en la facia del os, e la plagua de aquestas doas fracturas o es gran o pauca.	And if this bone is broken, then you are close to their death.
E de fractura es que es ameguada en le os, en la subtilitat del cabel petita, e per aquo es nompnada aquesta specia fractura capillar.	And if a fracture is present in the bone, it is called capillary fracture.
E es fractura que es fayta o per cazement o per percussio de peyra e a lu semblantz, que fa intrar alcuna lamina del os a las partidas dedintz, e es fayta en le loc concavitat ayssi cum accideys als payroles de eram quan accideys a lor percussio e es partida de lor intrada a las partidas dedintz.	And if there's a fracture in the leg, it's called a bone-related ailment by the other name for it, which is gout.
E majorment es fayt aquo en les cors de osses humitz, ayssi cum so caps de efantz.	Then apply a hot cautery to reduce the swelling in the joints.
E so a totas aquestas specias fracturas satagias, so son pessas ayssi cum stelhas separadas.	And if the pain is caused by these conditions, they should be called "pessas" because they are separate from the bones in the legs.
E yeu vindre am reremoracio de tot aquo en son loc.	And let the patient's leg be held in place.
E conoyssem totas aquestas specias de fractura per deteccio sobre aquelas e per inquisicio de lor am tentas e ostament de carn corrumpuda que es sobre lor.	And so the patient's legs are opened up and treated using surgery on their chest and the foot.
E specia capillar es conoguda per aysso que es descubert sobre le os, e es abstergit, e linit sobre lu am tentha, quar la fractura appar negra.	And especially if the disease is severe, a physician should place a cushion between their limbs and keep them covered in bandages.
Mays en la curacio de fractura considera al comensament les accidentz del malaute, e lahoras si tu vezes per los accidentz que signifique per significacio manifesta sobre paor, ayssi cum es vomit de colera, e extencio, e perdement de entendament, e abscizio de votz, e sincopi, e febre acuta, e eyssiment dels huels e rogor de aquels, e semblantz a lor dels accidentz en las majors disposicios, ses dopte no es sanat.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the bone for treatment of a fracture, they are treated differently from those in the flesh.
E si vezes accidentz no-correntz tu speras salut, lahoras tu comensa la curacio de lu.	And if your foot is affected by an injury, it is best to have the patient's legs brought up to the chest in order to avoid further damage.
La qual causa es quar si es vengut a tu le plaguat en le comensament cum es plaguat e aquo es en les dias de ivern, lahoras cove que tu studias en le ostament del os denant le dia xiiii segon tota disposicio.	In such cases, the patient's leg is affected by the disease we call gout.
E si es en les dias d’estiu, lahoras cove que te coytes ostar le os denant le vii dia, habantz que aquo que es dejos le os sia corromput del pannicol, e que accidescan les accidentz que havem recomtatz.	If you are already suffering from gout, it is best to avoid cold temperatures.
E si la fractura ja es pervenguda al pannicol cubrent le cervel, e es am partidas menudas e atricio, lahoras cove que inscidas la partida conminuta e atrita, segon que yeu recomtare a tu.	E si'l ha escutat (or "it is")  and the injury is serious or deep-seated, one must be careful to avoid further damage.
E es que tu razas le cap del malaute plaguat, e descuebres sobre le os segon costuma e manieyra a tu possible segon la figura de la plagua, e que sia leugier sobre le malaute.	And if you find that the patient has a light fever, apply a cushion under them.
E si accideys a tu deves la deteccio del os, fluxs de sanc o apostema caut, lahora tu te oppausa a lu am aquo que cove, e es que huemplas le loc de draps infuzes en vi e oli rozat, e fassa repausar la plagua entro que sia sedat le apostema, e sies segur de fluxs del sanc; e aprop comensa en la circuicio del os e en la ablatio de lu.	And if you encounter a boil, let it be opened by a physician, who will place another under it, and another for the bloodletting.
E aquo sia segon una de dos manieyras de operacio.	And there are two types of operation.
E la una manieyra es que tu inscidas le os am inscisori de streyt tal, e aquesta es la forma de lu: E aprop administra un autre inscissori aquest, un pauc pus lat que aquel; e aquesta es la forma de lu:	Then you should apply heat to the bones in a precise manner, for this type of gout requires a specific treatment method.
E aprop administra mays le inscissori pus lat que·l segon.	And apply the ointment to the affected area as soon as possible.
E cove que sia deves tu nombre de inscissoris diverses, dels quals alcus so pus latz que alcus autres; e alcus de lor so pus breus que·ls autres e sian en le derier de acuitat de las suas extremitatz, e sian de ferr indi o felod.	And therefore it is necessary to apply different cushions from various places to the patient's body, which are applied to their legs.
E usa de lor am facilitat en percussio sobre le inscissori per so que no concutesca le cap e leda aquel.	And if the pain in their foot persists, apply a cushion to the area where the patient's foot is located.
E si le os es fort, dur, lahoras cove que perfores en le circuit de lu denant que tu administres los inscissoris am les taravels, les quals so nomnatz taravels no-profundantz.	And if the bone is strong and hard, place your hand on their legs to prevent them from being cut.
E no so nomnatz ayssi sino quar aquels no pausan le terme de l’os del test ad aquo que es aprop lu, per so quar al taravel es redonda extremitat o marge sobre aquel que es dejos le cap de lu agut semblant a marge o a cercle petit, le qual prohibeys esser submergit e passar la spissitut del os.	This sounds like a description of the surgical treatment for a hernia.
E es convenient que tu prenguas de aquestz taravels gran nombre dels quals quascu convenesca a la spicitut de quascun os, entro que sia a tu present en tottz testz del cervel la extremitat del qual sia aguda, la quantitat en longitut e brevitat sia segon la quantitat de spicitut de aquest test.	And it is convenient that you put a cushion under the patient's feet if they have pain in the legs e.g., to ease the pain.
E aquesta es la forma de tres specias de teravels: La qualitat de perforar en le circuit del os trencat es que pauses le teravel sobre le os e revolvas aquel am les tieus ditz entro que sapias que l’os ja es penetrat; e aprop permuda le terevel ad autre loc, e pausa aquo que es entre tot trauc la quantitat de la grosseza del ray o enviro aquo.	Then treat them with a cushion placed on the bone, as long as they are able to be placed under their legs (the affected area) because the bone has been pierced by the needle of the instrument.
E aprop inscideys am inscissoris aquo que es entre quascun trauc del os, e fay aquel pus subtil que podes sobre aquo en fi de levitat, ayssi cum havem dit, entro que erradiques le os, o am la tua ma, o am alcuna autra causa per alcus sturmentz les quals auras apparelhatz ad aquo, ayssi cum tanalhas e forceps subtils.	And if a surgeon has said that the patient's pain is caused by the first incision, then they are to be given another cushion, for the pain is caused by something subtle, just as we have said, and it should be treated accordingly.
E cove que tu guardes am tota cautela que l’inscissori no toque alcuna causa del ciphac.	And you must keep your hands on them so they don't touch anything sharp.
E donc cum auras circuit le os perforan, e sira separat del ciphac si es continuat am lu, e auras aquel extrayt, cove que razas e enguales aquel en la asperitat de lu de aquo que es en le os am autra sturment semblant a inscissori, mays empero cove que sia pus teon e pus subtil que les autres inscissoris.	And if you are concerned about the other's cushion being used by a person who has already been separated from the body, you should know that it is no longer necessary to worry.
E si roman alcuna partida dels osses petitz e satagias, lahoras pren aquela am facilitat am aquo que es deves tu dels sturmentz; e aprop aquo cura la plagua am lichinis e enguentz les quals havem ditz.	You have already opened the area between the patient's legs; you should apply a poultice to keep the cushion from being too loose on their feet.
E l’autra manieyra de operacio es leugiera, longinqua de paor, la qual diyssec Gualia e la lauzec per gran lausor; e aquest es le sermo de lu: necessari es a tu en le comensament que comenses descobrir la partida del os del loc en le qual es la fractura pus vehement e pus manifesta, entro que quan auras descubert aquela partida e auras pausat dejos lu la extremitat de aquest inscissori lent e alegre del qual aquesta es la forma:	And if your legs are exposed to the cold, you will need to use a cushion or something similar to support them, and then apply a cautery to the area around the affected bone.
E es que la partida lenticular es leon e no inscideys alcuna causa, e la partida aguda es de lu en dos latz avantz en longitut, ayssi cum vezes; que la partida lenticular sia ajustada al ciphac am la facia de lu inscident aguda en le os.	Then treat the lentil-shaped area (the lens) as if it were a lentil-shaped wound.
E aprop percuteys sobre le inscissori de una partida am un petit malhet entro que inscidas tot le os am facilitat ayssi cum es revolvut, e tu sias segur del pannicol que no accida en lu accident que temas en denguna manieyra, e si le medicant14 era le pus fol de totz les homes e le mays ignorant de lor; certament, e si era dorment.	And apply your treatment to their legs, striking them with a hammer or placing a cushion under the other leg.
Lahoras si romania alcuna causa annexa al os del pannicol en alcus locs de os, inscidira aquel de lu am la extremitat del inscissori aquel lenticular, e deliuraria aquel de lu am facilitat, quar es deliurat de lu ses nocument e ses paor.	When there is a cushion under your leg, you place it on their body.
E si fractura del os no penetra entro al pannicol, e aquo que es abscidit o es ostat del os es la facia de lu, e roman en lu asperitat e satagias subtils, lahoras cove que razas aquela asperitat e erradiques aquelas satagias am razoris subtils per les quals tu has preparat le nombre, de diversas quantitatz per que sia a tu possible administrar de aquels en tot loc les pus convenientz de lor e le pus dreyt de aquels segon aquo en que te perduzeys la tua operacio aquel os trencat e la figura de lu.	When the bone breaks, it can be used to treat bones.
E cove que administres en la tua razio am la qual razes le os al comensament le pus lat de aquels razoris, e aprop usa aprop lu del pus subtil de lu, e no cesses far aquo segon continuitat entro que pervenguas ad aministrar le pus teon e·l pus subtil de totz aquels.	And when you have a cushion over the patient's thighs and feet to prevent the pain from spreading further.
Mays en quascuna de las autras fracturas petitas capillars e fractura subtil, cove que administres cura segon aquo que perduseys ad rectificacio de lu.	You have already translated the first part of your question.
E es causa que no es ameguada sobre totz les quals han studi en aquela art.	And then there is cause that all those who have studied in that area will know what to do.
E stec sobre aquo que nos scriut havem mostrat en grans fracturas.	And here comes another who has been in pain and they have put a cushion on his legs.
E si le pannicol es retangut quan tu erradiques le os, lahoras cove que prenguas drap de li segon la quantitat de la plagua, e submergeys aquel en oli rozat, e pausa aquel sobre le orrifici de la plagua; e aprop pren autre drap doblat o triplicat e submergeys lu en vi e oli rozat e pausa aquel sobre drap prim e fay aquo al pus leugierament que podes sobre aquel, que no graves le ciphac; e aprop administra sobre aquel liament lat, e no strenhas aquel sino per quantitat que tengua la plagua tant solament.	And if it is necessary to apply oil, use a second cloth for another plague.
E layssa aquel am aquesta cura per un dia o per dos entro que sias segur de apostema caut; e aprop deslia aquel e aprop aministra medicinas am las quals es superflua siccitat, ayssi cum razitz de lin e farina de errs, e polvera de enses e de aristologia, e de semblantz ad aquels.	And let the patient be given a cushion for their legs, if they are suffering from gout.
E es que tu fassas de aquestas medicinas polvera que sia pulverizada sobre la plagua, ayssi cum son secas; e universalment, administra en aquel tota medicina de proprietat de la qual es que abstergesca e no mordique.	Then you must apply these medications to the affected area to prevent them from spreading further.
E guarda te segon la tua vertut que la plagua en la tua curacio sia neta; e no sia en lu surdicia de enguent ni autra; ni no layssas agreguar virulencia en lu; quar quan es ajustada sobre le pannicol del cervel, corromp aquel e poyreys aquel, e accideys sobre le malaute aprop aquo malicia maligna.	And if you have applied cauterization, apply it carefully to avoid harming them.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.	E therefore if it is necessary to cauterize the patient's legs, they should be treated by applying a burning tool to them as described in the previous lines.
E si no accideys negror sino de la medicina que es pausada desus, e es en vertut de aquela medicina que fassa aquela negror, lahoras cove que tu prenguas de mel una partida e de oli rozat partidas iii, e am aquels linieys un drap, e aprop pausa aquel sobre le ciphac; e aprop cura aquel am las specias de curacio que conveneys entro que sia sanat.	Then if the pain is caused by that illness, use three parts of rose oil.
Capitol .iii.	And there are three chapters in the book that follow the medical practices for the treatment of the body, which is why it's called "the gout."
De restauracio del nas quan es trincat.	When the nose is broken, and needs fixing.
Sapias que no es trencat del nas sino doas partidas ensemps pus sobiranas, o una de aquelas alcunas veguadas, per so quar en lu has dos osses, quar la partida dejos es cartillaginosa, e no es trencada e no accideys a lu sino atricio e tortuositat e sinuitat.	And if a bone in the foot is broken, it's called gout, but the rest of the body should be treated with a cushion to protect the joint.
Mays si es trencada la una de las doas partidas de lu, lahoras cove que tu intrometas le dit petit en le sieu nas, e que engualhas aquela fractura dedintz am le tieu dit indic, e am le dit pous defora, entro que retorne le nas segon la sua figura natural.	If a member has been broken, the patient should be treated as needed by a cushion, and the rest of the body parts are treated with another type of treatment.
E sia fayt aquo per tu am facilitat, e guarda te que no caja per aquela tua operacio sobre le malaute delor.	And if you have a cushion to cushion the pain.
E si la fractura es en la pus sobirana partida del nas, e le dit no perve ad aquela, lahoras cove que sia equat am la extremitat del ray en le qual sia petita grossitut.	When the pain is in the most prominent part of the nose, one should apply a poultice to that area, and another poultice should be applied to the other parts of the body.
E si la fractura es en doas partidas, lahoras tu fay le semblant de aquo.	Then make them apply a cautery to two parts of the body.
E coyta te am restauracio de lu en le primier dia de la fractura, si es possible; e sino, lahoras aprop le vii o·l x deves le repaus del apostema caut.	And if it is possible, restore the cushion to its place on the patient's legs; and the rest to the patient's body.
E aprop entromet en la extremitat del nas una meca de drap de li, si la fractura es en una partida, o metz doas calguas, si la fractura es en doas partidas, e sia en la calgua grossitut de tanta quantitat que umpla le trauc del nas.	E put a cushion on their nose if they have a cold, but don't use a hot cautery there.
E diysso alcus dels antics restauradors que las calguas sian enfundudas en boder, e sian permudadas en tot dia, mays no es vist a mi; habantz cove que la meca sia enfunduda en album de huou comfit am polvera de moli; e aprop layssa la qualgua entro que l’os sia fermat e sia endurazida la cartillage.	And so that the patient has been placed on a bed and covered in order to protect their body from the cold.
E alcunas veguadas sia entromes en le nas, en loc de calgua, pena de auca pus que es envolopada de drap de li leon; e sia que ja te la fractura del nas pus vehement e que le malaute no sia prohibit de inspiracio.	And sometimes there are wounds in the nose that are treated with cauterization with a cushion on their face to protect the other side.
E aquesta causa no es a tu necessaria; e si voles, fay aquo, e si voles, fay calguas.	And this cause, if you wish to use it, is treated with hot water.
E si accideys autra veguada apostema caut, emplastra le nas am cerot o am coto enfus en vi agre e oli rozat, o am diaquilon.	And if they are afflicted by a boil, treat it with poultice of wax and another cushion, with which the boil should be treated.
Mays si no accideys apostema caut, lahoras cove que emplaustres aquel defora am farina de sizami e am polvera de enses cofitz am album de huou; e aprop pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e no lies le nas am alcuna causa.	If there are any pustules on the patient's body, they should be cauterized with a cushion of flaxseed meal and the application of a poultice will help heal them.
Mays si so trencats les osses del nas am fractura petita o so conminuitz, lahoras cove que scindas sobre aquels, e extraguas aquels am insturmentz que conveno ad aquels; e aprop cos la scissura, e cura aquela am aquo que encarna e consolida, e am emplastres ad aquo convenientz.	When there are small fractures in the foot, they should be treated with cauterization using tools appropriate for that purpose.
E si accideys plagua dedintz le nas, lahoras cove que cures aquela am calguas e administra canulas de plom entro que sia de tot sanat.	When there's a plague within the nose, apply a cauterizing tool to burn away the affected area.
Capitol .iiii.	Chapter 4
De restauracio de la mandibula quan es trincada.	When the jaw is dislocated.
Quan la mandibula dejos es rompuda e la fractura de lu no es am plagua, reguarda lahoras si la fractura es deforas tant solament, e no es trencada en dos e es curvada a las partidas dedintz, lahoras la sua cognicio es leugiera.	Observe the jaw for signs of gout: if the fracture is on the surface, and you find the bone to be inflamed or painful, then treat it as such.
E cove donc, si la fractura es en la part dreyta, que tu intrometas le tieu indic senestre en la boca del malaute; e semblantment si la fractura es an la mandibula senestra, lahoras intromet le dit indic de la ma dreyta; e impelleys am aquel la gilbositat de la fractura dedintz am facilitat a las partidas defora, am la tua autra ma de la partida defora del os; am aquel decentment equa aquelam.	So if the patient has an injury to their body, a hot iron should be used on the injured area.
E si la fractura de la mandibula ja es separada en doas, lahoras cove que administres extensio de doas partz segon rectitut entro que sia possibla la equacio de lu.	Then apply traction to the jaw if necessary, for that's where the fracture should be addressed.
E si accideys conmocio de dentz a disrupcio, lahoras strenh aquelas de las quals speras que romandran am fil de aur o de argent o de ceda; e aprop pausa sobre la mandibula trencada cerot, e aprop pausa sobre lu drap duplicat, e pausa sobre le drap gran stelha decentment fayta, o una pessa de sola engual a la longitut de la mandibula; e aprop lia aquela desus segon que a tu es apparelhada la liadura de lu e que conveneys la applicacio, entro que no es destruida.	And you must place a gold tooth-picking splint on their broken teeth if they are to be repaired by a skilled craftsman.
E comanda al malaute que use de repaus e tranquilitat, e pausa la vianda de lu sorbicios leons.	And when they are closed, the other sources are consulted for advice on the best treatment.
E si extimas que ja es alterada la figura en alcuna manieyra, lahoras tu te coyta e deslia aquel al tertz dia; e aprop rectifica aquo que ja es alterat de lu e emplaustra aquel am polvera de moli, am album de huou, o am farina de cisami, pus que tu auras ostat le cerot de lu, e pausa sobre le emplastra lana leon.	And if you judge that the patient has already been altered in some way, then apply a poultice to the affected area after three days.
E adonc cum sta annex e ajustat aquel emplastre sobre lu, e la disposicio del os no es alterada, layssa aquel, que no le deslies entro que sia sanat e strenh la fractura; quar motas veguadas aquesta fractura es streyta en tres sempmanas.	And so if the cushion does not fit well, apply another to the body and fix the position of the bones, and they will be healed in three weeks.
E si autra veguada accida apostema caut, lahoras administra aquo que havem dit motas veguadas en la sedacio de lu entro que sia sanat, e sia remaugut aquel apostema.	And then if a person has an abscess while awake, they should be treated as I have explained.
E si la fractura es am plagua, lahoras considera si es pessa del os separada o satagias, lahoras tu te subtilia que ostes aquelas satagias am aquo que conveneys ad aquo en la remocio de aquelas dels sturmentz.	And if the fracture is in the region where the bone is affected by gout, the patient's legs should be treated carefully.
E si le orrifici de la plagua es streyt, lahoras tu le amplifique am le fleubotomi segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat.	And if the plague is present, then you should immediately cauterize the affected area.
E aprop quan tu auras ostat aquelas satagias, e de aquelas no sira remaugut re, lahoras tu cos le orrifici de la plagua si es ampla; e sino, pausa sobre aquela un dels emplaustres que conveneysso ad aquo e encarnan aquela, entro que sia sanada.	Then apply the appropriate poultice to the affected area on the foot if necessary, or use another poultice for those who suffer from pain in their feet due to a wound, e.g., one caused by an arrow.
Capitol .v.	Chapter 5.
De restauracio de la furcula quan es trinquada.	This is when it is necessary for the patient to be healed.
Motas veguadas es trencada la furcula de la partida denant deves le muscle, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres manieyras.	There are three ways to treat a fracture in the leg.
Quar o es trencada, o seperada, o es seperada en doas partz otra que no accidan satagias; e es leugier a la restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que accideysso en lu satagias, e es dificil a restauracio de lu; o es ayssi que la fractura es am plagua.	And if the patient has a fracture or injury, treat them lightly and they will have pain in their bones.
E la operacio en aquela, quan la fractura es ses plagua, es que tu fassas esser present dos ministres, per so que la un tengua le adjutori e siegua la furcula trencada, e l’autre extenda le col ves aquela partida.	And if the patient has a fracture, they should apply a cushion to the wound and use a cauterization tool for other injuries.
E aprop enguala la fractura am les tieus ditz entro que sia fayta la forma de lu segon que cove, e no sia en lu eminencia pauca ni concavitat.	And then place your hand on the patient's legs to help them.
E si indigeysses mes de extencio, lahoras cove que pauses dejos le titillic del malaute spera de drap o de lana, e sia la grandesa de lu segon la quantitat de la tua necessitat; e exten e eleva la furcula e coarta la spera am la tua ma entro que enguales la frectura segon que cove.	And if the patient has a cushion on their legs, they need to be put on their feet, and they need a cushion for them.
E si no podes atirar la extremitat de la furcula a las partidas defora, per so quar es pervenguda al preon, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sua cervitz, e pauses sobre le muscle de lu un coyssi migier en grandeza.	And if you cannot apply cautery to the patient's shoulder, then use another method for applying cautery.
E le ministre prema le muscle de lu a las partidas dejos entro que l’os de la furcula sia elevat que es en le preon en sus, e lahoras tu rectifique la fractura e enguala aquela am les tieus ditz.	And you place a cushion on his legs to help him heal.
Mays si sentes satagias de la furcula e so maugudas, lahoras cove que fendes sobre aquela e extraguas aquelas satagias am facilitat.	And if you want to treat someone for pain in their joints, apply a cauterizer to the area.
E si es retenguda en le os, lahoras tu ingenia inscisio de lu am un dels inscissoris les quals has apparelhatz ad aquo, pus que havias pausat dejos la furcula le sturment que serve le ciphac; e es sturment de fust o de ferr del qual aquesta es la forma de lu:	And if it is necessary to apply a cautery to the intestines, use a cushion for that purpose.
E es semblant a culier del qual aquesta es la concavitat; e sia la sua latitut segon aquo que has necessitat de lu, segon la grandeza del os o la pauqueza de lu.	And if the patient is suffering from a cold humoral condition in the thigh, the other leg will be treated similarly.
Mays la longitut de lu sia segon que es a tu possible a la operacio; que haja doas extremitatz ayssi cum vezes, e la una extremitat sia ample e l’autre streyta.	Mays the pain of the patient be reduced by the operation; as if the patient has an ailment in the legs, they have already placed cushions on them during surgery.
E si la disrupcio de la plagua la qual has inscidida quan has extraytas la satagia del os es ampla, e yest segur de apostema caut, lahoras tu ajusta las doas labias de la plagua am sutura.	And if you are treating a swelling caused by an infected boil, the other two will be adjusted to reduce the swelling.
E si la disrupcio es pauca, o temes apostema caut, lahoras tu uemple la plagua am draps e pulvils segon la quantitat de la scissura de la plagua.	And if there's little disruption, then use a cushion.
E si accideys apostema caut, lahoras infon drap en vi agre e oli rozat e vi, e pausa sobre aquel.	Then apply a cushion to the affected area to treat the pain.
Mays la strictura del os quan es ses plagua e ses seccio, es que pauses emplastre fayt de farina de moli am album de huou, e pausa sobre lu stopa leon, e aprop pausa la spera dejos le titillic de lu, si indigeyssas de aquela, e aprop pren humemate, so es torca la qual teno les Sarrazis , que sia mot longua, e sia latitut de lu de un palm o entorn aquel; e aprop pausa pulvils duplicatz sobre la stopa e l’emplastre; e aprop pren una stela de taula subtil de la qual la latitut d’ela sia de tres ditz e en longitut semblantment; e aprop envolopa aquela en drap, e aprop envolopa aquel drap am la stela en lo loc sobre le loc de la fractura; e aprop pausa humemati ayssi cum es revout, e revol aquela sobre le col de lu e dejos le titillic de lu sa e dejos le titillic de lu malaute, e reduzeys aquela sobre tota partida, e quan vezes que la strictura de la fractura am strictura descent, e es aquo que no es occultat sobre tu.	When the body is broken down by cold humors, the patient's condition is gout.
E tot, que no sia mauguda la stelha desobre le os trencat; e per so cove que tu vejas le malaute quascun dia, que quan le liament es mollificat o vezas la stela ja esser remauguda, lahoras tu rectifica aquo e strenh la liadura.	And so, if the legs are not broken, the cushion should be placed under them.
E aprop pausa le dormir del malaute sobre le col de lu, e pausa dejos le titillic de lu deves le dormir de lu en la nueyt un petit coyssi; per so que am aquel sia elevat le adjutori de lu del latz de aquel, e donc es elevada la la fractura de la furcula a elevacio del muscle; o sia le bras de lu liat al col de aquel.	And if the pain is in the shoulder, apply the cushion to the area around the collarbone, so that the intestine or hernia does not protrude further out.
E no deslies le liament si no accideys en le loc prusiment o apostema, entro a xii dias.	And if there is a need to cauterize the joints (if they are swollen) in the next twelve days, it is best to do so after the swelling has subsided.
E aprop renovelha le emplastre si has vista la facia de lu ad aquo, e ajusta en la strictura e restaura aquel e layssa entro que sia restaurat e sia coagulat la fractura de la furcula.	And apply the bandage to their legs, allowing the intestines to heal.
E es strenguda e comfortada segon le mes en xxviii dias, e alcunas veguadas en alcus homes es fayt en mens de temps de aquel.	And if it is necessary to cauterize and comfort the affected area, that's what they say takes xxviii days.
Capitol .vi.	The sixth chapter begins.
De restauracio de fractura de la spalla.	The treatment for a dislocated shoulder is to surgically set it.
Spatula tart es trencada en le loc lat de lu e no so trencatz de lu sino les marges.	The spatula is broken in the place of the patient's foot, but only on the margins.
E donc quan es trencat le loc de lu — e es trencat en le mieg loc de lu — e no es conogut sino per tocament, lahoras segon que es la figura de la fractura sforsa te la preparacio de lu e reduzir aquela segon la figura natural en tota manieyra de engen la qual es a tu possible.	And so when the bone is broken, one must know how to set it back together (with the use of a cauteri) — or reduce it.
E aprop pausa sobre le loc polvera de moli am album de huou e stopa leon; e aprop pausa pulvil de drap duplicat; e aprop pausa sobre lu stela lada de taula subtil segon la quantitat de la spatula tota o mays un pauc.	Then pause the pain to be measured by the cushion, applying your knowledge to heat the body and treat the patient's condition.
Mays si dejos la stela es concavitat en alcu dels locs de la spatula, lahoras tu enguala aquela concavitat am stopa leon, e aprop pueja la stela segon equalitat.	If the patient suffers from the disease of gout, you can then apply a bandage to the affected area.
E aprop strenh desus am humemati longua ab constriccio decent e am fermesa de la stela entro que no sia remauguda del sieu loc.	Then strengthen the area around the feet, as the physician's duty requires.
E considera le liament en quascun dia; e totas veguadas que sia mollificat, lia autra veguada e stren le e equa la stela si es remauguda del sieu loc.	And consider the foot to be treated as in the case of those whose legs are weak from gout, and whose intestines or other organs are affected by them.
E jagua le malaute sobre le sieu latz sa.	Then the doctor will place his hand on the patient's hand.
E la spatula es restaurada en xx dias o en .xxv.	And the spatula will be restored in .xx. days or in .xxv. days.
E donc quan es complit aquest nombre, lahoras tu dissolveys le liament, e que tu scias ensegurat quar aquela es dels osses dels quals la cominicio no es temuda ni lor dissolucio.	And then when it is done, you should know that there is nothing to fear from the dissolution of the ligaments in the legs, which are located on the body's lower part.
E si procezeys del loc del os pessa e pongeys dejos la codena, lahoras tu scindeys sobre lu, e osta le, e fay segon que havem dit en la fractura de la furcula de sadacio de apostema caut si accideys aqui.	And if you have to treat the affected area with cautery, do so carefully, using your hands to hold the skin in place.
Capitol .vii.	Chapter 7
De restauracio de la fractura del pietz.	Of the restoration of bones in the foot.
Le pietz alcunas veguadas es romput en le mieg loc de lu e aquo tart endeve; mays las extremitatz de lu mot endeve que so ciccadas e comminuidas.	The foot has been opened by the physician, and the cushion has been placed in the patient's chest to draw out the inflammation.
E dels accidentz de lu quan es trencat le mieg de lu es que declina a las partidas dedintz e accideys a lu gran dolor, e dificultat en lo hale, e tos, e fort leu e vomeys sanc; e es declarada en lu cavitat en le os trencat e no es occulta al sentiment.	Then apply a cauterizing treatment to the affected bones so that the pain will be less intense.
E la restauracio de lu es que sia resupinat le malaute sobre le sieu dos, e pausa entre las spallas de lu un coyssi; e aprop prem als muscles de lu, e ajusta las costas de lu am las mas de dos costatz, e subtilia te en la operacio de lu e en la equacio segon tota manieyra que es ad aquo possibla e que conveneys ad aquo, entro que retorne la figura del os segon que cove.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the breastbone, or to another bone in the body.
E aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e estopa e pausa desobre astela de taula subtil de sauze o de caligi e de a lor semblantz en levitat, pus que tu envolopas aquela en drap; e aprop subtilia te en lian aquela sobre le os trencat que no sia maugut; e vay am liadura segon retonditat al dors alcunas veguadas, e strenh aquel am strictura decent; e aprop considera la liadura en tota hora, e quan es mollificada strenh aquela.	The physicians call this condition a gouty attack when the patient's body has too many humors in its system.
E si necessitat provoca a desliament de aquela deves corrossio o pruziment, o dolor, o apostema que accideysso en le loc, lahoras tu coyta e deslia aquela e erradica le emplastre e rectifique aquo que accideys per aquo am manieyra de curacio de lu; e aprop reduzeys le emplastre, si vezes ad aquo la facia; e ajusta a lu strictura entro que sia sanat.	When you cauterize the patient's legs, apply a cushion to support them.
Capitol .viii.	Chapter 8.
De restauracio de las costas quan son trincadas.	And for the restoration of the shores of the body, when they are injured.
Sapias que fractura de las costas no catz sino en locs grosses que siegon le dos; e de las extremitatz de lor de la partida denant no accideys ad aquelas contricio sino per aquo quar so cartillaginosas.	And to know that the pain in the joints is caused by injury, it can be said that it is a gouty pain.
E cognicio de lu no es amaguada al sentiment deves la inquisicio de lu am les ditz.	And the examination is not hidden from the doctor's perception.
E la restauracio sia ayssi que enguales la fractura am les ditz segon la manieyra possibla, entro que sia engulhat segon que cove, e aprop emplastre e strenh le os trencat am stela, si indigeys de aquel.	And then apply a splint to their legs and apply poultices to the injured bones.
E si la fractura de las costas es declinant a las partidas dedintz, lahoras accideys al malaute dolor vehement e punctura, ayssi cum punctura que accideys ad aquel que ha pleureci, e per aquo quar le os ponh le velament; e accideys a lu difficultat de hanelit, e tos, e vomit de mot sanc; e aquesta es de dificil curacio.	And then you will know if they have a cushion in their hands or are suffering from pain in their legs.
E ja les Antixs so engeniatz en aquela am motz engientz.	And so the doctors are already treating their condition.
E de lor so que diso: cove que pauses viandas del malaute que engendro imflacio e ventositat, per que le ventre sia imflat e sia extendut, e la fractura sia impellida a las partidas defora.	Then if you are treating inflammation caused by the humors in the legs, it's important to use other treatments.
Mays nos avoreyssem aquo per so que no sia causa leugiera a generar apostema caut, si no accideys; e si ja accideys, lahoras ja ajuda ad aquo.	And if it is a heavy pain, if they do not want to be in agony.
E diyssero alcus de lor que sia pausada desus ventoza e aprop que sucque am fortitut; e es semblant a ratiocinacio, mays empero es temut que la ventoza atire las superfluitatz al loc per la debilitat.	And if it is necessary to cauterize them, do so on their legs while they are still experiencing pain.
E diyssero alcus de lor: cove que·l loc sia cubert am lana que ja es submersa en oli caut, e sian pausatz pulvils entre las costas entro que sia umplida, que sia la liadura engual quan envolopas aquela segon retonditat; e aprop sia curat le malaute am curacio de pleuresi de vianda e de medicina.	Then place your hand on the patient's body to ensure the cushions are placed correctly, and then apply another cushion to their legs, and another to the chest.
E si causa vehement constrenh le malaute la qual no sufferta, e le os punh le velament am punctura ledent, temem sobre le malaute, lahoras cove que fendam sobre le loc, descubram de la costa trencada, e aprop pausem desobre aquela instrument que conserve le ciphac, la rememoracio del qual es precedida, e que inscidam le os am facilitat, e extraguam aquel.	And if you want to cause pain in the feet, it’s called “fratura” or “fracture”, so they say it doesn't hurt as much as other conditions.
E aprop que ajustem las doas labias de la plagua, si es gran, am cozidura, e curem aquela am emplastres entro que sia sanada.	And then apply to the affected area a cushion to elevate the body's temperature.
E si accideys dedintz apostema, lahoras tu coyta e enfon pulvils en oli rozat e pausa sobre le loc, e que sia curat le malaute am aquo que cove a la apostema dedintz.	You have already opened the source for the ailment; you will find the cure in the revelation of the nature of the ailment.
E sia ressupinat sobre le latz sobre le qual dorm, entro que sia sanat.	And if the humor in the patient’s body is stagnant, then you should use heat on the side where the humor is stagnant.
Capitol .ix.	This refers to the treatment of a patient's foot with a cautery, possibly for an ailment related to bloodletting.
De restauracio de fractura del spondil del dos e del col.	This refers to a specific area of the body where a cushion should be placed for support.
Alcunas veguadas endeve fractura als osses del col, e tart endeve a lor atricio, e semblantment als spondils del dos.	And if it is necessary to use a cautery on the spine, apply it carefully.
E cum aquo accideys ad alcu e voles saber si sara sanat o no, lahoras considera, quar si vezes las sieuas mas ja mollificadas e stupefaytas e mortas e no pot maure aquelas ni extendre ni strenher aquelas e quan constrenges aquelas am les tieus ditz o punges aquelas am agulha e no sent en aquelas dolor, lahoras sapias que no es sanat, e en las mes de disposicios es mortal.	And so you must know that if the patient has a pain in their legs, or elsewhere, which is described as sharp, sudden pains, they are generally good for them.
E si mau aquelas e sent en aquelas constriccio am les ditz e punctura, lahoras sapias que la nucha de l’os es salva e que le malaute guereys am curacio.	And if you cauterize the area between their thighs, it will be cured.
E si ve als spondils del col le semblant ad aquo e voles saber si sira sanat o no, lahoras considera als pes de lu.	And if you want to know if the patient has or has not been healed, you must consider their physical state.
Lahoras si tu vezes que so ja mollificatz, accideys ad aquels aquo que es accidit en las mas, e aprop quan jatz sobre le sieu dos, yeys ventozitat e egestio ses la sua volontat, e alcunas veguadas es resupinat sobre le sieu dos e vol urinar e no pot, lahoras sapias que es mortal, e adonc no trebales en la curacio de lu.	If gout is the cause of pain in the joints, place the cushion on the patient's legs during treatment to prevent them from becoming infiltrated by the humors.
Mays si no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, la causa es milhor e pus leugiera.	And if there is no other cause for the pain, the cause is better and lighter.
E la curacio de lu es que te perforses a la sedacio del apostema caut que pauses sobre le spondil atrissat oli rozat sol, o am mugols de huous asatz; pausa sobre aquela aquel alcunas veguadas le dia entro que sia sedat le apostema caut.	And if the intestine or cushion is placed on the patient's spine, it is called a cushion-burning.
E lahoras pausa un dels emplastres confortantz e exsitans, e strenh sobre aquel am liament; e comanda al malaute que use de repaus e de tranquillitat e que no dorme sobre la partida am la qual atroba dolor entro que sia sanat.	And thus you will bring relief to the patient's pain by applying remedies.
E si accideys deves la atricio del os satagias o alcuna causa que ja es seperada de lu, lahoras cove que secces sobre la codena e que ostes aquel os; e aprop ajusta las doas labias de la plagua, am sutura si es gran; e aprop cura aquela am alcu encarnatiu dels enguentz, entro que sia sanat.	When you have to apply cautery to the patient's bone because of a wound from the operation, it should be applied to the area where the bone was previously exposed.
Mays si es trencat le derier del os alhoses, e es la fi de la coeta, lahoras cove que tu entrometas le dit pous de la ma senestra en le cul, e que enguales le os trencat am l’autra ma segon que es possible per equacio segonda; e aprop pausa sobre lu emplastre e astelha, si indigeysses de aquels, e aprop strenh aquel.	When you have broken a bone, put your hands on the hips, and the rest of the body is carefully burned in order to avoid pain in the legs, then place them under the thigh and another on their feet if necessary.
E si sentes satagias trencadas en lu, lahoras tu fen sobre aquela, e osta aquel, e cura la plagua am la curacio que es precedida entro que sia sanada.	And if you feel pain in your legs, apply a bandage to them, and allow the patient to rest and heal.
Capitol .x.	Chapter 10.
De restauracio de la ancha.	Then apply the treatment for gout.
Les osses de las anchas tart so trencats, e si trencan, lahoras la fractura de lor no es sino communicio en las extremitatz de aquelas e son inscidas en la longitut e declinan a las partidas dedintz; e accideys al malaute dolor en le loc e punctura, e la camba es stupefacta quan es fractura.	And if the body is affected by humors that cause pain, then apply heat to the affected area.
E la restauracio de lu es que tu extendas la tua ma sobre aquel entro que sia sobre la fractura qual es la figura de lu.	Then you apply your hand to the area above their broken bones.
E si fractura es en la extremitat de lu tant solament, lahoras tu enguala aquela segon que a tu es apparelhat per equacio engual entro que sia asemblat a la sua figura natural.	Then return the patient's hands to the body's natural position.
Mays si la fractura es en le lonc o que ja declina a las partidas dejos, lahoras tu fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu ventre entro que sia preparada a tu la restauracio de aquela fractura.	Then you must apply a hot poultice to the fractured area.
E donc quan auras engualada aquela, pausa sobre lu emplastre, e aprop pausa sobre aquel astela de fust o de codena, e strenh per strictura sobre la qual no temas punctacio de fractura ni remocio de la stelha.	E then apply a hot iron to cauterize the other parts of their body.
E enguala la concavitat am aquo que uempla aquela entro que aquela prengua la strictura segon equalitat, e comanda al malaute que dorma sobre le sieu dos o desobre le sieu costat sa.	Then apply a hot iron to the affected area to treat their ailment on the leg.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu cessa de extencio de lu e de la sua restauracio entro que sia sedat le apostema caut, e pausa sobre lu aquo que sede aquel segon que es precedit; e aprop retorna a la restauracio de lu, e strenh aquel ayssi cum cove.	The first part of the text is about gout being caused by an imbalance in bodily humors.
E si accideysso en le os satagias o son comminuidas, lahoras tu las tratz.	If you are experiencing pain in the bones, then treat them.
Capitol .xi.	Chapter 11
De restauracio de la fractura del adjutori.	And then apply heat to the affected area.
Adjutori es aquo que es entre le coyde entro al cap de la spalla.	The physician will call it gout.
E si es trencat, lahoras la restauracio de lu es en una de doas manieyras, de las quals es la una que tu prenguas fust pla de migiera groceza segon aquesta forma:	Then, if there are cushions to be restored for the patient, use another method.
E sian liatz en doas extremitatz dos liamentz, e aprop sia suspendut del loc elevat.	Two weights are used to apply pressure to the body during surgery.
E segua le malaute sobre una sezela; e aprop gieta fora le sieu bras trencat sobre le fust entro que pervengua al titillic de lu en le mieg loc del qual sia annexa la curvitat del fust.	And if the patient has been treated for the ailment, but they are still suffering from pain in the limbs, then the doctor will use a hot cautery to treat them.
E aprop suspen sobre aquel alcuna causa greu, o·l minestre extenda aquel a las partidas dejos; e aprop le metge eque la fractura am las sieuas mas ensemps, entro que la fractura retorne segon que cove.	And if the patient's bowels are in distress, the doctor should apply cauterization to them carefully.
E l’autra manieyra es que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre la sieua cervitz e suspen la ma del col de lu am liament; e aprop comanda a dos ministres que la un de lor tengua aquo que es desobre la fractura am las suas mas; e l’autre tengua le pus dejos de lu; e quascu de lor extenda a la sua partida.	And if you are in the position to apply the other end of the wound to the thigh, it is customary for two cushions to be placed under the patient, at the side of the wound, one above the fracture and the other below.
E si voles que la extencio sia pus fort, lahoras tu strenh sobre la fractura am liament e sobre aquela am autre liament, e quascu dels dos ministres extendan a doas suas partidas.	And if you want to cauterize the fracture, use a hot cautery.
E donc si la fractura es propinquada a la extremitat del muscle, lahoras cove que sia pausat la mitat del liament sobre le citillic e l’autre dejos la fractura deves le coyde.	And if the injury is near a muscle, apply a cushion to the injured area.
E semblantment si la fractura es propdana al coyde, lahoras cove que sia pausat le liament sobre aquel loc e sobre aquel coyde.	Similarly, if the injury is near a joint, put a cushion on their leg, and another one on their foot.
Enguala aquela am facilitat e ses trebal, e aprop quant sira engualada segon que cove e es applicada per bona applicacio, lahoras strenh aquela si no accideys apostema caut.	Then apply a poultice on their joints.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras layssa la strictura entro al vii dia, e pausa sobre lu lana sutza enbeguda en vi agre e oli rozat entro que repause le apostema, e lahoras tu stren aquela.	Mays, if necessary treat the swelling in the legs with a poultice.
E la manieyra de strenher aquela es que pauses emplastre sobre la fractura, e aprop pausa envolopament de drap nau sobre le emplastre; e aprop ajuste le bras sobre aquel adjutori, e pause la sua ma uberta sobre le sieu muscle.	And apply the poultice to the patient's arm for their leg pain.
E pausa le drap e strenh sobre le adjutori le bras per so que·l bras sia en loc de stelhas, si no prohibeys de aquo alcuna causa del os trencat.	If you don't prevent the patient from moving, hold their arms down firmly.
E lahoras usa de stelhas.	And then they should be used for pain in the feet.
E es que pauses sobre la fractura aquela stela que sia pus lada e pus fort de las autras stelas; e pausa entre quascuna stela la latitut del dit, e sia la longitut de las stelas segon la trencadura am addicio de tres ditz de tota partida.	And you place three cushions under the affected area; one for the patient's leg, and another for their foot, and another to be applied directly to the site of the injury.
E aprop strenh sobre las stelas am la strictura la qual he dita al comensament del capitol.	And then strengthen it with bandages on the side of the abdomen.
E es que la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura sia pus streyt.	And then you have a straight line over your legs to be used for cauterization if necessary.
E quant pus es alonguada la fractura sia la strictura menor.	And when pus gathers in the joints, it is called gout.
E donc si vezes le situament de las stelas e la strictura ayssi cum havem dit en la hora en la qual restauras le membre al sieu assituament, lahoras tu fay.	Then when treating someone, you must be careful to place the cushion on their legs.
E si temes apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la strictura e las stelas entro al dia vii ayssi cum havem dit.	Then apply a cushion to the legs as needed, just as we have done with the patient's foot.
E aprop considera le liament en totas partidas per tres dias per so que no accida en le loc pruziment o imflacio; o es prohibida la vianda pervenir al membre per disposicio de superfluitat de strictura; e donc rectifiqua tot aquo segon que havem dit.	And then consider the location for three days, so that the food does not cause harm to the patient's body.
Mays si tu yest sobre confizanssa que no accida alcuna causa de aquo, lahoras no deslias la liguadura sino aprop tres dias o mays.	Mays three days must pass before you can loosen the bandage.
E sia la sua dormicio del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e las sieuas mas sian sobre le stomac.	And so the patient should be treated for their ailment with a cushion placed on their stomach.
E pausa sobre le adjutori cocena plena de lana engualment, e considera en tota hora de la nueyt o del dia que no sia deliada ni dissolta la figura del membre trencat, o que sia le liament mollificat, donc rectifica aquo tot am la tua vertut.	And you must place cushions under them to ensure comfort during treatment.
E pausa la vianda del malaute segon le orde le qual havem denant mes, enayssi que la vianda sia subtil en le comensament entro que es comensat strenher; e lahoras cove que egrossas la vianda de lu.	And then place a cushion under their feet to stop them from being thin.
Quar de constuma del adjutori e de la camba de lu es que sian strengutz en xl dias; e lahoras cove que sian desliatz e sia administrat banh e sia medicat am enguentz los quals rectifican aquel.	Here comes the translation:
E si la fractura es layha atrita, lahoras tu no deslies de aquela le liament e las stelhas entro a l dias o entro a dos meses.	And if the fracture is severe, it will take a few weeks to two months for the body to heal.
Capitol .xii.	Another person's hand should be placed on the foot for another to be used as a reference, if necessary.
De restauracio de fractura del bras.	Then apply a cushion under their arm, and then on their legs, etc.
Bras es compost de dos osses les quals so appelatz dos focils; dels quals la un es petit, e es aquel que siec le dit pous, e l’autre es gran e es aquel le qual es pausat dejos le petit dit, de la partida pus dejus.	Two bones are being composed (composed of) as two parts of the body, the one small, the other large, which are called a small part of the body are above their feet, where the pain is located, and you must apply a cushion to the smaller bone in that position.
E fort leu es trencat le focil major solament, o le petit, e fort leu son trincatz ensemps.	And so, the pain in the foot will be relieved by applying the cautery to the appropriate areas.
E quan es trencat le focil petit desus, lahoras la restauracio de lu es leugiera, e la sanacio de lu es pus leugiera.	And when it is broken, healing the slightest injury can be difficult.
E quan es trencat le focil de lu dejos la fractura de lu es mala, e la sanacio de lu es dificil.	And when the body is broken open, it's difficult to heal.
E pus mala de aquela es quan son trencatz dos osses essemps.	And two bones are already held in place for the patient's body, and another cushion on their legs.
Donc si l’os le qual es trencat es le focil petit desus, lahoras es convenient al metge, deves la restauracio de lu, que pauze petita extencio am facilitat entro que aquel sia engualhat.	Therefore if the patient has a broken bone, it is appropriate to place a cushion on their legs and use a hot iron for cauterization.
Mays si le focil gran es aquo que es trincat, lahoras cove que pause extencio pus vehement.	When the fire is hot, it must be used carefully.
E si les dos focils so ensemps trincatz, lahoras cove que tu pauses la extritura mot pus fort.	And if the two are together, they should be strong together.
E cove que pauses la figura de la ma deves la restauracio de lu e la extencio de lu estenduda sobre un coyssi, e sia le pols de la ma a las partidas desus, pus aut que totz les autres ditz, e le dit auricular sia pus bas dels autres ditz, e le malaute sia cezent sobre una cezela cayrada.	And if you have a pain in their foot, you should know that it is caused by pressure upon the ear.
E sia un coyssi denant lu en la altetut o endreyt de lu, per so que·l malaute no encorra trebalh.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the leg of the patient, so that the heat does not reach the other side.
E aprop le ministre extenda le bras de la partida pus dejos am la sieua ma o am liament, e autre ministre extenda desus semblantment.	And upon the legs, apply the poultice to reduce pain and inflammation.
E aprop le metge engualhe le os entro que redugua aquel segon la milhor figura que pot.	And so place a cushion under their legs in order to achieve the best possible position.
E si en la factura del os so satagias, lahoras te perforsa raduzir tota pessa en le sieu loc am la tua vertut.	And if your body's humors are out of balance, then in the case of the bones, you are affected by gout, which is why a pointed tool is used to treat it.
E si appar en lu satagia separada que punh la codena e no es a tu speransa en la restauracio de lu, lahoras tu fen sobre lu e osta aquela segon la manieyra la qual havem dita desus.	And if you are treating an injury to the leg, apply heat by using another method, and place your hand on the other side of the body to prevent the spread of inflammation.
Mays si la fractura es am plagua, yeu ja he fayt ad aquo capitol singular, e donc pren la curacio de aquel.	Therefore, if a wound is in a single place, it's known as a boil.
E si accideys apostema caut al comensament de la tua restauracio, lahoras tu lineys un drap am cerot fayt de oli rozat e cera blanca, e sia migier entre specitut e subtilitat, e strenh drap sobre aquel am strictura subtil entro que le apostema sia cedat; e lahoras remau le cerot e pausa emplastre preparat de polvera de moli am clayre de huou, e aprop pausa stelhas; e sia la stela la qual es pauzada sobre aquela fractura pus lada e pus fort.	When the pain is in the legs or feet, it's necessary to use a hot iron for cautery.
E sapias que·l nombre de las stelas del bras so vi en las majors disposicios, o sia la fractura en un focil o en dos focils ensemps.	And you are wise to know that the stars on the arm are called "stelas".
E aprop pausa la tua strictura sobre le loc de la fractura pus fort e pus vehement, e quan mays sira la extrictura a las partidas desus de la fractura o a las partidas pus bassas de lu, pausa la strictura un pauc pus molh segon que es precedida la rememoracio de lu en le comensament del capitol.	And if you wish to apply a cauterization, a cushion should be placed upon their feet to prevent the pain from becoming more severe by applying it directly on the affected area.
E les draps que so envolopatz sobre la fractura sian draps mols humitz, e no sian durs ni aspres, e·l fiel am le qual es strenhut sia de li propriament migier entre subtil e gros, ayssi cum havem recomtat.	And when a bandage is applied to the injured area, it should be soft and smooth.
E considera le membre e·l liament aprop alcus dias.	And consider the patient's leg and the thigh bone as the most important.
E si accideys alcuna causa de la qual rectificacio es necessaria, ayssi cum prusiment le qual accideys al membre, e lahoras cove que tu enbroques le membre am aygua cauda entro que cesse aquel pruziment.	And if a wound or injury occurs to the body, use warm water to wash it.
E leysses le membre no costreyt entro que repause, e aprop torna la strictura.	And let it be cauterized, if necessary.
E si la extrictura ja es mollificada e l’os ja es remaugut e semblantz ad aquels, lahoras rectifiqua tot aquo am la tua vertut.	Translation: Then apply a cautery to the legs.
E considera mays si le nutriment es prohibit pervenir al membre per superfluitat de strictura, quar lahoras cove que mollifiques aquel un petit e laysses aquel per alcus dias entro que corra ad aquel le nutriment, e aprop strenh aquel.	Then you must consider if it is necessary to treat the ailment with a cautery.
Mays si al malaute no accideys alcuna causa de aquelas que havem ditas, lahoras no cove que sia desliat entro aprop xx dias o enviro de aquels.	Mays a person has already been afflicted by gout, they will be in pain for days or weeks.
E aprop sia suspenduda la ma del malaute per la sua vertut de movement agitatius, e fay aquel dormir sobre le sieu dos.	And another servant on their chest will cause them to sleep.
E sapias que aquesta fractura es restaurada en xxx dias o en xxxii dias, o fort leu es restaurada en xxviii dias, e tot aquo es segon la disposicio de las compleccios e las disposicios de la vertut.	And if the patient's body is such that the disease can be cured by applying a cautery to certain points, they will be cured in xxviii days.
Capitol .xiii.	This chapter discusses the treatment of the disease, stating that it's appropriate for it to be treated as a specific type of ailment called "malaute" which may have been a common term used in medieval medical texts for a variety of ailments.
De restauracio de fractura de la pinche de la ma e dels ditz.	And if there are fractures in the leg or foot, then apply a cushion to their legs.
Sapias que a la pinche de la ma e als nuzes dels ditz tart endeve fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio motas veguadas.	Know that it is necessary to know that the patient needs a cushion for comfort.
E quan accideys a la ma fractura o atrissio, lahoras cove que·l malaute segua cayrat e denant lu lies cezent segon equalitat, e aprop pausa la ma de lu sobre aquela extenduda.	And if a patient's hands are injured by a fall.
E aprop le ministre extenda les osses trencatz e·l metge engualhe aquels entro que sian congongitz am bona congoncio.	And then the doctor applies a poultice to the patient's leg.
E lahoras cove que pause emplastre e estopa, si no accideys apostema caut; e aprop pausa stela desus segon la quantitat del loc, e tu ja has envolopada aquela en drap de li.	Then apply a poultice and bandage to the affected area.
Mays si la trincadura es en las partidas dedintz deves le ventre de la palma, e lahoras fay semblant de spera de drap, e comanda al malaute que strenha aquela am la sua palma trincada; aprop sia strenguda am drap lonc.	When the body is weak, use a cushion to support its abdomen and use a bandage to protect the wound; use the long, thin cushion for the leg.
E sia la stelha de cuer am drap en le qual sia levitat, per so que le cuer sia aplicat a la palma; e strenh aquela segon que cove.	And if it is necessary to cauterize, apply a bandage on their legs, and treat them as they deserve.
Mays si la fractura es a las partidas defora, lahoras cove que pauses desus stela e autre estela de la partida dejos en la palma, per so que la ma sia uberta e dreyta; e aprop pausa la strictura, ayssi cum es revolvuda la ma a la rateta entre les ditz am liamentz.	Then if the fracture is outside the body, you should apply a cushion to the affected area and carefully place their legs back in their proper position.
E si accideys fractura a alcu dels nozes dels ditz, lahoras si es le dit pous, sia engualat segon que cove e aprop sia strenhut am la palma e si·t voles, pausa a lu astela petita dreyta per so que sia elevada la fractura e no sia mauguda.	And if there is a fracture in the legs, apply a splint to hold the bones together.
Mays si la fractura es en les autres ditz, ayssi cum en aquel del mieg loc, o en le indic, o en le auricular, o en le anular, lahoras sia engualhat e liat am le dit sa le qual siec aquel; o sian totz liatz segon continuacio, e es milhor; o pausa sobre aquel stela petita, ayssi cum havem dit en le pous.	Mays es que la lesa engualhat, o le auricular, or le other, be in the legs and elsewhere.
E considera, en la tua restauracio, e aprop aquela, la disposicio de apostema caut e oppose — am la tieua operacio — am aquo que cove quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, segon que es iterada la narracio de lu.	E consider the following for your recovery — e si es necessitat: E, tu.
Capitol .xiv.	When there's pain in the legs and feet, apply a poultice directly to the affected areas.
De restauracio de fractura del os de la coyssa.	For the restoration of the bone of the leg.
Le os de la cueyssa motas veguadas es trencat e es declarat al sentiment segon que es convertit a la partida denant e a la pus sobirana.	The bones are broken by their own malice, and they declare the person to be suffering from gout.
E la restauracio de lu se fa enayssi que·l liament es strenhut sobre la fractura e autre liament dejos la fractura, e le malaute sia prostrat sobre le sieu ventre e sobre la cara.	The patient's injury is best described as if being treated with cautery.
E aprop le ministre extenda tot le liament a la sua partida segon la qualitat, quan la fractura es en le mieg loc del os.	And if he has a fracture, then cauterize the bone at the site to prevent further damage.
Mays si es propdana a la razitz de la cueyssa, lahoras sia le liament propda al denolh a la partida del pentenilh, per so que la extencio caja en sus, e le autre liament dejos la fractura.	When the doctors have to treat something, they will use one of the methods I've mentioned in the other sentences.
E semblantment si la trencadura es propdana al denolh, lahoras sia fayt le liament propda al denol, e sia la extencio a las partidas dejos.	And if the patient's injury is to the leg, it should be treated with another method of cautery on their body.
E aprop le metge enguale le os am amduas las sieuas mas entro que reduzesca aquel segon la semblansa natural e l’os es conjungit per bona conjunccio; lahoras cove que pauses emplastre e strictura, si no accideys al membre apostema.	And if you have a cushion, place the other one on his legs.
Mays si accideys en lu apostema, lahoras tu layssa aquel per alcus dias entro que l’apostema caut sia cedat, e aprop retorna a la tua curacio.	The text refers to treating an abscess (Translation 1) and mentions using a cushion for support during the process.
La strictura de lu sia ayssi fayta: cove que envolopes sobre la fractura una benda dura, e dobla aquela dos o tres veguadas, e remaugua de lu superfluitat; e aprop envolopa la camba entro que pervengua al talo e a la razitz de la cueyssa.	Then apply a bandage to the affected area.
E intromet lonc fiel entre la cueyssa e la camba prop del denol a las partidas dejos, e venguan las extremitatz del fiel de la partida pus sobirana de las doas partz, e aprop revolveys sobre la camba e la cueyssa aquo que superflueys de la benda.	And then apply heat to the legs and use a hot cautery.
E aprop pausa sobre la cueyssa en le loc de aquela fractura astelhas, e pausa de aquelas una stela sobre le os de la camba.	And so you have opened the space between the legs of their cushion, and placed a cushion on that area and another on their bones.
E aprop uempli las vacuitatz entre la camba e la cuoyssa am draps mols, per so que sia coagulada la extrictura.	Then return the patient's legs to their place and the other servant will be fine.
E aprop comensa am strictura fort del mieg sobre le loc de la fractura am tres envolucios o quatre, e quant mays tu te alonhas am liament del loc de la fractura, la tua strictura sia menor e pus leugiera e pus molha.	Then the patient's intestines are inflamed and swollen, and you must apply heat to the location of the pain in their bowels.
E aprop exten a doas extremitatz del fiel a las partidas dejos entro que pervengua a la cavilha del pe, e strenh amdoas las extremitatz de las stelhas del autra part per so que·l liament no sia remaugut del sieu loc.	Then place two cushions on their legs to prevent the intestine from being injured.
E aprop leyssa la strectura sobre aquel, don esta ayssi que no accideys al membre corrosio ni apostema caut ni emflacio e semblantz ad aquels; e si accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, adonc cueta te am desliament de lu, e rectifica aquo que accideys tot aprop, segon que havem dit motas veguadas.	Then apply a bandage to hold the incision closed and prevent infection.
Mays si en le os es pessa del os la qual pongua, lahoras cove que tu engualhes aquel segon que a tu es possibla; e sino, fen sobre lu e remau aquel, e cura am aquo del qual es precedida la rememoracio entro que sia sanat.	Then you must apply the cushion to the legs after you have removed the herniated part.
E alcunas veguadas es strenhuda aquesta fractura de la coyssa otra aquo que sian ajustadas a lu stelhas, ayssi cum havem dit en le adjutori e·n le bras.	It is customary to cauterize the other parts of the body when treating this type of fracture in the leg.
Mays empero en la restauracio de lu en tal manieyra fayta no accideys al malaute claudicacio; e si es restaurada sola, otra aquo que li sia applicada l’autra camba, lahoras es necessari que claudique aquel del qual es tostemps.	"And if the patient's body is not already afflicted with a disease, it will be necessary to apply a cautery to his or her legs."
E sapias que la coyssa es strenhuda en xl dias o un pauc mes o un pauc mens, e tot aquo es segon la diversitat de las compleccios e de las autras dispozicios.	And if the patient has been suffering for forty days or more, or less, depending on the severity of the illness.
Capitol .xv.	Chapter 15.
De restauracio de la fractura de la rodela del denolh.	This refers to restoring something to its original place.
Sapias que fractura de la rodela del denol tart endeve, mays accideys a lu motas veguadas atrissio.	This is a description of how to apply a bandage for a broken bone.
Mays si accideys a lu fractura, lahoras no es sino fissura o trauc en las suas partidas, e aquo es am plagua o ses plagua, e sobre aquo tot es estat am le sentiment.	Then apply this treatment to the legs or feet as well.
E la restauracio de lu es enayssi que sia engualat aquo que es romput de las partidas de lu am les ditz entro que sia agreguat e conjongit segon que es possible per equacio e facilitat e fabricacio.	And then the patient's intestines are to be re-enforced where necessary.
E aprop pausa emplastre e pausa sobre aquel stela redonda, si indigeysses de aquela; e strenh desus am strictura ad aquo convenient.	And upon that round place where the patient's pain resides, you will apply a poultice.
E aprop considera totas las disposicios las quals havem recomtadas en las autras fracturas, ayssi cum es apostema caut e semblant ad aquels enaissi que se oppause a tot accident am aquo que a lu es convenient entro que sia sanat.	Then consider all the positions on the body where the patient experiences pain.
Capitol .xvi.	Chapter 16
De restauracio de la fractura de la camba.	And another for cushion under the leg.
Sapias que en la camba so dos osses dels quals la un es gros, e es le nompnat per nom de la camba; e l’autra es subtil, e es nompnat focil.	Then a cushion is placed on their legs when they are held in place by another hand.
E accideys a quascus de las specias de fractura aquo que accideys als dos osses del bras, e per aquo es fayta restauracio de lu ayssi cum restauracio del bras engualment, e la operacio de lu es una.	And if there are injuries to the arm or body, for that matter, the operation is the same.
E si so trincatz dos osses ensemps, la camba es convertida a totas partidas.	And if the patient's legs are broken, it spreads to the whole body.
E si es trinquat le os pus subtil, la camba es convertida a las partidas Denant.	And if the patient has a pain in the leg bones, it is called "trinquat" (likely meaning "painful") due to the finest (of the) humors.
E si es trincat le os pus gros, atrobas aquel dejos, e es de aquelas causas que no so a tu ameguadas.	And if the bone is fractured, you should apply a cauterizing treatment to help those with such conditions.
E aprop aministra extencio e equacio e liguacio de las astelas segon aquel engualment.	Then place your hand on their feet to help them with pain relief.
Mays empero cove, si la fractura de la camba es laja havent motas satagias, que la extencio sia mendre e pus leugiera, e alleuja am la tua vertut.	But if the pain is in the legs, they call for a cushion under them, and the doctor's help.
E en la camba es alcuna causa de operacio sobre le bras, e es quan tu engualas las stelhas e que comples tota la tieua operacio, lahoras tu prendras pessas de fustz de pi le qual es pausat dejos las cauzas las quals so pausades en solies, e so faytas eyssament de brancas de palma; aligeys de aquelas a las quals es petita groceza, e no sia ges de las manudas, e sia la longuesa de aquelas segon la longuesa de la camba, e del denol entro al pus dejos.	When there is an intestine or something else in the body, which is necessary for the lower body to be healed, you apply a cauterization to those parts.
E aprop envolopa sobre quascuna drap en doas envolucios segon la longitut de lu, e pausa la una sobre la partida de la camba de la una part e l’autra del autra part, e sian del denol entro al pus bas loc del pe.	And then you cauterize the area around the foot.
E aprop lias las doas stelhas en tres locs de doas extremitatz e al mieg loc, quar am aquesta strectura la camba es prohibida de clinar a la partida dextra e sinistra, e sta per bona stacio.	And apply two cushions to their legs, and a second one on each side.
E ja es aministrat un brasset de fust segon la longuesa de la camba; e sia pausada en lu la camba per so que conserve aquel de movement.	Then place a cushion under their foot as needed to soothe them.
E majorment cove que tu fassas aquo en fractura, e quan am aquela es plagua propriament.	And if it is necessary to cauterize the wound, you should apply it to the leg, where the pain is located.
E aprop considera en quascun jorn la camba e studia am aquel per derier studi, e tu le guardes de apostema e de imflacio o de autres causas semblantz; e cum accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, lahoras opausa te a lu am aquo que cove entro que sia sanat.	Then cautery was used for the other ailments I mentioned, such as to treat them from the inside.
Capitol .xvii.	Gout is a disease that affects the joints.
De la fractura del talo e dels osses del pe e dels ditz.	And placed a cushion on their foot.
Al talo no accideys fractura de tot; mays als osses del pe accideys fractura alcunas veguadas; e als ditz del pe pauc accideys fractura, e no accideys a lor sino atricio en las mes de disposicio.	Then apply cautery to the affected area to stop the bleeding.
E si als osses del pe endeve fractura e vezes aquels osses esser elevatz sobre si entre lor, lahoras le malaute pause le sieu pe sobre la terra preparat ayssi cum anant.	And then apply pressure to the bones of the affected limb with the other cushion, as you would do for the pain in the foot.
E aprop pausa la un pe sobre aquo que es elevat de aquels osses, e aprop calca aquels, e prem, e engualha aquels entro que torno en los locs.	Then place a cushion on the feet and apply pressure to the area where the pain is felt.
E aprop pausa emplastre e stopa desus, e pausa dejos le ventre del pe una petita taula a la qual sian dos caps plas.	Then apply a cushion to the patient's feet.
E aprop strenh aquela am le pe am strectura descent, pus que tu has envolopada aquela am draps e am autres causes de las quals indigeys.	And if it is necessary to treat the foot, apply a hot poultice.
E cum a lu passan tres dias o quatre, lahoras tu deslia le liament, quar tu atrobaras les osses engualatz, o sian trincatz o sian dislocatz, e la operacio en aquels es ayssi co coneysses.	And if on the third or fourth day, the patient has pain in their legs or feet.
Mays si alcus ditz son trincatz, lahoras restaura aquels, e enguala aquels ayssi cum yeu e recomtat a tu en la restauracio dels ditz de la ma.	This translates to "And if the patient has gout, the pain will be intense."
E aprop pausa al dit trincat stela segon la longitut del dit, e sia pus lada de lu un pauc; e aprop dejos le pe aquesta taula la qual e a tu recomtada, e strenh aquela am strictura decent.	And cushion the foot with a cushion of the proper size for the patient's condition, so that the intestines are properly aligned.
Mays si aquo que es trincat dels osses so dos o tres o mays, lahoras tu pausa sobre quascun dit astela de la sua quantitat envolopada en drap leon, e strenh la taula en le pus bas del pe, e sia stant sobre la un dels caps de la taula foro le ventre del pe per que la tengua am bona retencio.	You have already opened the foot's cavity, and you will now treat them based on the quantity of the old wound.
E es convenient a tu que no oblides que no consideres totas las causas las quals que e ditas a tu en las autras fracturas dels accidentz que havem dit; e opausa te a tot accident am aquo que cove.	And so that the physician may treat with proper care and attention to the details of the injury.
Capitol .xviii.	Capitol .xviii. translates to Chapter 18.
De fractura del conh de la femna e del os del pentenilh e de la vergua del home.	And if you need to be treated for pain caused by a broken bone, use the following method:  (for a woman)
Quan le conh de la femna es trincat, lahoras fay aquela ceser en cezela cayrada, e aprop enclina aquela a la partida del dos un petit, e sia tenguda detras.	When a woman's bowels are inflamed, it is treated with a poultice applied to her back.
E aprop la matrona umpla le conh de coto, e sia fayt en le conh de lu ayssi cum spera; e aprop la femna sia concutida, e eleva le dos de lu petit a petit, quar tot aquo es fora-getat entro que sia denant la partida del conh ayssi cum spera e l’os trincat retorna.	And place it on their legs, if they are cold and shivering, or near the heart of a man.
E aprop pausa pulvils sobre le dos de lu, e quan vol urinar remaugua le coto am facilitat e aprop urine, e reduzeys e retorna aquel segon la manieyra segon la qual mezist aquel al comensament, e aprop retorne al sieu pulvil primier.	And then apply the poultice to the affected area.
E fassa ayssi per vii dias o enviro aquels, quar aquel es restaurat.	Let the patient be kept in this state for seven days or so.
E si voles, pren una vezica de ovela e strenh sobre le trauc de lu una canula de canavera; e entromet tota la vesica en le conh de lu, e aprop ensuffla en la canula am vertut entro que la vesica sia imflada dedintz le conh, quar la fractura retorna.	And if you wish to remove a portion of the sheep's bladder, put a canula of the same size in the hole.
E aprop sia umplida de coto e estia per alcus dias segon que havem recomtat, entro que sia sanat.	When near the affected area or if the intestines are affected, you'll need to apply a bandage for the duration of the treatment.
E quan le os del pentenil de home o de femna es trincat, lahoras aministra en la restauracio e agulacio de lu aquo que havem recomtat en l’os del anca.	And if a bone is broken, a hot poultice is applied to the area to help it heal.
E aquo que es dreyt no es occultat en aquestas fracturas proprinquas e que pauc endeveno, majorment ad aquel al qual es alcun studi e us e enten aquest meu libre mot; quar aquela fractura significa a tu en las majors disposicios via dreyturiera en la restauracio e en la strictura de lu, e donc enten be.	And es que the patient's joints have been opened (in this case, caused to be inflamed) but they are not in their proper place, and another treatment for a cushion under the skin was used.
Mays en la vergua del home quan es trincada, pren guarguamela de auca, e met la vergua en aquela; e aprop pausa sobre lu envolucio de drap, e sia envolopada, e aprop sia layssada per tres dias o enviro aquels, e sia sanada.	And placed in the opening of that body, which is the way you treat a man's foot for three days or so.
Capitol .xix.	Capitol .xix. should be translated as Chapter 19.
De restauracio de fractura dels osses quan es am plagua.	Then restore the broken bones in the legs.
Convenient es ad aquel al qual accideys fractura am plagua, e majorment si le os es gran ayssi cum es le os de la cuoyssa o de l’adjutori, o semblant ad aquel, que tu te cuoytes e fleubotomes aquel tantost si las condicios de fleubotomia a tu o testifican ayssi cum desus havem dit.	The first part of the body to be affected by the plague in an operation.
E si la plagua eflueys sanc, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la retencio de lu enayssi que tu polverizes sobre lu zegi trissat, si a tu autra causa no es present.	Then if there are issues with blood circulation or wounds, use cauterization only if absolutely necessary.
E aprop comensa restaurar la fractura en aquel meteys dia, e no prolongues aquo, si no accideys apostema.	And if the wound does not fester, then apply cautery to the wound.
Mays si accideys apostema caut, lahoras tu layssa la restauracio de lu entro al ix dia, entro que sia cedat le apostema, e no apropinques a lu en le tertz dia e·l iiii de tot, quar tu faras accidir mals accidentz.	When you see an abscess, restore the patient to their health by treating the ailment in the proper manner.
Mays si le os trencat es eminent sobre la codena descubert, lahoras cove que te perforses reduzir aquel e engualar aquel am las tuas mas am facilitat e am pauca extencio.	Mays, if it is necessary to cauterize the bone, the wound is treated with another.
Mays si extencio no es a tu preparada e la equacio de lu am las tieuas mas, lahoras tu reduzeys aquel am las tuas mas am aquest sturment; e es sturment le qual es fayt de ferr, la longitut del qual es de vii ditz o de viii e la latitut del qual es segon la quantitat de la plagua; e per aquo es necessari al metge que prengua de aquels tres o quatre segon la quantitat que indigeys ad aquo en la curacio en tota specia de fractura.	Mays tu am the length that is necessary for the doctor to prepare and treat the patient's ailment; the doctor applies cauterization to the affected area, which is seven days long, and their treatment requires a physician.
E sia redon, e sia en lu pauca groceza per so que no sia doblat deves la comprecio sobre aquel en la hora de la operacio.	And in these cases, the patient's legs are swollen due to the inflammation.
E sia de aguda extremitat al qual sia marge en las sieuas extremitatz; e sia le desus de lu a grossetut tendent, e de la maytat de lu entro a las partidas.	The patient's body will be affected by pain in various ways; if the pain is severe, they may need to have their limbs cauterized.
E aquesta es la forma de lu:	And then you should place your hand on their legs.
E es nompnat en grec “labre volentz atelarem”, so es paleta pauca.	And if there is pain in the joints or muscles, then the patient should be treated carefully by a physician.
Per que cove que sia pausada la extremitat de lu acuda elevada sobre la extremitat del os eminent.	And if the pain is in their legs, they should have their hands elevated.
E inpelleys aquel en una veguada entro que retorne le os, e sia engualat am alcuna equacio.	And then apply a poultice to that joint so the pain will not spread.
E donc esforsa te engualar las extremitatz de la fractura entre lor, e si la extremitat de lu trencada es subtil, e no pren aquela le sturment per bona axcepcio, lahoras cove que tu inscidas la extremitat de aquel os entro que l’insturment haja poder de aquo.	Then apply cauterization to prevent further complications.
Mays si no podes reduzir le os de tot am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras enscideys aquel am aquo que coveneys a lu dels inscizoris les quals havem ditz; o serra aquel am una de las serras en qualque manieyra sia a tu possible.	When a patient has a bone that can be reduced, and you are unable to reduce the bones in their foot, use cushions to support their legs, and hold the affected area of the leg gently but firmly with your hand.
E aprop ratz aquel que roman en le os de asperitat e de scorsas menudas.	And then put a cushion under their hands (to soothe the pain), and another on their legs to prevent them from becoming stiff.
E cum le os es reduzit, e aprop la reduccio le malaute atroba dolor vehement ledent, lahoras sapias que le os no es retornat al sieu loc natural; e adonc fay aquo quar tu confereyses al malaute gran juvament.	And if the bone is returned to its natural position, then you should apply another cushion to their leg or thigh, so that the joint in the leg does not become inflamed.
Cum es complida la tua restauracio la qual fas al os, e lahoras submergeys drap en vi stiptic negre, e propriament si es en estiu, e no pauses sobre la plagua cerot ni autre causa en la qual sia oli, per so que no fassa en lu accidir poyredura e corropcio.	And if you apply the cautery to a wound during your summer restoration, it will be necessary to use a poultice to treat the inflammation.
E aprop aministra stelas en la hora del tieu compliment de la restauracio de l’os, e layssa la plagua descuberta enayssi que inscidas le trauc am forfexs e uses de envolucios segon la quantitat de la plagua.	Then leave the intestine or plague to run its course and let the patient regain their strength.
E guarda te am tota cautela que no strenhas la plagua am la fractura, quar motas veguadas an fayt aquo les fols metges, e fero accidir sobre les sieus malautes mort o malautia corrodent o zuthement, so es sania.	Then if you are careful, they will be able to avoid spreading disease and causing harm.
E si la tieua strictura leugiera, molli, diversa de la strictura de las autras fracturas.	If you have a weak constitution, you are prone to pain in the legs and feet.
E si la plagua es gran o es plagua mala, e temes sobre aquel alcus accidentz mals les quals havem recomtatz, e atrobas dolor en le loc, lahoras no cove que pauses sobre aquel astelas, mays fay ad aquel envolucio de draps durs en loc de stelas e strenh lu am aquelas.	Then use firm bandages to bind the legs in those cases, but put cushions under them for comfort.
E cum aprop un dia o dos vezes ja la plagua comensar, que en lu sia engendrat brac, lahoras tu osta desus le drap le qual havias pausat sobre aquel am vi, e aprop aministra calguas, enguentz am les quals de nostra constuma es que mediquem las plaguas, ayssi cum enguentz tetrafarmacon e semblantz ad aquel.	When you have come to treat one or two patients with the plague, use a hot iron to apply cauterization to the affected area, as we shall administer it to them in the same way as we would administer it to others.
E conveneys a tu que deslias le liament e considera la plagua en quascun dia mati e vespre entro que sia consolidada e fermada, e cove que·l membre sia preparat en tal manieyra que la poyredura corra de lu a las partidas dejos am facilitat.	Therefore, apply the cautery to the intestine or leg of the patient, if there are signs of infiltration on that day.
si a la plagua passan motz dias, e no es consolidada ni es abscindit de lu le brac, lahoras sapias que aqui so satagias de las petitas per que cove enquieras la plagua am tenta.	If your illness is neither in the joints nor on the feet, it is translated as "the plague."
E de aquelas satagias aquelas que so separadas remau e extratz, aquelas que de lor no so separadas e pongen le membre e fan accidir dolor, perforsa te a inscidir aquelas segon que a tu aquo es possibla.	And so you apply cauterization to the body between the legs when they are affected by heat.
E si accideys a la plagua zuchem o eluchen, so es stiomenios, o autra specia de corrupcio e de putrefaccio, lahoras cove que pauses a quada un de aquels am aquo que conveneys a lu de la curacio del qual es precedida narracio en le sieu capitol.	When you apply heat to the area of the foot, it is customary to place a cushion underneath.
E de aquo en le qual cove que stia lo mieu sermo e tu fassas present la tua pessa: quan os gros es trincat, emineys sobre le membre ayssi cum le os de la coyssa e del ajutori e semblantz ad aquels dels membres grans, e que no presumas atraccio de lu, ni la extraccio de lu quar motas veguadas accideys per aquo la mort; habantz layssa aquel entro que poyresca, quar fort leu cayra per si aprop xx dias o xxx; e lahoras cura la plagua si a tu es vist, e si no layssa aquela.	And you should know that this is what doctors use to treat the other, which are in the body already, and for twenty days or more, you should apply a cushion (to stop) the spread of plague.
Capitol .xx.	Line 1: The twentieth chapter.
De la curacio de nodacio que accideys en le vestigi de alcuna fractura.	The treatment for gout, which affects the limbs, includes the use of cauterization.
Motas veguadas accideys aquesta nodacio en le vestigi de sanacio de fractura, e majorment que es prop de las juncturas, e es orrasada per lu la figura del membre; e fort leu prohibeys le membre de la sua operacio natural.	This is how they will know that it's good to treat it with the use of a cautery, and the patient's pain in their feet is from bad blood.
Adonc considera si la nodacio es recent e aministra en aquela medicinas que han stipticat ayssi co es aloen, e enses, e mira, e sercacollo, e acrassia, e semblantz ad aquels; enayssi que prenguas de aquela alcunas o totas, e comfesiys aquelas am vi stiptic, o am album de huou, o am vi agre, e pausa aquela sobre la nodacio en estopa, e constringeys aquelas sobre lu per bona constriccio.	when the pain in the joints is caused by cold humors, apply a poultice of cooling herbs to the affected area.
E leyssa extrictura que no deslies aquela per motz dias; e aprop deslia aquela e itera autra, entro que sia remauguda la nodacio; o strenh sobre aquela lamina de plom descentment, quar plom ha proprietat de remaure tot aquo que es imflat en les membres.	It is said that the condition of gout is characterized by a blockage that causes pain in the joints.
Mays si nodacio ja es en peyra convertida e streyta es e nessessitat provoca a ostar aquela coytadament, e lahoras scindeys aquela per la partida pus sobirana de lu, e inscideys la superfluitat e eminent, o ratz aquela am alcus rezoris entro que sia remauguda; e cura aquel entro que sia sanat.	Mays (meaning: perhaps) if the patient has a disease or illness related to humors that are caused by a specific part of the body being affected.
Capitol .xxi.	Chapter .xxi.
De restauracio de fractura quan es restaurada e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul no segon la sieua natura.	Then restore the bones to their proper place, and apply cushions to prevent them from moving.
Quan fractura de os es restaurada, e aprop aquo roman le membre subtil e freul, lahoras aquo no es fayt sino per motas causas: de las quals la una es multitut de solucio del liament e de la liguacio de lu fayta no segon que cove; o per superfluitat de strictura dels liamentz entro que·l nutriment sia prohibit correr al membre; o per multitut de embrocaccio superflua; o per movement superfluent no en la sua hora; o per pauquesa de sanc en le cors del malaute e per debelitat de lu.	When a fracture is healed, and their ligaments are restored to their proper place, the patient will be able to move their legs freely, but they may still need to use other supports for stability.
E curacio de aquo es dar a mengar al malaute e far le cor de lu tendre entro que·l sanc sia multiplicat en lu; e aministra banh; e entromet gaug e leticia sobre lu.	If someone has gout, they should be treated by a doctor who specializes in that ailment.
E aprop pausa pegua sobre le membre, per so que la pegua atire a lu mot nutriment, o continua embrocacio de lu am aygua tebeza, entro que·l nutriment corr e retorne a la sua figura natural.	Then apply a poultice to the area so that it heals naturally.
Capitol .xxii.	A hot poker should be used on the area to prevent the body from being opened.
De curacio dels osses trincatz quan so restauratz tortuozament e prohibeys la operacio de lor de aquo que cove.	And for treating broken bones, allow surgery to be performed on them.
Quan accideys al membre ja restaurat aprop la sanacio de lu de tortuositat e eminencia al os trincat e nodacio, e es per aquo fededa de forma del membre, mays empero le membre no es prohibit de la sieua operacio natural, lahora no cove que tu recipias la paraula de aquel que exsistima aquel membre sia de novel trincat.	If the intestine or the foot is affected by a twisted intestine, you must be careful.
Mays ja so statz motz fols metges e restauradors les quals han fayt aquo en nostra tera; e aquesta operacio es mot vituperable perduzent a gran temor le senhal de la qual es mortal.	This is a common treatment for those who have too much uric acid in their body.
Mays si claudicacio e nodacio son recentz, lahoras cove que sian enbrocatz am aygua tebeza en la qual so coytas erbas mollificantz, ayssi cum son fuelas de altea e razitz de lu, e mellilot, e semblantz ad aquels; e sia fayt a lu emplastre am emplastre mollificatio ayssi cum dyallaquilon ben fayt; o que sia preza mucillage de razit de altea e sia contucida am gray de gualina o am oli de cirami, e sia emplastrat am aquel; o que sian prezes figuas grassas e sian trissadas am fems de colom, e semblantz ad aquels de las medicinas que son nompnadas amermans consolidacio.	And when the pain is in the recent past, apply a cushion to the affected area recently by those who have been stung by a bee.
E alcunas vetz es dissolvuda am assidua fricacio leugiera que sia am las mas humidas, e sia administrat movement del membre a tota partida en totas horas.	And if it is necessary to apply a mild cauterization to the body.
Mays si tortuositat ja es anada denant e es fayta fort e convertida es en peyra e provocada es necessitat a curacio de lu am ferr, lahoras cove que sia le pus desus cecsat e la continuacio del os sia dissolvut, e sia inscidit aquo que superflueys de nodacio de aquel meteys am le os am inscissoris subtils, e sia aministrada facilitat en aquel am sollicitut e studi.	And if it is necessary to treat the patient's legs, make sure to use a cushion for the knees, e.g. a cushion for the knee and another for the foot, and another one that prevents the pain from spreading.
Capitol .xxiii.	The intestine or a cushion on its legs are for the purpose of reducing inflammation in gout.
De sermo en dislocacio.	This phrase is likely referring to a medical condition, as seen in the context of Translation 2:
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.	This sentence describes how gout causes pain and inflammation in the joints.
Donc quan accideys ad alcu dislocacio, lahoras cove tantost perforsar que sia reduzit, e no tarde aquela reduzir, quar si es tardada, le loc es apostemat e fort leu am aquo es fayta dificil la reduccio de dislocaccio.	Therefore, when the patient has a dislocation, it should be reduced quickly, for if it is delayed, the joint will become painful and difficult to treat.
E per aysso no cove que sia maugut ni stendut en la hora de la apostemacio, quar motas veguadas fa venir spasme e dolors ledentz.	And for that reason, the legs must be kept warm to prevent pain from occurring in the feet.
Mays quan aquo accideys, lahoras cove que tu te coytes a la flaubotomia del malaute, e aprop sia layssat entro que repause le apostema; e aprop le membre sia embrocat am aygua cauda e oli, e aprop sia reduzit am facilitat.	When the patient's body is afflicted with the condition known as gout, it is customary to leave one cushion under their legs for support and to let the other leg rest in a warm bath.
E tot membre sia curat am aquo del qual la rememoracio vindra en son loc.	And every member should be treated with the respect of their place.
E yeu ja e ordenatz les capitols de dislocacio segon que es precedit en fractura; de la partida del cos pus sobirana entro a la partida pus dejos.	E if you are skilled in medicine, you should know that the physician treats the patient according to their knowledge of setting bones; they will attend to the patient's legs first, then the head, then the feet.
Capitol .xxiiii.	And another place (a cushion) be placed on the patient's legs.
De curacio de dislocacio de la mandibula dejos.	Dislocation from the jawbone should be treated by a doctor.
So dislocadas las doas mandibulas si no tart; e la dislocacio de amdos es fayta segon una de dos manieyras: que o son remaugudas de lurs locs per pauca remocio, e so mollificadas un petit; o so dislocadas per entiera dislocacio e complida, entro que sian mollificadas a la partida de la junctura entro que corro saliva del malaute e que no puesca tenir aquela ni puesca claure la sua boca, e la lengua de lu sia envolopada en sa paraula.	If you are dealing with a person who has dislocated their intestines, they can be treated by gently moving them back into place after loosening the muscles in the area.
Mays quan la dislocacio de lu es pauca, lahoras en las majors disposicios retorna per si an pauca causa.	When the pain is so severe that it causes other ailments to appear, it's a sign that the body needs attention.
Mays si la dislocacio es entiera e complida, lahoras cove que sia administrada reduccio de lu leugierament, e no sia tardada de tot.	May your joints be free from injury or pain.
E es que·l ministre tengua le cap del malaute, e entrometa lo metge le dit pous de la una sieua ma en la razit de la dislocacio de la mandibula dedintz la boca de lu, si la dislocacio es de la una part; o que entrometa les sieus dos pouzes ensemps, si la dislocacio es de doas partz, e les autres ditz de las mas de lu sian defora am les quals enguale; e comanda al malaute que cesse las suas mandibulas e absolva aquelas anar de quascuna partida; e le metge engualhe la mandibula e enpellisca la mandibula entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And then treat the dislocated part.
E si dificil es la reducio de lu, e majorment si amdos las mandibulas so essemps dislocadas, lahoras aministra evoporacio am aygua cauda e oli, entro que sia fayta leugiera la reduccio de amdos e no tardes la reduccio de amdos de tot, ayssi quo havem dit.	When there are many aches, they should be treated with warm compresses.
E donc cum retornam e so engualadas, e es clausa la boca del malaute e no es mollificada, lahoras pausa sobre aquelas polvils de drap am cerot, e sia fayt de cera e oli rozat; e aprop sia liat am facilitat am liamens mols.	And so when the body is exposed to cold humors, which are commonly known as causing pain in the feet, then you should apply this to the patient's ankles, and another use a cloth to cover their legs.
E sia le dormir del malaute sobre le sieu dos, e·l cap de lu sia stant entre dos aurelhes, per so que no maugue aquel a la partida dreyta ni a la sinistra; e no li fassas per forsa masteguar alcuna causa; habans la sieua vianda sia forbicio leon, entro que quan las dolors sian remaugudas e las mandibulas so nozadas, lahoras maugue aquo que vol.	When there's a need for a cure, it's cauterized; when there's a need to keep them from moving, a cushion is put on their chest.
E aquo sia aministrat am facilita, e no trebalhe sobre la apercio de la boca deves la comestio e beure e ocitatio, entro que la mandibula sia nozada e sanada.	And you should administer to them a cushion under their arms and another on their legs, so that they be healed.
E si es dificil la reduccio de duas mandibulas quan so dislocadas en alcuna hora e no so convertidas als lors locs, lahoras motas veguadas accideysso febres e soda assidua, e fort leu es alerguat le ventre del malaute, e fort leu e vomeys colera pura.	Then there comes a time when the two mandibles are dislocated due to their position, it is necessary to use cushions for support and apply a cushion on the patient's belly so they do not suffer further damage.
E quan tu vezes aquo, lahoras sapias que es perdicio; e motas veguadas mor aquel al qual accideys aquo en x dias.	And when you see that the patient's condition worsens, use hot cautery to draw out the poison and bring relief.
Capitol .xxv.	Chapter 25.
De reduccio de la dislocacio de la furcula e de la extremitat del muscle.	And when the shoulder bone is dislocated from the muscles, then place a cushion on their arm.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.	The forks are placed under the intestines, preventing the pain from spreading to the lower limbs; then they were ready for the operation, they put their hands on the patient's body while a cushion supports the leg of the patient.
E la restauracio de lu es que·l malaute jagua sobre le sieu dos e extenda les sieus brasses.	And if it is necessary to be cauterized, the patient's body will be healed.
E aprop coarta le loc am la tua palma am fort coartacio, quar ela retornara.	And thus the patient's health will improve, if you apply a hot cautery to their body.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre e pulvils e strenh aquela.	And then apply it to their legs and feet.
Mays la extremitat de aquel que siec le coyde e·s continuat am aquel, no es dislocada en alcun dia; lahoras cove que sia reduzida e engualhada segon que havem dit e segon que es a tu aparelhat.	May the pain in the patient's body be relieved by your physician.
E aprop pausa sobre aquela emplastre, e pulvils, e extrictura, e comanda al malaute adherir a trenquilitat e a repaus entro que sia sanat.	And if you are in pain, place your hand on their leg to calm it down.
E am aquesta meteyssa curacio es reduzida la extremita del muscle quan es separada del sieu loc.	And so if your body's muscles are inflamed, they will be treated by reducing the inflammation in the affected area.
Capitol .xxvi.	E a la persona que se le ha de apply the cautery, make sure to place a cushion under their legs.
De la reduccio de la dislocacio del muscle.	And for the reduction of muscle displacement.
Sapias que·l muscle no es dislocat sino segon tres manieras, de las quals es la una que sia dislocat a la partida del titillic a la partida dejos.	Know that the doctor is wise, but he only applies his knowledge to those who have not been touched by evil influence.
E la segonda es que sia dislocat a la partida desus del muscle, e aquo es fayt tart; e no es dislocat a las partidas detras per la spalla; e no es dislocat a las partidas denant per les nervis.	And if it is caused by a cold humor, it is called the gout.
E majorment es dislocat e defora eyssit a las partidas dejos deves le titillic, e majorment en aquels dels quals las carns son paucas, leugierament es dislocat; mays en aquels en les quals so motas carns, es eyssit fora am dificultat.	And so you are to cauterize with difficulty, for in those cases where there are few fleshy parts, it is said to be difficult.
E fort leu accideys ad alcus homes percussio o cazement, e le muscle de lu es apostemat de apostema caut, e es cujat per aquo que ja sia dislocat.	Some men are stricken by gout, which is caused by an excess of humors in the body.
Adonc cove que tu sproes aquo entro que estias sobre-sertetut de lu, e lahoras procesiscas en la curacio de lu.	Then, if it is necessary to cauterize the leg, they should place a cushion under the patient's thigh and hold them in place.
E es conoguda la dislocacio de lu quan es a las partidas dejos deves le titillic; per so que distingescas entre le muscle dislocat e·l muscle sa, quar tu atrobas entre aquels diversitat manifesta; e atrobas en le cap del muscle concavitat e dejos le titillic deves le tocament del cap del muscle ayssi quo un huou, e al malaute no pot redusir la sua ma a la sieua aurelha, ni maure aquela per totz movementz.	It is known that the dislocation is painful, so you should treat the injury carefully and avoid touching it, as well as the patient's other joints, which are more sensitive to pain.
Si es dislocat deves le pietz o ensus, e tu lahoras atrobas manifest tocament, e no es amaguat.	Then apply a bandage to the affected area where the wound was closed, and apply a cushion on the patient's foot or leg if there are open wounds.
E de aquesta dislocacio es fayta leugiera reduccio quan es fresca e le malaute es enfant.	And for this dislocation, a cushion is used to treat it when it is recent or in the case of a fresh injury.
E la reduccio de lu es que·l ministre eleva la ma de lu a las partidas desus; e aprop pause les tieus pouses dejos le titillic de lu, e eleva la junctura am fortaleza en sus al sieu loc, e·l ministre eleva la ma de lu, e extenda aquela en sus; e aprop pausa aquela dejos quar ela retorna leugierament.	And the minister gently applies a burning tool to the patient's body, wherever it is needed.
Mays si per aquo que havem dit no retorna, e so del comensament que accidic la dislocacio, motz dias, lahoras cove que·l malaute sia banhat en aygua cauda e sia aministrada enbrocacio que mollifique e liniesca ayssi cum si so coytz razitz de altea, e fenugrec, e melillot en aygua, e sia administrada.	Perhaps if the pain is in the legs, it might be called "cometh" by a doctor, but the cure is different if it is for the whole body or for the foot.
E aprop le malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu dos e sia pausat dejos le titillic de lu espera de lana que sia engual entre levitat e strictura, e aprop le metge pause le sieu talo sobre la spera, e eleva le cap del muscle am vertut, e atire la ma del malaute per que no sia mauguda a las partidas dejos, e autre ministre tengua le cap del malaute, que no sia maugut a las partidas dejos, quar aquela tantost retorna al sieu loc.	Then you apply a hot poultice to the affected area of the patient's foot.
E si voles, reduzeys aquel segon aquesta manieyra: e es que tu fassas esser prezent un home le qual sia pus lonc que·l malaute, e estia de la part de aquel latz, e entrometa le sieu muscle dejos le titillic del malaute e eleve le titillic de lu a las partidas desus entro que·l malaute sia suspendut en ayre, e autre ministre tire la ma del malaute de las partidas dejos del sieu ventre.	Then place the patient's hand on your right arm to apply the poultice.
Mays si le malaute es leugier, lahoras cove que am lu que autre causa sia suspenduda, per so que grave aquel, quar la dislocacio retorna tantost.	Mays if it is light, you can put a hot iron on their legs to prevent further dislocation and then apply a cautery.
E es reduzit eysament segon autra manieyra: e es que sia ficat en terra un fust lonc le cap del qual sia redon de figura, ayssi cum pilo de mortier, que no sia gros ni subtil, e aprop sia pausat dejos le malaute; pus que so pausatz sobre·l cap del fust draps leons, e·l malaute sia stant segon la longitut del fust, e aprop sia extenduda la ma de lu a las partidas dejos del autra part; e sia extendut le cos de lu del autre part am fortaleza, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And so you should apply your hand to the other parts of the body, namely: if leeches are found on the legs, then you should use a mortar pestle to grind them up; if the patient's pain is localized, and the patient is strong enough.
E si es dificil reduccio de lu per totas las causas que havem ditas, lahoras usa de aquesta cura: e es que tu prenguas un fust la quantitat del qual sia en le lonc de dos brasses, e latitut de aquel sia de quatre ditz, e la grossetut de lu sia aleujat en le preon del tittilic segon aquesta forma:	And if it is difficult to reduce the swelling from the illness, use another method for treating the swelling, not by applying heat to the entire body.
E aprop sobre le cap redon sian liatz drap leons per so que·l fust no ledesca le malaute.	And if there are other cushions placed upon their legs, it shall be covered with a cloth so that the patient may not feel the pain.
E aprop sia pausat dejos le titillic del malaute, e sia extenduda la ma o le bras sobre·l fust entro a las partidas dejos, e sia liat le fust sobre le adjutori e le bras e la extremitat de la ma.	Then apply a cushion to the patient's intestine and extend his hand on the body of the patient.
Aprop sia pausat le bras sobre un scalo de scala segon la latitut, e la ma sia extenduda a las partidas dejos, e l’autre cos sia suspendut de l’autre part, quar la junctura intra tantost.	And if a poultice or cauterization is needed, place your hand on the affected area, which is usually the foot, to help guide the application of the cushion.
E cum le intrament de lu es complit segon quascuna maniera que es a tu possibla, e lahoras cove que tu pauses dejos le titillic spera de lana de engual quantitat; e aprop pauza emplastre perparat de polvera de moli am enses e album de huou sobre tot le muscle, ayssi quo es revolvut desus, e aprop strenh dejos le titillic am strictura decent; e le liament sia revolvut sobre le emplastre, e la ma de lu sia annectida al col de lu, e sia leyssat, e no sia mauguda la ma de lu per vii dias.	And when the patient's health has deteriorated due to illness, apply strictures from the muscles on their feet, as if for gout.
E cove que sia pausada la vianda del malaute pauca, entro que·l membre sia confortat, quar es pus leugier a la sanacio de lu.	And if it is necessary to apply cautery to the patient, they should be cauterized.
E aprop la vianda sia donada major aprop vii o v e sia exercitat un movement; e donc si es fermat e no es mollificat, lahoras ja es sanat.	Then use a cushion to support the patient's food.
Mays si la junctura es dislocada motas veguadas per humiditat que accideys a lu o per autra causa, lahoras cove que en aquela sia administrat cauteri am tres traucs, segon que denant es dit en le capitol de cauteri.	If one has three or more dislocated joints, they should be treated with a method called cupping.
E si tot aysso es fayt e aprop vii dias es desliat le liament e la junctura no es fermada, e le emplastre e la strictura son reduzitz sobre lu alcunas veguadas, e no es fermada e catz e no pot elevar aquel bras a las partidas desus, lahoras sapias que·ls nervis de lu, les quals so al cap del muscle, ja so inscizes o extendutz o mollificatz, e sapia que la junctura nul temps no sira ficada en loc sieu.	And if at that point a patient has had a fever for seven days, the illness will be incurable, and they will not be able to have their temperature lowered by any other means.
De la dislocacio de aquela qu’es fayta deves le pietz e la mamilha o las partidas detras, la reduccio es fayta am impulcio e extencio am las mas, entro que retorne.	This is a description of how to treat injuries in a traditional way.
E sia administrada en aquela l’autra strictura, e cura aquela entro que sia sanada.	And if the pain affects their feet, the other leg should be treated with cautery.
E si accideys aprop la sanacio gravitat en le membre e tarditat en le movement de lu, lahoras le malaute uze de banh motas veguadas entro que aquela gravitat sia alleujada e que retorne a la natura de lu primiera.	And if the patient's joints are affected by cold, then apply cauterization to their body to help them return to their natural state.
Capitol .xxvii.	Then apply the proper name for the pain in the patient's body.
De curacio de dislocacio del coyde.	This refers to setting a bone or treating an injury where something has been dislocated from its usual position.
Sapias que la junctura del coyde es dislocada am difficultat e semblantment retorna am difficultat; e aquela es dislocada a totas partidas, e majorment a la partida denant a la partida detras, e la dislocacio de lu no es amaguada a tu quar es cazent dejos le vezement o dejos le tocament segon qualque figura sia dislocat, e quan ajustes le coyde disloguat am le sa, aquo es a tu declarat manifestament, quar la junctura es concavada e no pot doblar le bras, ni tocar am aquel le sieu muscle.	Sapias that which you read on the Internet is likely to be inaccurate.
E cove que·t coytes, e reduzescas la dislocacio tantost denant que vengua a lu apostema caut, quar si ve a lu apostema caut, dificil es la reduccio de lu, e fort leu no es sanat de tot; e majorment quan es a las partidas detras, quar pus mala es de totas las autras specias de dislocacio, e de major dolor, e motas veguadas deyssen am aquela la mort.	Then apply your hand to their limbs as a doctor would do for someone suffering from gout, and do not allow the abscess to be treated by anyone other than yourself, for the pain caused by it is great.
E la restauracio de lu, quan es aquela que es possibla reduzir, es que la ma de lu sia extenduda am doas mas, e le bras de lu sia expandut, e las mas del metge sian sobre le coyde e dejos lu, e el empellisca la junctura am les pouzes de las suas mas ensemps, o am la razit de la sua palma entro que torne en son loc.	E si es necessitat que puntz sia faytas, it is necessary to place another surgeon’s hand on the patient’s, e las doas mas, so that they can be used to help reduce the swelling.
Mays si la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras retorna ayssi que dobla la ma am la sua ma, entro que percuta le coyde am la razit de la sua palma.	And if the patient has pain in the joints due to an ailment, they should be treated as a hot or cold case.
E si la dislocacio no obezeys a la reduccio, lahoras aministra vehement extencio e mot fort.	And if the joint does not obey the reduction, then they are difficult to treat.
E es que dos ministres extendan le bras, e tenguan aquel eyssament dos ministres per so que no sia remaugut deves la extencio.	And they will apply two cushions to each part of the body.
E aprop sia revolvut le bras deves tota part, pus que es envolopat drap doblat lonc sobre la ma de lu, o liament.	And if it is necessary to treat a wound on their arms or legs, use a bandage for the wound.
E quant le metge toca la junctura am la sua ma, unte aquela am alcun oli per so que aquo sia aquelas causas las quals ajudan en lubricitat de la junctura am facilitat; e aprop empellesca la junctura am empulcio vehement entro que retorne.	When the doctor touches the joint, they place a cushion under them to avoid further inflammation.
E aprop la reduccio de lu cove que sia pausat sobre aquela empastre en le qual sia stipticitat e excequacio am album de huou, e sia extrenhut am strictura descent, e·l bras sia suspendut del col, e sia layssat per alcus dias.	Then treat the wound with album for the healing process.
E aprop sia desliat; e donc si la junctura es formada en le sieu loc, lahoras tu deslia le liament de lu e layssa aquela.	Then apply a cushion under their leg, and to their thighs.
E si vezas la junctura no be strenher, lahoras tu itera le emplastre e·l liament, e layssa aquela per alcus dias entro que sia extrenhuda; e aprop deslia aquela.	This refers to a situation where a person's hands are being treated for an illness that causes pain in the joints, but they have to be left open until they are healed, and then you can stop treating the whole thing.
Mays si accideys a lu gravitat aprop la reduccio de la junctura, e la disposicio de lu es en movement, lahoras aministra humectacio en banh e fricacio subtil, e comprecio, entro que sia aleujat; o pausa sobre la junctura aleliati, so es coyssa de moto grassa; e aprop sia liada, e layssa aquela sobre le os le dia e la nueyt.	And if you need to make a distinction between the different types of pain in the foot, apply a cushion to the area.
E aprop osta aquela, e met aquel en banh; e quan suza, lahoras tu fregua la junctura am fricacio temprada, e aprop itera sobre aquela aleliati, so es ronhonal de moto, una veguada, e la segonda, e la .iii.a.,	And place a heated iron on the affected area.
am intrament de banh, entro que sia linit.	Then put the cushion under their legs.
E si voles, pausa sobre aquela fenda de vaca humida e scalfada am boder e stren sobre aquel; e fay aquo alcunas veguadas, quar aquela es humida e reduzeys a la sua disposicio.	And if you wish to apply the treatment for gout, which can be caused by cold and dampness in the body, use a hot cautery to treat the affected area, and apply a poultice to soothe the afflicted part.
Capitol .xxviii.	**Chapter 28.**
De curacio de dislocacio de malassen, so es de la junctura que es entre·l bras e la ma.	Treating the dislocation of the foot, you must use a cushion to prevent further harm.
Malassen de la ma alcunas vetz es deslocada, e la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es leugiera, e·l contrari es de las autras juncturas, mays empero cove que sia velocitat en la reduccio de lu en la hora en la qual es deslocada, denant que le loc sia apostemat o que accida en lu apostema caut.	When the joints are dislocated, they are treated with a cushion on their limbs, or with other means.
E la reduccio de la dislocacio de lu es que tu pauses la junctura de la ma del malaute sobre una taula e le ministre extenda la ma de aquel, e le metge pause la sua ma o o la sua palma sobre la iminencia de la junctura, e empellisca aquela entro que retorne al sieu loc.	And if it is reduced to a point, this will make the patient's condition better.
Mays empero cove que sia considerat si la palma ja es ostada al ventre de la ma, lahoras le malaute pause le dos de la sua ma sobre una taula deves la extencio e la reduccio; e si la dislocacio es precedent deves le dos de la ma, lahoras sia la posicio de la ma de aquel intrinicequement sobre la taula, per so que la ma del metge caja sobre aquela iminencia de la junctura.	May that which is called "gout" in the modern age be understood as being similar to what was previously known as "the gout."
E donc si retorna tantost, bon es; e sino, lahoras strenh aquela am empastre cedant le apostema e layssa aquel; e no iteres aquo, quar sino, no soferta ni no podes sobre la reduccio de lu pus que passan a lu dias.	And so he would be called a good man; but he has a cushion under his foot, and is tired from making points on the feet of others.
Mays empero la junctura roman segon la sua tortuositat; e no notz al malaute alcuna causa, sino que la ma es mollificada e no pot strenher alcuna causa; lahoras sapias que les nervis son trincatz o trissatz, e lahoras no es engen en lu sino que sia strenhuda am cauteri prop le cazament de lu e fort leu aquo confereys alcuna causa.	The intestines are often affected by gout.
Donc cum malassem es retornada, lahoras pausa sobre lu empastre le qual havem recomtat, e sia layssat e strenhut per v dias; e aprop sia desliat e sia layssat e la ma de lu sia excercitada.	And if the intestine or the belly were to cause harm, they are to be treated with cauterization for five days; then the physician should apply a hot poultice.
Mays si le movement de lu es ostat e accideys en lu alcuna gravitat, lahoras leniys aquela am aygua cauda e am fricacio alcunas veguadas, entro que sia alleujat.	Then apply heat to the affected area and keep it closed off by pressure or bandages.
Capitol .xxix.	In the following body, e.g., text, we see that the meaning is shifting from Latin-based languages to something more like a medical procedure.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels ditz.	And now, concerning the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Alcunas veguadas so dislocatz les ditz a tota partida.	Then burn the skin on their legs wherever they have a pain in the bowels.
E quan es dislocat alcun dit de aquels al dos de la palma o al ventre de lu, lahoras sten le dit e impelleys la dislocacio de lu am les tieus pouses, entro que retorne.	And when he is injured in the joints, the doctor will place the dislocated finger back into its place.
E aprop sostenta le cap del dit, e suspen aquel deves la part a la qual es dislocat, e layssa aquel per dos dias.	And then place your hand on their finger to prevent the herniated part from dislocating.
E aprop suspen aquel e exten aquel entro que dreyt sia engualhat en aquel sieu dia.	Then apply a bandage to the affected area.
E quan sira noyt, lia aquel segon aquela narracio, e no cesses desliar aquel en le dia e exercitar am movement, e lia aquel en la noyt; e fay aquo per alcus dias entro que sia streyt.	And when the disease is severe, it may require a second cautery to be applied for several days after the first.
E fay semblant am aquo, si es dislocat al ventre de la ma, e lia aquel ad aquela partida e fay am aquo la tieua primiera operacio, entro que sia sanat.	When you apply heat to the body, it's the first step in treating a dislocated foot.
E semblantment fay am aquo quan es dislocat a las autres partidas.	And similarly, it is called gout when pain is caused by swelling in the legs.
Capitol .xxx.	Capitol .xxx.
De la curacio de dislocacio dels spondils del dos.	From the patient, remove the bone from the legs.
Quan accideys ad alcun dels spondils del dos o del col dislocacio complida, e so remaugutz motz spondils de lors locs, lahoras en aquela no es curacio, quar la mort se coyta al malaute.	Then apply heat to the affected area, for that is how you cure the pain in the body, by placing a cushion on the legs and another on the feet, and holding the afflicted foot.
E senhal de aquo es que la egestio del malaute es fora-eyssida ses voluntat, e no pot retenir aquela; e motas veguadas so mollificatz alcus membres de lu o doas cambas de lu o dos brasses de lu, o un de aquels; o es remaugut un spondil de son loc, quar motas veguadas es remaugut e motas veguadas es fayta la remocio de aquels a quatre partidas.	And when the patient is unable to keep the intestine in its place, it is customary to have two cushions used: one for the affected area and another for the leg or foot.
Donc aquela ja es remauguda a las partidas detras e es nompnada gelbozitat.	Therefore, it is known as "reuma" in the Catalan language.
Mays la curacio de lu es que lahoras consideras si la gelbozitat accidey de puerissia, quar lahoras en aquela no es curacio ni de aquela no es sanacio de tot.	So, if they have a fever or pain in their legs, they should place a cushion under them.
Mays en aquela que ve per cazement o per percussio o per semblant ad aquels, ja diyssero les Antics las manieras de curacio am sermo prolixs, del qual lo mays retorna am profieyt; mays yeu ja e abreujat de aquel del qual lo pauc escusa del trop de lu, per la mieua propinquitat a la entencio mieua exposicio, am la qual he aquo expausat et format ex instrument divers de aquel am le qual mostrero aquo e espausero aquel.	Mays in the human body, its presence being diagnosed by a physician, am leys head, may be treated with various remedies.
E dic que en gelbosita que accideys de la partida denant en le pietz, no es engen ni sanacio de aquela; e semblantment en aquela que es fayta a dos latz.	And so then the pain in the feet is treated by applying heat to both legs.
E de aquelas no es curada sino aquela que accideys en le dos propriament am aquo que yeu recomti.	The patient's legs are already treated but I don't know what "am" refers to in this case.
E es que·l malaute sia extendut sobre la sua cara sobre pug engual prop de paret, e sia extendut dejos lu esturment molh per so que no sia lidit le pietz de lu.	Then let them be treated by a doctor.
E aprop un fust dreyt sia pausat, ficat en la terra en la extremitat del pug entorn le cap de lu, e autra fust en aviro les pes de lu en l’autra extremitat del pueg.	And if it's necessary to cauterize the intestines, it is placed under the cushion in the leg.
E·l ministre tengua le fust, e no sia fermat en fossa; e autre ministre tengua l’autre segon aquela forma.	Then another cushion or other things are placed on the foot to keep them warm.
E aprop envolopa sobre le cap del malaute e dejos les titillic liamen leon ferm; e exten la extremitat del liamel al fust le qual es deves le cap de lu, e lia aquel en lu; e aprop strenh l’autre liament sobre las ancas de lu les denols de lu, e deves las cambas de lu; e aprop ajusta totz les liamentz e lia aquels en l’autre fust le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And let it be known that the other side of the body should be treated similarly.
E aprop le ministre cascu extenda le liament a la partida del fust, e no sian remaugutz les dos fustz e les liamentz dels sieus locs en les quals son ficatz, mays empero no so fermatz ayssi cum havem dit.	And if there were two or more burns already on the leg, then it is customary for doctors to treat that area.
E le metge pause las suas palmas sobre le spondil am fortaleza entro que retorne, o que pause sobre aquela una taula, e aprop que ajuste sobre la taula les sieus pes entro que retorne.	The doctor holds the patient's feet to provide strength and prevent them from slipping out of place.
Mays si no retorna per aquesta forma, lahoras pren una taula de la qual la latitut o la longitut sia en aviro de tres brassas, e cava en la paret de la qual havem dit que es prop le malaute un loc en le qual intre la extremitat de la taula.	If the table does not fit this form, then use a three-foot long cushion for the patient's knees.
E aprop pausa la maytat de la taula sobre le spondilh, e·l metge pause les sieus pes sobre l’autre extremitat, e estrenha be entro que le spondil sia coartat e que retorne al sieu loc.	And if the patient's body needs to be treated with a cushion, then place the patient's intestines on their back and use another cushion for the rest of the body.
E si tu voles, obre am torn le qual es revolvut am la ma; e es que tu fiques en terra deves le cap del malaute en le derier del pug dos fustz, la longitut dels quals sia d’un bras, e deves le cap de lu en le derier del pug eyssament dos fustz; e sia la longitut que es entre quascun fust un palm, e ja es fayt en quascun fust trauc en le qual corr torn, e quascun sia mot fermat en terra per so que no sia maugut.	And if you want to cure them, then apply this treatment.
E sia mes un fust redon en le qual es le torn, e sia revolvut en les dos traucs dels dos fustz.	When the patient's legs are affected by gout, they are to be treated with a cushion on them.
E en la extremitat de lu es un trauc en le qual es format le fust, la longueza del qual es un palm am aquo que es revolvut; e en les dos autres fustz es semblant de aquel.	A cushion is placed under their arm to avoid pain in the long bones.
E aprop strenh les liamentz que has streyt en le pietz del malaute en le trau le qual es deves le cap de lu, e les liamentz que has streyts en las coyssas de lu en le torn le qual es deves les pes de lu.	And if you have found the tendons that are causing the pain in the patient's leg, then place them back into their proper position.
E aprop deves quascun torn e stia un ministre que torssa le torn am la sua ma, e le metge engualhe le spondil segon que havem dit.	E aprop deves place un MINISTER to help the patient's body heal.
E aquesta es la forma del torn:	And this is the way one identifies [the cause of gout]:
E aprop pus que le spondil es retornat, e le loc es engualhat, lahoras cove que pauses empastre exciccatiu am album de huou, e aprop estopa; e aprop pause sobre le empastre astela de taula de la qual la latitut sia de tres ditz o enviro aquels, e la longitut de lu sia quantitat que prengua le loc de la gelbositat, e sobre la partida del spondil sa.	Then apply a poultice to draw out the pain, but only after the joint has been heated by a hot iron.
E aprop sia liat am liament le qual havem dit, e uze le malaute de nutriment subtil entro que sia sanat.	And if you want to treat the illness by applying a cushion, use that which I have just mentioned for healing the other illnesses.
E si roman alcuna iminencia en le loc en la fi de la sanacio, lahoras cove que sian aministradas medicinas que moilifico e liniscan am aministracio de la taula per lonc temps, la qual havem recomtada; e ja es aministrada en aquel loc lamina de plom.	If the illness lingers for a long time after the initial treatment fails, apply medicine to the area for a long time.
E alcunas veguadas accideys imminencia en le derier dels spondils del dos, e es cujat per aquela dislocacio; e es aquel os le qual ja imineys per que no cove que sia fayta prosompcio a lu am aquesta medicina, quar fort leu fara a tu accidir mort.	When your joints are swollen or in pain, you can use this method to relieve them.
Capitol .xxxi.	Of humors that afflict the limbs, one should apply heat to the joints.
De curacio de anca dislocada.	And then apply heat to the patient's legs to treat a dislocation.
Sapias que la junctura del ancha e la junctura del muscle no endeve sino dislocacio tant solament, e no accideys ad aquelas aquo que accideys a las autras juncturas de petita remocio e concavitat.	la menta, la ja ha fet lo seu treball on the body parts are concerned.
E la junctura de la ancha es dislocada segon quatre manieyras, quar es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, o a las partidas defora, o a las partidas denant, o a las partidas detras.	The intestine can be affected by four different types of gout.
E majorment es dislocada a las partidas dedintz, e pauc a las partidas denant o a las partidas detras.	And if it is necessary to perform surgery on the foot, the pain will be felt in the other parts as well.
E senhal de la dislocacio de lu a las partidas de dintz es quar, quan tu ajustas la camba del malaute sana am la malaute, es pus longua e·l denolh es pus heminent que de la sana, e·l malaute no pot doblar le sieu pe deves le lenguonar, e es le loc que siec le lengonar apostemat de apostema caut, per so que·l cap de la coyssa ja es pervengut aqui.	Then the patient has an injured leg, which would be the same as the leg of a man who has gout.
E·l senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio es a las partidas defora, es que les accidentz de lu so contraris ad aquest accident.	And if he has pain in his joints, it is called a dislocation.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas denant es quar expan la camba sieua segon compliment, mays empero no dobla aquela ses dolor que es en le denol, e si se perforsa ad anar e no pot sobre aquo a las partidas denant; e la urina de lu es retenguda e l’engonar de lu es apostemat, e deves la ambulacio de lu sobre le talo.	When there is pain in the joints, and especially in the feet.
E senhal de aquel al qual accideys dislocacio a las partidas detras es que no expande le denol, ni no puesca doblar aquel denant que doble le engonar, e la camba de lu es pus breva que l’autra, e l’engonar es mollificat, e·l cap de la coyssa es deves aquel loc.	When joint pain occurs because of an injury to the body, it is customary for the patient's leg to be treated with a special cushion.
Mays reduccio de las specias de aquesta dislocacio es que tu consideras, lahoras, si la dislocacio es vetusta et antiqua, que ja es anticada am le havent aquela aprop tu aministras reduccio de lu e roman segon la sua disposicio, lahoras no es en aquela curacio de tot; e adonc no cove que en aquela sia fayta prosompcio.	May this be the cure for your ailment?
Mays en aquel del qual la dislocacio es recent, e es una de las quatre specias de dislocacio, lahoras te coyta ad aquo que volvas la junctura e extendas aquela a las partidas dedintz e a las partidas defora, e mau aquela a la dextra e sinistra, quar fort leu retorna e no indigeys de autra cura.	Mays in that place where the dislocation is recent, and is one of the four types of pain, it is said that a cushion should be placed under the patient's legs.
Mays, si no retorna en aquesta manieyra, lahoras cove que tu prepares ministre fort e extendas la camba de lu de la partida pus dejos, o am las suas mas, o am liament lo qual es liat sobre la camba desus le denol; e autre ministre extenda la ma de aquel desus enayssi que meta las suas mas dejos les titillics de lu; e aprop strenha am liament leon sobre la razit de la coyssa, e tengua autre ministre ters le extremitat del liament.	And now if you are going to treat a patient with strong pain, use a cushion on their back and apply heat to the affected area.
E sia extencio de lu o de la partida dedintz a l’angonar a la partida de la furcula, o de la partida detras a la partida del dos.	And let him be treated by means of letting out blood from the legs or foot, so that he may be healed.
E sia la extencio de totz aquels en una veguada entro que·l malaute sia elevat am le sieu cos de terra e que romangua pendent.	And the rest of the body is suspended by its own weight.
E aquesta specia de extencio es specia cominal a totas quatre.	And this type of inflammation affects all four limbs.
E donc si la dislocacio retorna am aquo que havem dit, sira bo; e sino, lahoras es necessari a tota specia aquo que dire de la propria curacio.	And if the dislocation returns, then it's considered to be a good thing by the people who have been trained in this art.
En la reduccio de lu propria, quan es dislocada, e la dislocacio es a las partidas dedintz, cove que·l malaute sia ressupinat sobre le sieu latz sa; e aprop pausa les liamentz sobre la razit de la coyssa en aquel loc le qual entre le cap de la coyssa e·l loc que es dejos le langonar; e aprop exten le liament en sus de la part del angonar a la pus auta partida de la furcula.	When the intestine has been cushioned, the patient's arms and legs are extended to prevent pain in the limbs.
E aprop autre ministre fort prengua les brasses de lu, e amerme le loc gros de la coyssa malaute e extenda a las partidas deforo per extencio vehement, quar aquela retorna en le sieu loc.	When the intestine or the bowels are affected by cold humors, they will be treated by a physician.
E aquesta specia es de pus leugiera curacio am la qual aquest membre es reduzit que las autres specias.	And if the pain is caused by a specific type of humor that needs to be treated by the least skillful physician.
Mays si es excusat sobre tu e no obezeys al entrament am aquesta specia de curacio de tot, lahoras cove que sian liatz les dos pes del malaute ensemps am liament fort, leugier, sobre amdos les talos e amdos les denols.	When gout occurs, apply a strong bandage to the affected area.
E sia la longitut de quascun de son par la quantitat de quatre ditz, e sia la camba malaute extenduda mays que l’autre per quantitat de dos ditz.	And let it be that the intestine or the hernia is in pain for four days, it is said to be a proper gout.
E aprop le malaute sia suspendut sobre le cap del fust, e que sia en la mayso; e sia la longitut de lu de la terra la quantitat de dos brasses.	And if it is necessary to apply a cautery, then hold it two hands’ lengths away from the patient and use it only as needed.
E aprop comanda a un jove fort que minuesca le cap de la coyssa, e sia suspendut am le malaute autre jove, e l’autre jove minuent la coysa am fortaleza empellesca, quar la junctura retorna al sieu loc am velocitat.	And then place a cushion under the patient's body, in order to make them stronger and hold their strength together.
Mays en la reducio propria, quan es dislocacio a la partida defora, cove que·l malaute jaga sobre pug segon que havem recomtat en le havent gelbozitat; e sia strenhut le liament sobre la camba malauta propriament e sobre le pietz de lu.	And in the reduction itself, the affected limb must be treated carefully so that the bones can be properly set back into place.
E aprop dos fustz sian pausatz, la un als pes de lu, e l’autre al cap; e aprop sian pausatz fustz ajustatz al mieg del pueg ficat sobre·l qual draps humitz sian envolopatz, per so que·l malaute no sia dampnajat per que·l fust sia entre las coyssas de lu, per que deves la extencio a las partidas dejos no sia atirat.	And if the body's humors are affected by both, then a cushion for the other parts of the body and another for the foot, and the one in the chest (for the hernia) prevents the body from being overwhelmed.
E aprop quascun ministre extenda a la sua part, e·l metge am la sua ma enguala la reduccio segon l’art.	When treating an illness, it is necessary for the doctor to apply a compress on the affected area.
Donc, si obezeys a revercio, sira bo grandament; e sino, pausa sobre aquela diligentment e ayssi quo havem dit en gelbozitat per aquela engualment.	And if it is swollen, place it gently on their legs; if not, use another cushion for that purpose.
Mays cove que·l malaute jagua sobre les sieus latz sa quetament.	When a man suffers from gout, he feels pain in his big toe and the affected area.
E quan la dislocacio es a las partidas denant, lahoras cove que la camba sia extenduda leugierament, e es segon aquesta meteyssa narracio sobre pueg; e le metge pause la palma de la sua ma dreyta sobre·l langonar malaute, e aprop coarte aquel am l’autra ma, e am aquela coartacio pausa aquel extendut a las partidas dejos a la partida del denol.	And if the dislocation is in the legs, they should be held open by applying pressure to the affected area.
E si la dislocacio es a las partidas detras, lahoras no cove que·l malaute sia extendut a las partidas dejos, e es elevat sobre la terra; habantz cove que sia pausat sobre causa dura, ayssi cum cove le eyssament si l’ancha de lu es dislocada a las partidas defora, segon aquo que havem dit del jasement de lu sobre dos anchas; e es sobre la sua cara e les liamentz sian extendutz, segon que havem dit, no ha guayre.	E tu las cuestas en the body are necessary for the blood to flow freely under the patient's legs and the cushion to be placed on the earth, a bit behind their feet, e per lo que havem dit.
E cove que sia aministrada compressio am taula sobre le loc al qual yeys la junctura.	When joint pain occurs, it's important to apply pressure to the affected area.
Donc cum la reducio es complida segon que cove — e·l senhal de la reduccio de lu no es amaguat a tu, e es que tu extendas del malaute doas cambas, e quan tu vezes aquelas enguals e le malaute extrenh la sieua camba e expandeys aquela ses excusacio, lahoras sapias que·l membre segon que cove es retornat — e lahoras tu ajusta doas coyssas e pausa empastre e extrenh am benda ayssi que la ancha no sia mauguda en alcuna de las partidas; e adheresca le malaute a repaus per tres dias o per quatre.	And so when you have to apply a cushion to the affected area, it is customary to place your hand on the thigh, but if it is necessary to do so with a hot water bottle.
E aprop deslia le liament e l’empastre, e compara la una camba am l’autra.	Then compare one leg to the other.
Lahoras, si vezas aquelas enguals en vustament, lahoras sapias que la dislocacio ja es fermada, e adonc layssa le malaute anar.	When the pain has subsided, you can remove your hand from the affected area.
E si vezas alcuna causa de mollificacio, lahoras tu retorna e emplastra aquel, e extrenh aquel segon la tua primiera strectura, e layssa aquel en tres dias.	And if you see any cause for the ailment, apply a poultice to it, and let it remain three days.
E aprop deslia aquel, e fay aquel tardar en ambulacio sobre quascu per alcus dias, entro que sia confortat.	And so the patient's feet are to be kept in place by the cushion for a few days, until the pain subsides.
Capitol .xxxii.	Gout is caused by an imbalance of humors in the body.
De curacio de dislocacio del denolh.	And then treat the dislocation.
Le denolh es dislocat segon tres manieyras, quar es dislocat a las partidas defora, e a las partidas dedintz, e a las partidas dejos mays a las partidas detras; e a las partidas denant no es dislocat.	The patient has three types of pain:  a cushion is placed on their leg when you are applying heat to treat inflammation.
E le senhal de dislocacio de lu es que comandes al malaute que aplique la sua camba am la coyssa; lahoras sapias que·l denol es dislocat.	The signal for you to apply a splint to the patient's limb is when they have pain in their bowels or feet.
E la restauracio de totas las manieyras de lu es que fassas cezer le malaute dreyt, enayssi que ja extenda la sieua camba, si pot sobre aquo; adherir le tieu dos a la cara de lu, e pausa le pe de lu entre les tieus pes; e aprop fay adherir le denol de lu am las tuas palmas, e rete aquelas entre les tieus ditz sobre le denolh de lu am fortaleza, e autre ministre extenda le sieu pe entro que·l denol retorne a son loc.	This is a humorous attempt at translating Latin, but I think it's safe to say that it's about using a poultice for pain relief in the legs.
E senhal de reddicio de lu es que la sua camba adharesca am la coyssa am levitat no-laboroza.	And if your legs are affected by a strong pain, put a cushion on their chest.
E aprop emplastra aquel e fay adhirir la camba am la coyssa, e aprop lia aquelas emsemps am una benda per tres dias o per quatre, e aprop deslia aquelas.	And then apply a bandage to the affected area after three days or four days.
E no uze le malaute de ambulacio per alcus dias, entro que sia sanat e cofortat.	Let the patient rest for a few days so that the inflammation can subside.
Mays si la reduccio de lu a tu es excusada, lahoras aministra fort extencio am liamentz dels quals en la curacio de la hancha precedit narracio.	When the joints are affected by gout, apply cauterization to the affected area.
Capitol .xxxiii.	And if it is necessary to treat inflammation in the feet.
De la curacio de la dislocacio del talo.	On the treatment of the dislocation of the ankle.
Le talo alcunas veguadas es remaugut per petita remocio, e alcunas veguadas es dislocat segon compliment, e la dislocacio de lu es fayta o a las partidas dedintz o a las partidas deforo.	Then apply another poultice to the affected area to prevent the swelling from dislocating further.
E le senhal de la dislocacio de lu es que vezes le talo imflat procedent a la partida a la qual es dislocat.	And that he has been injured in his legs, it is necessary to have a doctor call it by its proper name.
Mays la curacio de la remocio de lu es de leugiera reddicio, e es que sia extendut am facilitat am las mas e sia engualhat entro que retorne.	And if there is pain in the legs, it is called a mild sprain when it's only a minor injury.
Mays en la curacio de lu quan es dislocat segon compliment, cove que fasses cezer le malaute dreyt, e tengua aquel un ministre fort e valent de la partida detras del dos de aquel en le mieg loc de lu.	"Then carefully position the patient's body to ensure the intestines remain in their proper place."
E aprop te tu am la tieua ma dreyta le pe de la pus sobirana part, e am la tua ma sinistra de la part pus dejos del pe en le loc de la cavilha.	And if you need to cauterize the right leg, use the cushion on the left side of the body to prevent the patient from moving their leg.
E aprop atira le pe a tu am la tua ma dreyta, e aprop am la sinistra per dos veguadas, e aprop exten am la sinistra; e empelleys le pietz del pe am la dreyta deves la camba ses trebalh.	Then apply your hand to the patient's legs twice over to ensure the right cushion is used.
E fay aquo doas veguadas segon que havem comtat.	And if a vein or the surface has to be cauterized, then apply it there as well.
E aprop empelleys le pietz del pe a la camba la tersa veguada, e tu es a la cavilha.	And then you apply a cautery to the third vein, and another on the patient's chest, which is where the pain is located.
Donc si retorna en una veguada o en dos segon aquesta manieyra, e si vezes le pe engualhat, es bo; e sino, lahoras sobre lu itera la operacio, quar aquel retorna.	And so if it is necessary to do two, of the same way as for the one, then we will cauterize their legs.
Mays si a tu es prohibida la reduccio de lu am aquo que havem recomtat, lahoras fay jaser le malaute sobre le sieu dos sobre terra, e estrenh un paysel mot en terra fermat, e que caja entre las coyssas de lu, e tu ja has envolopat sobre lu drap per so que no ledesca le malaute.	Mays si a tu are that the doctors have said to do it in another place.
E aprop le ministre de lu tengua las suas coyssas, e aprop autre ministre extenda le pe am las suas mas o am liament que lie sobre le col del pe; e aprop extenda aquel quascun ministre contre extencio del sieu par, e le payssel sia extant entre las coyssas del malaute retinent aquel, per so que·l cos de lu no sia atirat a las partidas dejos deves la sua extencio.	Then apply another cautery to the legs; one for the pain itself, and another to keep the intestine from protruding further.
E aprop le metge enguala la dislocacio am las sieuas mas, e autre ministre tengua la coyssa sana a las partidas dejos, quar la dislocacio retorna am la facilitat.	And if the pain is on the feet, it is called by the doctor's expertise.
E donc cum retorna la dislocacio e es declarada a tu la sanetat de la reduccio de lu, lahoras pausa emplastre e extrenh aquela am liamentz fortment, e ligua le pe am liament a la camba.	And so if it's a dislocation causing pain to the cushion in their leg.
E cove que temes o te guardes dels nervis les quals so detras sobre le talo, per que le liament sobre aquel no sia vehement e leda aquel fortment.	And on their legs, put a cushion under their feet to protect them from pain.
E aprop layssa aquel per dos dias o per tres; e si le liament es mollificat, extrenh aquel.	Then keep it away from the patient's body for two or three days.
E aprop deslia aquel en le ters dia o en le quart, e prohibeys le malaute de anament per xl dias.	And then the patient will be allowed to go about their daily life.
Mays si es forsat de anar denant aquel spazi, no es fayta segurtat que la dislocacio no sia sobre lu dissolvuda e corrumpuda, e aprop aquo que no recipia curacio.	This describes a situation where someone's legs are being treated with cautery, which is a medical procedure.
E si accideys a lu apostema caut, lahoras cove que tu aministre en la cedacio de lu aquo en lo qual precedic la nostra narracio, en autre loc de curacio e de embrocacio, entro que sia remauguda.	And if the abscess needs to be treated with cautery, it must be done in the area where the pus is, as described previously, and the patient should be given a poultice to apply to the wound.
Capitol .xxxiiii.	Chapter xxxiv.
De curacio de dislocacio dels ditz dels pes.	The treatment for a pain in the feet caused by cold humors.
Cove que aquel qu’es dislocat sia engualhat am pauca extencio ses trebal; e aquo que no es dificil, abantz es leugier.	When gout affects the legs, it is often painful to move them.
Mays si la dislocacio es en alcus nozes del dos del pe, lahoras cove que fassas cezer le malaute le sieu pe sobre loc engual de la terra o sobre taula, e sia estant ayssi cum si anava.	And if you are treating someone with a wound, they will need to be treated with the appropriate tools.
E aprop tu sta de pes, e pausa le tieu pe sobre aquo que imineys de las juncturas, e aprop calca aquel am le tieu pe am vertut entro que retorne, e que vejas aquel ja engualhat e no aparesca en le loc eminencia.	Then place your hand on the patient's foot to prevent the swelling from spreading.
E aprop pausa dejos le ventre del pe de lu una taula que prengua tot le pe, a la qual sian dos caps, e aprop strenh aquel am strectura decent e ferma per tres dias; e aprop deslia aquel e fay aquel repausar de ambulacio per motz dias, entro que sia estrenhut e de reddicio sia assegurat.	And if the patient is unable to stand when they are made to stand up by the table.
Capitol .xxxv.	This text appears to be in a language similar to Latin, but with some variations, which makes it difficult to accurately translate without more context.
De las specias de dislocacio que sian faytas am plagua o am fractura o am quascuna ensemps.	This is a description of how the first sentence might describe a case where someone has a gout flare-up in their feet.
Quan accideys alcuna causa de aquelas, e tu te perforssas en la curacio de aquela e en la restauracio de lu, motas veguadas succezeys la mort.	When one of them is too much to bear, then other things will be considered.
E per aquo no cove que sobre la curacio de lu presuma, sino aquel que es savi en l’art, de lonc uzatge, misericordios e pietados, tardiu, no-ardit ni presomptuos; e que use en le comensament de medicinas que cedan apostemas cautz tant solament, e leyssa le malaute al divinal jutgament, sino ad aquel al qual speras salut de perdicio, am de la malautia alleviacio, e en la qual appareys alcuna speransa.	The wise person will treat the patient with compassion and healing remedies, hoping for their recovery from the illness, but if there is no hope of relieving the pain, they should be relieved to know that their work here is done.
E adonc esforsa te tantost far de lu la reduccio en le comensament de la causa, denant que endevengua apostema caut.	Then place a cushion under their feet and apply pressure to the affected area.
E adonc si le membre retorna segon que volem, lahoras aministra regiment le qual ceda apostema caut e cura la plagua am aquo que conveneys a lu dels enguentz desiccatius.	And then if the limb is healed, he will administer medicine that suits the patient's needs.
E si dislocacio es am fractura e accideys en le os satagias separadas, lahoras tu perforsa le stement de lor, e fay en aquo so que havem dit en las malautias simplas de aquo que es precedit en les locz de aquels.	And if there are fractures in the bones, it becomes a case for the surgeon, not the physician.
E guarda e esquiva segon la tua vertut aquel del intrament en las vias de temor segon que a tu es precedida la mia predicacio; quar aquo es milhor a tu deves le tieu Creator, e mays permanent a la tua gloria, e mays saludos al tieu cos verays aquels en le tieu temps.	Then apply a cushion to your feet, and if necessary, use other methods to alleviate the pain.
Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt.	When translated into English, the sentence would likely read:
Amen.	Amen.
