 CHAPTER EIGHTY-EIGHT.
On the treatment of sinuses and the way to irrigate them.
 When an abscess occurs in any of the fleshy parts and becomes chronic and eventually collects pus, and then it breaks open or is perforated, and all the contained matter comes out and the site is left hollow, like a vessel, and the overlying skin thinned like a rag, but the suppuration has not gone so far as to involve bone or tendon or ligament—and hence it merits the name of 'sinus' and is not called a fistula.
But if it goes on until the disease involves any of these parts it is then called a fistula or defluxion.
 The treatment of it will be to cut away all that skin with a circular incision; specially if it be thinned and has become like a rag, and you are sure that it will not adhere to the place, because of its corruption.
But if you are in hope of its adhering, and the corruption has not reached that point, and there is in the skin some thickness of flesh, then treat it by irrigation.
The procedure is that you examine the sinus, and if it be large and the purulent discharge from it smell bad, then irrigate it with Egyptian medicine, which is vinegar, oil, honey and verdigris, equal parts of each, mixed in a vessel and heated on the fire until the compound thickens and assumes the consistency of honey.
Then take as much as you need and dilute it with water and honey, and with this irrigate the sinus and bind up the opening, leaving the compound inside for two hours.
Then get it out by pressure.
Do this for several days until the sinus is clean and the smell disappears.
It may be irrigated with water of ashes if the medicine is not at hand.
For that, you take ashes of vine or of oak, and put water upon them; then clarify the liquor and with it irrigate the sinus until you are sure it is thoroughly clean.
But if the patient cannot tolerate the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then irrigate him with water and honey with which a little pounded verdigris has been mixed; or irrigate with honey and wine mingled; the value of the honey lies in its cleansing and washing, while the wine closes up the sinus, specially if it be a wine which has some dryness and astringency.
When you have done this several times and you are sure that the sinus is clean of diseased matter, then irrigate it with those compounds that will encourage granulation in it.
For example, you may take a little Palm ointment and dissolve it in oil of roses and some astringent wine; or irrigate it with some of the other ointments and medicines whose prescriptions we have recorded in the treatise on ointments.
If the opening of the sinus be too narrow for the nozzle of the syringe, open it up slightly with the knife, or put in it a pad steeped in Egyptian ointment or vermilion ointment, until it is dilated.
On the other hand, if the opening be wide, bring the edges together with a suture, and leave of it sufficient width that the syringe may be only just introduced.
In the same way, if the opening from which the discharge flows be raised up, then incise it at its lowest part so that the discharge may flow downward out of it; for when the discharge collects at the bottom of the sinus it prevents the formation of flesh in it.
If you cannot open it up as you wish at the lower point, then try to set the part in whatever position you conveniently can to facilitate the discharge of pus, and try to ensure that no pus is held up in it.
 As for the consolidating medicaments that are applied externally to the sinus, and the manner of their application: you take one of the ointments suited to your purpose, and spread it on a piece of lint of sufficient size to cover the whole sinus; then with scissors cut a hole in the lint over the mouth of the sinus and a little wider than the sinus opening; then spread on another piece of lint a quantity of softening ointment proportionate to the opening and put the one on the other so that it stands away from the opening of the sinus, in order to ease the discharge of pus from it; and do not remove the larger dressing until after many days.
But the dressing over the sinus opening you may constantly remove, so that the pus collected behind it may come out and so that you may know whether there be much or little ichor, and whether digested or not.
And at the same time investigate the site of the sinus itself to see whether the patient feels any pain in it or no pain, and whether there be any swelling in it or not.
Then when your treatment has reached such a point that you see that there is only a little superficial matter coming out round the mouth of the sinus, you may know that the sinus has closed up or is near to closing up.
Then you may unbandage it the next day or the third day, and when the wound is unbandaged make a change of dressing and ointment.
But if, after a long while, the sinus discharges a thin ichor, do not despair of its closing up, for its healing is near.
For there are some men whose wounds are slow in healing, and some are the opposite.
 If, after many days, undigested pus is discharged you may know that the sinus has not closed.
If the closing of the sinus be delayed and it be a long affair, make the medicines dryer; let them be medicines that have some humidity in their substance but dryness in their potency, such as Palm ointment with the addition of excess of rock-alum.
A most efficacious treatment is to take Palm ointment and dissolve it in oil of roses and sprinkle over it old wine of even consistency.
Then knead together, and use that.
The same sort of thing may be done with honey if you have no
 Palm ointment at hand; if you heat the honey to a thick consistency and use that; or take myrrh and aloes and incense of juniper and beat them all up together and sprinkle on the honey while it is heating on the fire, spread on lint and bind over the sinus; or spread on it honey heated to a thickness, and over that sprinkle powdered aromatic roots, and over these place a dressing that you bandage on.
Sometimes also in a case of this sort long birthwort and the root of the blue iris and vetch flour and centaury are usable, either separately or mixed, beaten up together, sifted and scattered into honey as I described; use them thus.
But if the sinus be chronic, and it does not heal with this treatment, then you may know that there is corruption at the bottom of it, which has affected the bones or motor nerves or ligaments; the treatment then is that of fistula as already given.
