 CHAPTER SEVENTY-EIGHT.
On extracting the afterbirth.
 When in a confinement the afterbirth is left behind, you should bid the woman hold her breath then make her sneeze with ptarmica, with your hand holding her mouth and nose; and if it come away thus, good.
But if not, then take a pot, pierce a hole in the lid, and put in it herbs that will open the womb, such as pennyroyal, rue, anise, chamomile, artemisia, cassia, and centaury, some or all of these remedies, submerge them in water, and place on the fire.
Then fix a silver tube to the hole in the cover and bring the other end into the orifice of the womb and hold it in position so that the vapours may reach the body of the uterus.
Then let her sneeze, as we said, and the afterbirth will quickly come away.
 But if, after this treatment, it still remains and does not come out, then tell the midwife to dip her hand in oil of sesame or mucilage of marshmallow and introduce it into the vulva and search for the afterbirth, and when she has found it, to take hold of it and very gently draw it until she bring it out.
But if it be adherent to the depths of the uterus, then let her pass her hand in as we described until she find the afterbirth; then let her draw very slowly and gently lest by violent pulling she cause a prolapse; and she should slowly move it from side to side, left and right; then let her increase the traction, for then it gives way to the pull and is freed from its adhesions.
If the uterine opening be narrowed, we have earlier mentioned the treatment by induced sneezing and that of the pot and herbs.
But if it does not come away by all the means we have described, beware of treating her roughly with repeated traction.
Whatever of it comes out of the opening should be tied to the woman's thigh, and then syringe her with Tetrapharmacon ointment; for that will cause putrefaction in a few days and it will loosen and come out.
However, when it necroses foul odours arise from it that ascend to the stomach and head and these cause harm to the patient; so she should have suffumigations appropriate for this.
One of the Ancients tried suffumigation with nasturtium and dried figs.
The form of instrument for suffumigating a woman for retention of the menses and of the afterbirth and the like.
 It is made of lead, resembling a funnel, or it may be made of bronze.
Its narrow extremity is introduced into the pudenda and the wide end is put over the fire, and the suffumigation is produced on the hot coals.
Keep it there until all the fumes are gone, and repeat once.
