 CHAPTER ONE.
On the single cauterization of the head.
 This cauterization helps against excessive humidity and coldness on the brain, which cause headache, abundance of defluxions from the head to the regions of the eyes and ears, excess of sleep, toothache, sore throat, and in general any sort of disorder arising from frigidity, such as palsy, fits, apoplexy, and diseases similar to these.
The manner of performing this operation is first to bid the patient open the bowels with an evacuant which will also clear his head, for three or four nights, according to the strength, age, and habits of the patient.
Then tell him to have his head shaved; then seat him cross-legged before you, with his hands on his breast.
Then place the lower part of your palm upon the root of his nose between his eyes; and where your middle finger reaches mark that place with ink.
Then heat an olivary cautery.
Then bring it down upon the marked place with one downward stroke with gentle pressure, revolving the cautery; then quickly take your hand away while observing the place.
If you see that some bone is exposed, the size of the head of a skewer or a grain of vetch, then take your hand away; otherwise repeat with the same iron, or, if that has got cold, with another, till the amount of bone I have mentioned is exposed.
Then take a little salt dissolved in water; soak some cotton in it, apply to the place and leave for three days.
Then apply some cotton soaked in butter and leave it on till the eschar falls off; then dress with Tetrapharmacum ointment till healed.
The Ancients said that the more a wound is kept open, discharging pus, the better and more efficacious.
Some said the skin was to be cauterized through to the bone and the cautery held until some of the thickness of the bone was burnt.
Then the burnt bone was to be scraped out, then dressed.
Others said that the cautery should be carried through to burn a deep impression in the bone so that there should come out of the bone a piece shaped like a grain of a carob tree or a small spindle-whorl; they asserted that the vapours of the head would be exhaled through this place.
The wound should be kept open a long while, then dressed until healed.
But these two methods of cauterization I do not consider right except on certain men; and I regard them as risky.
In my opinion, to let the patient alone is preferable and safer, if it is to be.
For the head is weakened when its natural continuity is broken, as we see in other parts, and particularly when the patient's head is weak by nature.
In my opinion the first type of cauterization is safer and better; therefore use that and be safe.
