 CHAPTER FIFTY-SIX.
On cauterization in haemorrhage arising from a cut artery.
 Very often there occurs bleeding from an artery which has been cut either by an external wound or in opening an abscess or in cauterizing a part of the body and so on, and it is difficult to stem.
When this happens to anyone, quickly apply your hand to the mouth of the artery, putting your forefinger to it and closing it properly till the bleeding ceases under your fingers and nothing comes out.
Then put in the fire several olivary cauteries, small and large, and blow on them to make them very hot.
Then take one, small or large according to the size of the wound and the site of the opening of the artery, and bring the cautery down right on the artery itself, after promptly removing your finger, and hold the cautery upon it till the blood ceases.
But if it bursts out after you have removed your finger from the mouth of the artery, and the cautery has cooled, promptly take another of the cauteries which you have ready in the fire.
Continue doing this, with one after another, till the haemorrhage is stanched.
Mind you do not burn any nerve which may be there, so that another calamity afflicts the patient.
You should know that when there is arterial haemorrhage it is impossible to stop it, especially when the vessel is big, except in one of four ways, to wit: by the cautery as we have said; or by division of the vessel when it is not completely divided, for when it is cut through the ends of it contract and the bleeding is stopped; or by a strong thread ligature; or by the application of styptics with tight bandaging.
But those who try to stop bleeding with ligatures or cloths, or by the application of caustics and the like, never stanch it by these means, or at least very rarely.
And if this happen to anyone and there are available neither doctor nor remedies, let him at once apply his forefinger to the mouth of the vessel as we have bidden and close it firmly till the blood is stanched; and pour over the wound and over the artery, without removing the finger, water as cold as possible till the blood thickens and congeals and ceases to flow.
And meanwhile one should be considering what kind of cautery or medicine is indicated.
