 CHAPTER FIFTY-EIGHT.
On the treatment of retention of urine.
 Retention of the urine is caused by an obstruction, from a stone or a clot of blood or pus or a fleshy tumour, or similar cause.
When you have carried out treatment in the ways we have prescribed in their place and the urine is not released; and when you see that it is held back by a stone sticking in the neck of the bladder, then you should have the patient down on his knees, squatting; then mount a man on his back to press his abdomen against his back; and let the patient himself hold his breath as tightly as possible; for then pressure will be put on the neck of the bladder to force the stone back and liberate the urine.
But if these measures do not free it and the matter is very urgent with the patient, then you should attempt to bring it out with the instrument called a catheter, of which this is the figure.
It is made of silver, slender and smooth and hollow like the quill of a bird's feather; as slender as a probe; about a span and a half in length; and with a tiny funnel at the end.
This is the manner in which you draw off the urine through it: take a double thread and with a strong knot tie a little wool or cotton on the end, introduce the end of the thread into the lower end of the catheter, and trim off with scissors any superfluous wool, so that it will go into the tube and close it like a tassel.
Then smear the catheter with oil or butter or egg-white.
Make the patient sit down; then anoint the bladder and the meatus of the penis with humid oils or with olive-oil and warm water.
Then gently introduce the catheter into the urethra until it reaches the root of the urethra.
Then turn the end of the penis upward toward the umbilicus; then push the catheter inwards until the curve of the catheter ends, and push the catheter in until it reaches nearly to the seat.
Then turn the penis down, with the catheter in it, and push until it reaches the bladder, and the patient now feels that it has entered a hollow.
The reason why the operation is done in this manner is that the passage by which the urine is excreted is curved.
Then withdraw rather firmly the thread with the wool plug attached, for the urine follows the wool; then pull it right out and the urine will pour out.
Apply the catheter again and again until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
