 CHAPTER EIGHTY-NINE.
On the treatment of paronychia and broken nails; and on the amputation of a superfluous finger; and the separation of webbed fingers.
 Paronychia is a growth of flesh under the nail of the thumb or big toe; it may also occur in the other fingers and toes.
When it is chronic and the treatment of it is neglected, it comes up as an abscess, or corrupts and generates pus until it eats away the root of the nail.
Often it rots it entirely, and often the disease reaches the bone and gives rise to foetor and broadens the tip of the finger and makes it livid in colour.
When you have treated it with those means mentioned in their place, and your treatment is ineffective, you must excise all the superfluous growth from the nail and then cauterize the wound, for in this case cauterization is a great help.
But if the bone be healthy and the nail also healthy, and the in-turned angle of the nail has pressed the flesh inwards and begun to stab it and injure it, you should pass a thin probe beneath the corner of the nail that presses into the flesh, and raise it up and carefully cut away that flesh and apply caustic to the remainder, until it is all gone; then dress with ointments until cured.
But if it should be that the disease has already begun to involve bone, that bone should be excised and removed; for it will never heal while there remains any diseased bone.
And if you see the corrosion and corruption spreading in the finger, amputate it at one of the joints, as has been previously mentioned; then dress it until it is healed.
 If a laceration or bruising happen to the nail, with violent pain, you should first bleed the patient and then cut away the nail with a sharp scalpel, a swerving cut from top to bottom.
But be careful not to cut into the nail-bed, for you will give the patient violent pain and it will cause a growth of superfluous flesh at the place.
Then dress the part with sedative dressings.
A superfluous finger growing on the hands of some men sometimes is all flesh, sometimes contains a bone, sometimes has a nail.
Some of them arise at the root of a finger, or on one of the phalanges of a finger, and the latter do not move, while those that arise from the root of a finger do sometimes move.
That which is purely fleshy is easily removed; you cut if off at the root with a broad scalpel.
But the treatment of that which arises at the root of a finger is difficult; you should avoid amputating.
In the case of one growing from the finger at a phalangeal joint, you should first cut through the flesh down to the bone with a circular incision; then saw the bone through, with one of the saws that suit the purpose; then dress it until it heals.
As for webbing of the fingers one to another, that occurs very frequently.
It may be either congenital or from the healing of a wound or burn or the like.
You have to cut the web away until the fingers are brought back to their original form; then interpose between them a pad or piece of material soaked in oil of roses, to prevent them from rapidly joining together and to keep them apart; or you can put between them a thin sheet of lead until the healing takes place as it should.
Similarly, if one of the fingers becomes joined to the palm of the hand, cut through the adhesion according to the form it takes, and with proper regard for the shape of the member.
