 CHAPTER THREE.
On the extraction of the temporal arteries.
 When a man has a chronic migraine or acute catarrh, on account of acrid humidities and heat in the temporal muscles, or a violent chronic headache, or the like, and he has been treated with various medical treatments without success, we have sometimes in these diseases tried extraction of the arteries from the temples or cauterization of them, already described.
The manner of extraction is for the patient to shave the temporal hair; then you press upon the artery appearing on the temple; for it will be manifest to you by its pulsation, and is rarely invisible save in a few people or on account of severe cold.
But if it is not plain to you then let the patient bind his neck with the end of his garment; then do you rub the place with a piece of cloth or foment with hot water, till the artery is obvious to you; then take a scalpel shaped thus; then with it gently scrape away the skin till you come to the artery, then stick a hook in it and draw it upward till you extract it from the skin and free it all round from the membranes that are beneath it.
But if the artery be thin, twist it with the tip of the hook and cut out enough of it for the two ends to be well separated from one another and contract so that no haemorrhage occurs; for if it is not divided and cut it will not let blood flow at all.
Then let blood, from six to three ounces.
If the artery be large it should be ligated in two places with a strong double thread; the threads should be either silken or lute-string, lest corruption attack them before the wound is healed, and haemorrhage occur.
Then cut away what remains between the two ligatures; do that immediately or later.
If you wish, you may cauterize it down to the bone with an edged cautery so that the ends of the artery be divided; for this will replace that operation.
It is in fact better, as we have said, unless the patient is feverish or of a hot constitution; cauterization is one of the means of eliminating humidities, so it will be of surer efficacy.
After extraction of the arteries the place must be packed with teased-out cotton wool, and on top of that must be put firm pads.
And after loosening the ligature, dress with dry medicaments that encourage growth of flesh, and with bandages,, till it heals.
But if arterial bleeding hinders you in the course of your operation, hasten to stanch it either by cauterization or by filling the place with vitriol, compressing it with your hand till the blood stays; or, if you have nothing of this kind by you, put your finger on it till the blood clots and rinse over the place till the flow dies down; then tie off as you should.
Less serious and easier than excising the artery is to cauterize the vessel with this cautery provided with two blades, having first marked both places with ink.
Bring it down, very hot, till it reaches the bone and the artery is cut in two places, so as to put some distance between the two ends, for it will certainly not unite after this cauterization.
This is the form of the cautery.
It should have two sharp blades like two small paring-knives, but they should be much less sharp than a knife, for if they are as sharp as a knife they will quickly lose their heat and the flesh will be slow in cutting.
If they have a certain thickness in them the heat of the fire will be retained in them and they will speedily cut the flesh.
This operation is superior to all and less severe and easier.
Let the distance between the two blades be the breadth of a finger.
