 CHAPTER FORTY-SIX.
On the shapes of the instruments used for incising and perforating.
 Among these are the various explorers.
There are three varieties of this instrument, large, medium, and small.
 This is the figure of the large explorer.
Figure of the medium explorer.
Figure of the small explorer.
 They should all be made of the best Damascene steel, with quadrangular points, and strong, to assist entry into the tumours.
And this is the shape of the probes; they are also called burud.
 There are three kinds of this, too: large, medium, and small.
 Figure of the large probe.
 Figure of the medium probe.
Figure of the small probe.
They are suitable for exploring tumours, wounds, fistulas, and sinuses, to see what is inside them such as bones, etc.
They are made round, polished, and smooth, like packing-needles, of Chinese copper or of white copper, or of brass, silver, or iron.
The best are those made of white copper.
Sometimes probes are made of black lead, for investigating fistulas whose deeper course is devious; so that by reason of their softness they can adapt themselves to the curves.
Of these, too, there are three varieties: the long, the medium, and the short, proportioned to the requirement of the depth of every fistula.
Their thickness also should be proportioned to the width or narrowness of the fistula.
The large lead probe.
The medium lead probe.
The small lead probe.*
 Figures of hooks.
There are many kinds of hook.
For example, there are the simple hooks, that is, having only one prong; there are three kinds of this: large, medium, and small.
There are also the blind hooks, of which there are three kinds.
And there are the hooks provided with two prongs, of which there are three kinds.
And there are the bent hooks with two prongs, of which there are three kinds.
And there are the hooks provided with three prongs, of which there are three kinds.
All of these kinds are necessary in their place.
 The large, medium, and small simple hook.
 The large and medium blind hooks.
The small blind hook.
 The large, medium, and small, double-pronged hooks
 The large triple-pronged hook.
The medium, and small triplepronged hooks.
 These are the figures of the scarifying scalpels with which you incise and dissect away cysts and tumours.
They too are of three kinds: large, medium, and small.
Figure of the large scarifying scalpel.
Figure of the medium scarifying scalpel.
Figure of the small scarifying scalpel.
The cutting edges should be sharp, and the other ends blunt.
The reason for making them like this is so that they can be utilized in dissecting away cysts where there is a fear of cutting a vein or nerve, and also that the patient may console himself thereby and find some small relief from the pain involved in the dissection of a tumour.
Here are the figures of the 'deceivers' of which also there are three kinds, large, medium, and small.
They are made of brass and resemble the rod for instilling eye-salve.
At one end there is the likeness of a broad spoon made of two plates, in the extremity of which is the point of a hidden scalpel; thus the knife is masked like a bird's tongue, moving in and out at will, as you see.
Figures of the scalpels which are hidden between the fingers when tumours are to be opened, so that they are not noticed by the patient.
They are of three varieties: large, medium, and small.
 Figures of the cupping vessels with which haemorrhage is stanched.
There are three kinds: large, medium, and small.
 They are made of bronze or of Chinese alloy, round but slightly elongated, as you see, and also rather thin.
You should have these kinds by you, large and small, so that haemorrhage may be quickly stopped in an emergency and when you have no medicine.
But they are not to be used for suppressing haemorrhage in all parts of the body, but only in the fleshy parts such as the calf and thigh muscles, the arm muscles, the breasts, belly, and groin, and other similar fleshy soft parts.
Sometimes of this class small instruments, like nutshells, are made, like this.
Haemorrhage from a venesection is stopped by these; or in the case of a cut artery or vein.
Sometimes round ones are made, like this.
