 CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.
On cauterization of a fistula in the angle of the eye.
 When you have treated a fistula in those ways mentioned in the sections on diseases, without success, it should be cauterized after this manner.
Bid the patient put his head in your lap; and let an assistant hold his head in front of you without moving or stirring.
Then place on his eyes cotton wool damped with egg-white or mucilage of psyllium seeds.
Then heat a cautery shaped thus.
It should be hollow and in shape like a fine tube, like an eagle's quill, at the one end that is used as a cautery.
And if you wish it may be perforated to the other extremity; or it can be solid like a probe.
But this hollow instrument will be better for your operation.
Then press on the fistula if it be open and get the matter out of it and wipe it away; or if it is not open, then open it.
Then apply to it the cautery, which should be very hot, and press it in with your hand till it reaches the bone.
While you are burning keep the hand away from the eye slightly toward the nasal side, lest your hand slip or the patient draw away so that you put the cautery into the ball of the eye and destroy it.
And if you reach the bone at the first cauterization, good; if not, repeat the cauterization if necessary.
Leave it a few days, then put on cotton wool with butter and treat with hygroscopic ointment till it heals.
And should forty days have passed and it does not heal, apply a sharp corrosive ointment so as to expose the bone, and strip it as will be explained in the appropriate chapter.
Another method of cauterizing a fistula is that which some of the Ancients mentioned: apply yourself to the site of the fistula and incise it; then insert into the incision a fine funnel, this being the figure of it, and pour into it a drachm of molten lead; and keep your hand on the funnel, holding it firm all the time, and do not let the patient move at all, lest the molten lead run into his eyes.
Then you should put cotton wool soaked in egg-white or water upon the patient's eye.
For the lead cauterizes the site of the fistula and acts as a marvellous cure.
If the fistula heals by the cauterization and medication we have described, well and good; otherwise perforation of the nose will undoubtedly have to be undertaken to lead the fistula into the meatus of the nose, by the technique that will come in its own place.
