 CHAPTER SEVENTY-FOUR.
On the perforation of eruptions occurring in the uterus.
 From time to time there occur in the womb various kinds of tumour, such as cancer and the stony tumour and ulcer and abscess and gangrene and fistulae and varicosities and cracks and warts and inflamed tumours; all these diseases I have mentioned, with their varieties and their symptoms, in the appropriate section.
But now in this treatise we must mention an inflamed tumour of the kind where there is a collection of pus, and the manner of its opening with the knife.
 You should inspect it, and if the pain of the tumour is acute from the outset, with pulsation and inflammation and fever, and, if it is visible, you see that it is red, then do not be in a hurry to open, but treat it with applications helpful for suppuration till these symptoms have subsided.
Then you should get the patient to sit in a chair having a double seat, lying back.
She should put her feet together upon her abdomen, with the thighs apart and the arms joined under the knees and bound together in a suitable manner.
Then the midwife should sit on the right side and employ the instrument for opening the orifice of the womb, which will be described later.
When you are going to use this instrument, you should measure with a probe the depth of the womb so that the instrument be not introduced beyond this measure lest the patient be harmed; if the instrument be longer, pads should be put over the rim of the cervix to prevent the passage of its whole length.
You must put the screw that runs in the instrument, in from the top and hold the instrument while your assistant turns the screw until the entrance of the uterus is opened.
When the abscess is exposed, and on manual palpation is found to be thin and soft, you should make an incision at its head with a broad scalpel.
And when all the matter is evacuated you should place on the wound a soft wick soaked in oil of roses or green oil with some styptic quality, and let it come outside from the incision into the cervix uteri.
Over the area of the uterus and pubes there should be clean wool soaked in an infusion of mallows.
Then after two days dress with a suitable ointment until healed.
Sometimes also both the wound and the uterus are washed out with a douche of honey and water, then of a decoction of liquorice root or long aristolochy; then go back to the ointment.
But if the lesion be hidden in the depths of the womb then you will have to abstain from operative treatment but carry out treatment as spoken of in its place.
