 BOOK ONE
 ON CAUTERIZATION
 Before we expatiate on the actual operation of cautery it is necessary to mention its advantages and disadvantages and the temperament upon which it is to be used.
I say that a discourse on the advantage and disadvantage of cautery is a long one, a subtle learning, a hidden secret.
A great number of wise men have spoken on the subject with differing opinions.
Lest I should be over long I have reduced their opinions to a summary.
 Now I say that the cautery has universal application for every ill constitution, whether organic or functional, with the exception of two: the functional hot temperament and the functional dry temperament.
About the organic dry temperament the Ancients differed, some saying that cautery helps in a constitution of this kind, while others said the opposite: that cautery is of no use in a disease caused by heat or dryness; for fire is naturally hot and dry and it is obviously absurd to treat a hot dry sickness with a hot dry remedy.
But he who holds the opposite view says that actual cautery may help in the case of such hot dry illnesses as arise in the human body; for when you compare the human body, humid as it is, with the nature of fire you find the human body cold.
I myself from much experience agree with this last opinion.
However, no one should attempt this operation unless he has had long training and practice in the use of the cautery, and is fully acquainted with the various human temperaments, and the character of the complaints in themselves; their causes, symptoms, and duration.
Concerning the rest of the temperaments there is no reason for fear, particularly the cold and humid distempers; all medical men are agreed and none differs concerning the utility of the cautery in such cases.
Now you should know, my sons, that the actual cautery and its superiority over cauterization with chemical caustics is one of the secrets of medicine.
For fire is a simple substance having no action except upon the actual part cauterized; nor does it do more than slightly harm any adjacent part.
But the effect of cauterization with caustic may spread to parts at a distance from that burnt; and also in the part cauterized it may give rise to a disease difficult to cure or even fatal.
Whereas fire, on the other hand, on account of the nobility of its nature and its superiority has no such effect unless it is overdone.
That has become clear to us by experience through length of service, devotion to the art, and acquaintance with the facts of the matter.
So I need not prolong this discourse.
Were it not inappropriate to this my book I should relate to you a deep secret concerning fire, the manner of its action on bodies and its expulsion of diseases; with a reasoned philosophical discourse too subtle for your understanding.
 Know also, my sons, that the Ancients disagreed also as to the fit time for cautery, affirming that spring was the best.
Myself, I say that the cautery is suitable at all times; for whatever harm may arise from the season of the operation is utterly outdone by the benefit deriving from the cauterization itself; especially if the cautery is applied to pains that are severe, grievous, and swift, brooking no delay, because of the fear that the consequences may be more grave than the slight harm from the season.
 Nor let enter your minds, my sons, the groundless notion of the laity and of ignorant doctors, that the complaint cured by the cautery never comes back later; do not cleave to this opinion.
The fact is not as they think; for the cautery is homologous to the drug which alters the constitution and dries up the humidities that give rise to disorders.
But the cautery excels the drug by the rapidity of its success, the strength of its action, and the potency of its powers.
It may be that the disease will return at some time according to the temperament of the patient, and the persistence and virulence of the disease; and from the formation of a mass of superfluities in the body; from his neglect of himself in acquiring them from food; and from causes of a similar nature.
Of course, if the disease to which the cautery is applied be a slight one, and in a part only slightly liable to superfluities and humidities, as, for example, the cauterization of a molar tooth for toothache, and the like, then it may happen that the pain does not return; but that happens rarely.
 Another common saying is that the cautery is the final remedy; which is true, but not in the way which they mean.
For they believe that after cauterization no treatment, either with or without medicine, will help.
It means something precisely the opposite: after various treatments have been applied to a certain disorder without success, then last of all we apply cauterization and this proves effective; whence comes about the saying that the cautery is the final remedy—not in that sense in which it is popularly held by the laity and by many ignorant medical men.
 The Ancients have stated that cauterization by gold is more effective than by iron.
Now they said that on account of the temperateness of gold and its noble character.
They also stated that the site of cauterization does not become purulent, but that is not absolutely so; for I myself have experience of that and have found that it happens in some cases and not in other cases.
Cauterization by gold is indeed better and more successful than with iron, as they have stated; except that when you are heating the gold cautery in the fire you are uncertain, by reason of the redness of the gold, when it reaches the desired temperature.
In addition to this it cools very quickly; and if you overheat it it melts in the fire, melts and runs, and the practitioner finds himself in difficulties.
Therefore in our own opinion cauterization is swifter and more successful with iron.
Now I have arranged this book on cauterization by chapters, set in order from the head to the foot, to make it easy for the seeker to find what he wants.
