 CHAPTER TWENTY-FOUR.
On the treatment of a dislocation of the lower jaw.
 It is rare indeed for the jawbones to be dislocated.
Their dislocation may be in one of two ways: either they may shift slightly from their place and be a little relaxed; or they may be completely and utterly dislocated so as to be relaxed down toward the breast so that the patient's saliva runs out and he cannot control it; nor is he able to close his mouth, and he stutters in speaking.
If it be only a slight displacement it will go back in most cases spontaneously without much trouble.
But if the dislocation be complete and total it is necessary to set about the reduction of it at once without any delay.
This is done thus: an assistant holds the patient's head and the doctor introduces into his mouth the thumb of one hand at the root of the jaw, if it be a dislocation on one side, or both thumbs if it be a bilateral dislocation, with the rest of the fingers outside to keep it straight.
Then let him bid the patient relax his jaws and allow them to move in any direction; while the doctor sets the dislocation, thrusting the jaw until it return to its proper place.
If the reduction be difficult, especially if it be a bilateral dislocation, administer a fomentation with hot water and oil, so that the reduction of both sides may be facilitated.
And on no account delay the reduction, as we have said.
When the reduction and straightening have been done and the patient's mouth closes and is not relaxed, then apply to both sides dressings steeped in wax prepared from wax and oil of roses.
Then bind it up gently, with a loose bandage.
The patient should sleep lying on his back with his head held between two pillows so that he does not move it either to right or to left; nor should he burden himself with chewing but should be on a diet of broth of corn starch until the pain is gone and the jaw is firm; then he may eat whatever he wishes.
Let him use it gently; let him not work his mouth heavily in eating or drinking or yawning until the jaw is firmly knit and healed.
If the reduction of both sides is hard when it is a simultaneous bilateral dislocation, and there is no return to the proper position, then thereby in many cases fevers and perpetual headaches occur; sometimes the patient's belly is loosened and he vomits actual bile.
When you see this you will know that he is doomed; in most cases in which this happens death follows in ten days.
