 CHAPTER NINETY-FIVE.
On venesection.
 The blood-vessels in the body which it is customary to open are thirty(two) in number.
There are sixteen of them in the head, and they are: two pulsating vessels behind the ears that are called the two occipitals; the two external arteries in the temples; and the two veins in the two internal angles of the eyes, called the vessels of sight; and the vein running up the middle of the forehead; and the vein situated at the tip of the nose; and the two jugular veins in the neck; and the two veins in the upper lip and the two in the lower lip; these being the veins known as 'the four vessels'; and two veins beneath the tongue.
 As for the veins that are bled in the arm and hand, they are five.
One is the cephalic, which is on the outer side; popularly they call it the 'headvein'; then there is the 'blue-black', that is, the median vein, which is made up of a branch from the basilic and a branch from the cephalic; popularly they call that the 'body-vein'; then the basilic vein; this is the one situated on the inner side and is termed also the axillary vein, but popularly it is called the 'belly-vein'; and then the cord of the arm; this is situated over the radius and is the one that is contiguous to it; this is the one that is clearly visible on the thumb.
And the salvatella which is the vein between the little and ring fingers; it has two branches.
There are also three veins in the leg and foot; one of these is the sciatic vein on the outer aspect; the second is the saphena situated near the heel on the inner aspect; and there is the external saphena situated near the heel on the outer aspect.
And there are three veins, counterparts to these, in the other leg.
Venesection of the two veins behind the ears.
Bleeding from both of these will give relief in cases of chronic catarrh, migraine and chronic foul pustules, and scabs of the head.
The method of venesecting these two is as I shall now describe: the patient's head should be shaved and the hinder part, in the region of the two veins, should be strongly chafed with a rough cloth; then the patient should bind his neck with his turban until the two veins are visible; their position is behind the ears in the two flattened places of the head; feel for them with your finger and when you feel their pulsation beneath your finger then mark the place with ink.
Then take a knife-scalpel, known as a lancet, and insert it beneath the vessel into the skin until the scalpel reaches the bone; then lifting with your hand both vessel and skin make an incision dividing both skin and vein; the length of the incision should be about two fingers side by side; then draw off the quantity of blood you wish.
Then bind them up with dressings and leave it until healed.
The incision and cauterization of these two vessels has been discussed earlier in the book.
The section of the two arteries in the temples gives relief for chronic migraine and severe headache and constant ophthalmia and the flow of acrid superfluities into the eyes.
Now the manner of incising them is as I shall describe: the patient should bind his neck with a sash until the vessels stand out clearly to the eye and their pulsation is manifest under your finger; then mark with ink.
Then with your forefinger raise the skin over the vessel and introduce a lancet beneath and lift up the vein and divide it as you did the other two; and draw off as much blood as you need.
Then loosen the band round the patient's neck and put your finger on the vein for a while; then apply cotton wool and a pad, bandage securely, and leave until it heals.
They and their incision and extraction have been mentioned earlier in the book.
 Venesection of the vein in the forehead is, after venesection of the cephalic, a relief to chronic diseases of the face such as pustules and scabs and erysipelas.
Now I shall relate to you the method of cutting: you bind the patient's neck until the vessel stands out; then you take the instrument called the 'pickaxe'.
The spike in the head of the instrument you place on the vessel itself and then strike with a comb or some similar thing; and let the blood flow to the extent you wish; then loosen the band round the neck and bandage the vein until healed.
Sometimes it is opened with a broad scalpel; the scalpel, however, should not have a sharp point like other scalpels but should be a little broader at the tip, and the vein is cut obliquely, because the bone is close and the scalpel, if it is too fine, may be broken on it.
 Venesection of the two lachrymal veins gives relief in diseases of the eyes such as granular conjunctiva and inflammation and pannus, and in diseases of the face.
Now this is the method of incising: the patient binds a sash round his throat, then you cut open both veins, standing in front of him.
The incision should be oblique, slightly longitudinal, with a small, rather broad scalpel, for in this place there is no flesh; so if the knife have too narrow a point it may be broken on the bone.
Then let flow what blood you wish, put cotton wool on both, tie for one night, then loosen.
 Venesection of the vein of the nose helps in acute fevers, in violent headache, and in diseases of the face such as the red pustules that arise on the nose, especially if they are chronic.
This is how you make the incision: the patient binds his neck and then you hold his nose with your left hand and take a long fine scalpel and stick it in the middle of the very lobule of the nose, perpendicularly in the nasal septum (for the vein is not obvious at that spot) and blood will immediately flow out.
You should advance the scalpel a little and cause the blood to flow as required; then bandage for one night, for it will quickly heal.
Venesection of the jugular veins helps tightness of breath and the early stage of elephantiasis, and the melancholic diseases arising on the surface of the skin, such as the black vitiligo and impetigo and malignant ulcers and cancrum oris.
Now the way to venesect them is for the patient to bind his neck below them both with a band; let the operator stand behind the patient and let the patient be seated upon a chair.
Then incise the vein longitudinally with a rather wide opening; then let a moderate amount of blood, or according to what you think necessary; then do the same with the other vein.
Then loosen the band and tie the veins with a moderate pressure lest the patient be suffocated; leave him until the next day and the wound will be healed.
 The four veins of the lips: venesection of them is effective, second to section of the cephalic vein, for pustules on the mouth and rotting of the gums and malignant ulcers and fissures of the lips and for malignant ulcer in the nose and round about.
The way to venesect is to seat the patient in front of you and bind a sash round his neck, then roll back his lips and look for the two veins, one of which you will see to the left and the other to the right; their dark colour will show them up against the lip and also the fact that round them are fine dark veins; so cut down upon both, dividing them.
But if you are in doubt about the matter and are not sure what they are, set about incising the largest and most obvious.
Do the same with the two veins in the upper lip.
The two veins under the tongue: their venesection is, after section of the cephalic, of good effect in the quinsy arising in the throat from disease of the uvula, and diseases of the mouth.
The way to venesect them is to seat the patient before you in the sunlight and raise his tongue, and look, and you will see beneath the tongue one vein on each side, blackish in colour.
Cut them; but be careful not to go too far in your incision, for beneath them lie arteries from which there may be haemorrhage.
The three veins that are opened in the elbow are the veins which universal custom has used for bloodletting.
There are two ways of venesecting these: either by piercing with a broad myrtle-leaf scalpel or a rather fine olivary; or by cutting with a knife-edged scalpel, the lancet whose figure follows.
The broad myrtle-leaf scalpel.
As you see, it should be broad so as to serve for opening hollow, full, outstanding, obvious and thick veins, and those containing turbid blood.
The olivary scalpel.
This scalpel is less broad and finer-pointed.
It is suitable for venesecting fine veins that contain thin jaundiced blood.
The lancet.
This is the lancet for making a slit.
There are broad and narrow varieties of it according to the breadth or narrowness of the vein.
This one indicates what the others are like; it is well known to surgeons.
The basilic vein, which is one of these three vessels, helps, when cut, by extracting blood from disorders below the throat and neck, in the parts neighbouring the chest and abdomen.
When one venesects it one must be careful and wary of it, for beneath the vein is an artery, so that if one is inaccurate and sticks the scalpel in too far one will cut the artery and cause a haemorrhage; therefore venesection of it should not be done with a transfixing scalpel but should be an incision with the lancet.
If the basilic vein is not clearly discernible, leave it and turn to another, or look for a branch of it; or venesect the brachial cord instead, for that is evident; incise it with the lancet as we have said.
But if you wish to open the basilic vein itself you should, before you bandage the arm, palpate the place till the site of pulsation is found; then mark it with ink; then bind the arm and cut the vein obliquely with the lancet as we said, and take care that the stroke fall some way from the artery.
If, when tying the bandage, you see a swelling in the place that you have marked with ink, that swelling is the inflation of the artery, so avoid it.
And if, on section, you see the blood spurt out like a child's urine, and it is clear and red, then you may know that it is arterial blood; so then be quick and put your finger upon it for a long while; then remove your finger and if the bleeding stops, as it often will, then bind up the arm and leave it.
Caution the patient against neglecting it; let him be careful and not move it for some days, until it heals.
But if the bleeding is not stayed but resists your treatment and you have no medicament there at the time, then cut the vessel through if you can see it; for the two ends will contract and the haemorrhage will stop.
Or else take a pistachio nut shell and split it and take one half and bind it over the site of the haemorrhage with a pad and bandage until next day.
The bleeding may stop; if not, then treat by those means mentioned previously, namely the application of styptic powders.
It is not difficult in most cases to stop the bleeding, because the wound is small and it is easy to bandage the arm.
So get to know it.
Venesection of the median vein results in drawing off blood from the upper part of the head and the lower part of the body; this being due to the fact, as we said, that it is composed of a branch of the cephalic and a branch of the basilic veins.
The venesector should be very careful in opening it because there is a nerve beneath; and if he takes the scalpel too deep and hits that nerve it will cause stupor, the healing of which will be difficult and perhaps even impossible.
Generally this nerve can be felt, but if in some persons it lies hidden and is slender and not discernible, then you should make your venesection an incision with the lancet and diligently avoid the nerve.
If the vein lies between two nerves you should cut it longitudinally.
 The cephalic vein: section of it is effective in drawing blood from the head and in diseases of the eyes.
Particularly in this vein you ought, if you wish to incise it, to make your incision by puncturing with the olivary or the broad myrtle-leaf scalpel, for this is the safest of all veins as there is neither artery nor nerve beneath.
When you are cutting it you have only to avoid with the scalpel the head of the muscle and to look for the soft place.
It will not injure it, if at the first cut you miss the vein, to repeat the incision several times; except that in some people it will sometimes swell up if the section is not made at the first stroke; nevertheless that swelling will do him no harm.
The manner of venesection, the accidents that may supervene, and the necessary preliminaries for performing it properly.
First you should know that venesection may be employed either for the preservation of health or in cases of disease.
When used for the preservation and maintenance of health and for guarding against the occurrence of disease, the venesection should be in one of the three vessels at the elbow, cephalic, median, or basilic; and it must be performed at the beginning of spring when the signs of repletion appear.
The venesection should be done on a Sunday or Tuesday, after three hours of the day have passed.
On the other hand, venesection administered for diseases has no fixed hour but when need and necessity arise, either by night or by day, at any hour, in any season.
Children should not be venesected until their fourteenth year, nor should you venesect old men of over sixty years.
 When anyone has decided to be bled, for whatever reason, first of all his bowels must be purged with a gentle enema if they contain much excrement, lest at the venesection putrid superfluities be drawn from the bowels into the veins, that might harm the chief parts of the body.
No one suffering from indigestion or surfeit or drunkenness should be venesected until recovered from these; nor a dropsical patient.
Beware also of venesection after stomach-trouble or vomiting or diarrhoea or much intercourse or fatigue or exercise or sleeplessness or fasting and anything else that diminishes the strength both bodily and spiritual.
Then, beforehand, see to the refining of the humours, if the blood be thick, by means of food and drink and medicines, if that is practicable for him.
Then, if there is no contra-indication, let him enter the bath; or let him take a little exercise to make the blood thin.
Then perform the venesection in the early part of the day, as we have said.
Let him endeavour on that day to have his mind free from all such evil spiritual affections as anxiety, anger, or fear; and from all bodily affections such as excessive fatigue and weariness and intercourse and the like.
There should also be in the place where he is sitting such things as are customary for men to enjoy, such as various perfumes, aromatics, and music, and the like, as each one may.
Then the venesector should sit on a cushion raised above the cushion of him whose vein is to be opened.
Then let him stretch out his arm, and let the venesector chafe it two or three times with his hand; then he should bind a bandage round it by means of thongs twisted two or three times.
The ligature should be moderately tight, for any other sort of ligature, be it too tight or too loose, will hinder the flow of blood.
After putting on the tourniquet the patient about to be venesected should chafe his own hands together until the veins swell up and become obvious.
Then the venesector should wipe over his knife with a little olive-oil, preferably old.
Then he should place the forefinger of his left hand on the vessel itself below the place where he wishes to cut, lightly, so that the vein does not slip away and elude the stroke; for there are some veins that you may find like cords slipping away at venesection, while others are filled with flatus and when the knife is applied to them they contract under it and deceive the operator and the knife fails to open the vein or makes only a narrow opening.
Wherefore it behoves the venesector to be firm and deliberate in all these cases.
Then he should apply the knife and if the vein is opened first time, good; but if not, let him repeat a little lower down or a little above, quickly, if the place does not swell.
If it does swell or the patient be anxious, then leave him for a day or two and do not bandage, for that might perhaps provoke an abscess; nor let him go to the bath.
Then if he likes, let the venesection be repeated.
If the knife has made an opening but it is small and the flow of blood is feeble and you fear that the amount of blood you require will not come out, then gently insert the knife again straight into the same opening and widen it a little.
Do this speedily before the place swells up; for in many people the place swells up at once from a small opening.
But if you see it swell up, on no account make another incision for it will be ineffectual; but apply to it a little lees of oil, for that will facilitate the flow of blood; it is superior in this situation to the oil itself and to all other unguents.
Therefore use lees of oil in all cases of venesection when the flow of blood is hindered.
The great theriac and shakhzanaya both have the same effect, for when the blood is thick it is rendered thin and running.
If there occur a big tumour at the site of venesection, as often happens, especially with a man who has not previously undergone venesection or if the opening in the vein be small, then quickly apply to the place a sponge soaked in lukewarm salt and water and bandage it for a while, then it will go down.
You should do this after the blood has gone out altogether from the same vessel or from another one.
If there remain after some days some discoloration or greenness at the site it will not hurt; if you like, apply some solution of myrrh and aloes, or juice of penny-royal or something similar.
 Often in section of the basilic vein there occurs tumour and swelling.
Put your hand upon it, and if you find that it sinks when pressed then it is a harmful swelling; be careful not to apply to it any of the things we have told you; for often arterial blood comes from it.
But apply a poultice with some styptic qualities, to harden the place; then treat in the usual way until healed.
 Now in each case you should extract blood in proportion to the person's strength and to the prevailing colour of the blood.
If the blood be black, let it flow until it becomes red; in the same way, if you see it is thick, let it run until it is thin; and again, if it be sharp, until its sharpness is gone.
In the case that is plethoric, robust, and requiring venesection just the once, the incision should be wide and the knife should be broad.
And on the contrary for the debilitated person, in whose case you should venesect several times and the opening should be small.
The best method in venesecting is if the incision be at an angle, oblique, cutting, not piercing.
This manner of venesecting is safe from haemorrhage and from cutting the nerve; it is better and safer than cutting straight across or straight along.
 To the patient who habitually faints during venesection you should give to eat beforehand a little bread macerated in the juice of unripe pomegranates or oxymel, if he be of a warm temperament; and draw off the blood in three or four instalments.
And if he be of a cold temperament let him take beforehand bread macerated in syrup of quinces or in aromatic syrup of honey or in fragrant syrup of basil.
If the patient faints during venesection and the cause is great loss of blood, then be should be given to drink meat-juice and thin syrup of basil; and he should perfume himself with galia moschata and anoint his chest with it.
And for the rest, use what we have spoken of in its place in the chapter dealing with fainting due to evacuation.
As for him who wishes to ease his arm and draw off blood a second time, when he is undergoing the venesection on account of great evacuation and the lowness of his strength, you should let the blood slowly, in proportion to his strength, on successive days.
For him who wishes to ease his arm and draw off blood a second time, being of robust body, it must be done seven or nine hours from the first venesection.
He who wishes to draw blood from his body to the side opposite to that toward which it tends, should be eased on the second or third day.
 He who has abundant blood that has become hot and sharp and has produced fever should be bled at one time, and a large amount should be taken with a wide opening, until he faints (all the rules of venesection having been observed by you); but you should keep your finger on the pulse while the blood flows lest death take the place of fainting, for that often happens when the venesector is ignorant and there is carelessness.
If you wish to loosen the arm and let blood a second time and you find that the opening of the vein is now closed up and the outflow of blood is difficult, you should not press hard upon it nor twist the arm violently, for that is very harmful.
Either you must leave him a while and then bleed him again; or the clot of blood can be removed from the opening of the vein by using the blade of the scalpel, or by applying some salt dissolved in water; or apply some of the great theriac or shakhzanaya; and put light pressure upon it until the blood comes out.
But if the vein has begun to swell, leave it and do not touch it until the swelling has subsided.
And if you are unavoidably called to let blood again, venesect either above the place or in the other arm or another vessel.
Section of the cord of the arm: this is cut in place of the median and basilic veins when these are not to be found or are hidden; for this vein is composed of those two.
The way to venesect it is for the patient to dip his hand in hot water until the forearm is red from the warmth and the vessel stands out distinctly.
Then bandage a little above it with a moderate pressure, and then cut the vein a little obliquely, neither transversely nor longitudinally.
The incision should be broad, and you should make the cut a little above the wrist.
If the blood does not flow easily, have the hand again put into the vessel of hot water and let the blood flow into the water until you have extracted what is needed.
If it be in the summer time you may be able to dispense with putting the hand back into the hot water; it is mainly in winter that you let the blood flow into hot water.
Venesection of this vessel is safer than all others for beneath it there is neither artery nor nerve.
 Section of the salvatella of the right hand is efficacious in case of diseases of the liver.
The method of venesecting it is to tie a band round the wrist or grip it with your hand, after you have put it in hot water until the vein is swollen up and is plainly to be felt; then cut it somewhat obliquely; if you cut it right through that will not matter at all.
But be careful not to go too far with the knife, for underneath there are the tendons of the fingers and the place is bare of flesh.
Then put the hand again into hot water and let the blood flow; for if you do not put it into hot water again the blood will clot in the opening and will be prevented from flowing.
 When you have extracted the required quantity of blood, put oil and salt on the vein so that it does not heal too quickly.
You should act thus with every narrow branch.
Incision of the salvatella of the left hand is of value in diseases of the spleen.
Venesection of it should be carried out in the same manner as you did in the other.
Venesection of the saphena is beneficial in diseases of the lower part of the body, such as afflictions of the uterus and retention of the menses, and for diseases of the kidneys, and for chronic ulcers of the hips and legs, and similar diseases.
Now the manner of venesection is for the patient to put his foot in hot water, then friction should be applied to it until the veins fill up; then bind a thong over the joint of the foot; then the site of the vein at the ankle is shown up running toward the big toe and forming many branches on the surface of the foot.
Then make your incision either in the broadest branch or at the ankle before it ramifies, for that is better and safer.
If you venesect it on the surface of the foot, be careful of the tendons that are beneath on the surface of the foot.
Make the incision obliquely as though you were cutting the vein through.
The knife should be a lancet.
If the flow of blood be impeded, put the foot back again into hot water and let the blood flow out into it until it is evacuated.
 If the venesector makes a mistake the first time in the vein to be cut, let him repeat the section a little higher up, for the.place is safe; you need fear no mischief as long as you are careful of the tendons, as we said before.
In the same way you may deal with the saphena of the other foot.
Now the position of the sciatic vein is, as we said, on the outside near the heel.
Section of it is effective in pain in the hip when it arises from hot blood.
The way to venesect it is to make the patient get into the bath.
Then hasten and bandage his leg from the hip to a distance of four fingers above the heel, with a long narrow bandage; for only this will cause it to appear.
When it has appeared then open it in whatever way you can; at an angle, which is best, or right through, or only cut it open, for it is a safe place.
But in many people it is very hard to find; and if you do not find it or it is in no way palpable, then venesect one of its branches, which will be seen on the surface of the foot towards the fourth toe and the little toe.
Be careful of the tendons, and let the amount of blood you require.
Then loosen the bandage and apply cotton wool to the site of the section and bandage the place; it will heal quickly.
