 CHAPTER ONE.
In which is given the necessary compendious preliminary information on fractures.
 Before we begin to speak of the fractures and dislocations of individual members we must, as an introduction to this book, give the general and particular information which compels your understanding and your being versed in it; both you and anyone else beside who is eager to learn this noble art.
So I say that when anyone has sustained a fracture or dislocation or luxation or fall, you should first hasten to venesect him, or get his bowel open, or both, if there be nothing to hinder such as physical weakness, or unless it be a small boy or a very old man to whom an accident of this kind has happened; or unless the weather be excessively hot or cold.
Next, let his diet be restricted to cold vegetables and the flesh of fowl and kids; he is to be forbidden wine and rich meat and gluttony and all foods that fill out the blood-vessels, until you are sure that there is no abscess and see no reason to suspect a flux of matter to the place.
Then let the patient return to his former diet according to his custom.
When the broken bone has begun to mend, the patient should be nourished with very nourishing food, fat, strong, having some glutinous property, such as porridge, rice, heads, trotters, the tripe of cows, eggs, fresh fish, heavy wine, and the like; for on this diet the mending of the fracture will be quicker and better.
 You should know that fractures occurring in mature and old people cannot join and mend into the original condition, on account of the dryness and hardness of their bones; though any bones that are extremely soft, like those of infants, may make a union and heal.
Yet nature produces around the bone on all sides something like glue, with a certain viscosity, with whose help it joins, and it binds so that one part adheres to the other and they are linked to one another until it be good and firm as it had been before; so that there is no impediment to any of its functions.
It is on this account that the patient's food should be the sort that has solidity and glueyness and thickness, as we have said.
You should know that there are as many different types of fracture as there are members.
Thus a fracture of the leg bone differs from a fracture of the cranium; and a fracture of the breast bone differs from a fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly there are differences among the other parts.
We shall give an exposition of each kind of fracture, each in its own chapter and distinguished from the others.
The fracture of each bone also has its own variations; for the fracture may be a clean break without splintering; or the fracture may be along the bone, with splinters and projections which may be sharp or may not; and the fracture may involve a wound and a laceration of the skin; and the fracture may be a crack.
Each kind has its own special technique of setting which will be mentioned in detail, each in its place.
 Among the diagnostic signs of a broken bone are: distortion, protrusion, the aspect of it, and the crepitus when you press on it with the hand.
When there is no obvious distortion or crepitus at the site, nor do you feel movement when you manipulate the bone, and the patient does not experience severe pain, there is no fracture there.
But it is possible that there is a luxation or a slight fracture or a little crack; so you must not disturb it with any extension or pressure, but apply one of the remedies suitable to the site, such as will be described later; then bind up gently.
If the bone is parted and broken in two and there is no fragmentation but a simple separation of one part from its fellow, then you should lose no time in straightening and aligning it before an abscess sets in.
If an abscess does set in, then let a few days pass until it has subsided; then gently and skilfully straighten it in whatever way you can.
You should know that the setting or alignment of this is easier than that of a splintered bone.
Then bandage as will be prescribed.
But if the bone is splintered, extension from either side is necessary, whether it be hand or foot; with your own hands if it be a small member, or with two ropes or with one hand and a rope.
You should place the part on a flat surface in its natural attitude so that when both parts of the broken bone have been extended you can try to restore the fragments to their proper place with all the skill and gentleness possible; and do your utmost to ensure that the patient experience no pain or distress as you operate.
Try diligently to get one part of the bone fitted in the best form to the other.
At the same time you should palpate and investigate both of them with your hand, and if you find anything wrong then mend it and straighten it to the best of your ability.
But avoid violent extension or compression which many ignorant people apply; for by doing so they often cause abscess or crippling in the limb, as I myself have many times seen.
Then after you have exactly repositioned it and bandaged it, keep that limb still and quiet, and bid the patient beware of moving it while awake or asleep, and in his shifting and stirring, and in opening the bowel, and in every activity, to the utmost of his capacity; and that he should try to let the position of the limb be such that he is free from pain; when pain or distress is felt in any position in which he has disposed the limb, he should move it to a different position in which he feels no pain.
At the same time he should try to make that position even and straight, so that when the limb is mended there be no curvature in it.
 As to the way to bandage a broken limb, it is as I shall now describe to you.
You should know that limbs which may be fractured vary in their size and shape.
The strips of bandage for those that are small, such as an arm or finger or forearm or the like, should be soft and fine, while those that are thick, such as the hip, back, or breast, should have broad and strong bandages.
For a broad bandage holds fast to a big limb, binding it all round with an even pressure so that no defect may occur.
Then, after you have finished the setting, begin by applying a suitable liniment on soft tow over the site of the fracture, then start to wrap the bandage over the actual site, three or four turns of bandage as the part may require, winding it fairly tight.
Then carry on the bandage above the site of the fracture, winding it more loosely than on the fractured place, and continue a little with the bandaging beyond the place of fracture, loosening the tension gradually, until you have taken up a good amount of the sound part.
Then take another bandage and wind it several turns over the fracture and then carry it over the part below the fracture, the tightness and looseness being arranged in the same way that we prescribed for the first covering, of the upper part.
Then put between the bandages enough soft tow or soft rags to correct the curves of the fracture, if any; otherwise put nothing in.
Then wind over it another bandage and at once lay over it strong splints, if the part be not swollen and effused.
But if there be swelling or effusion in the part, apply something to allay the swelling and disperse the effusion; leave it on for several days and then bind on the splints.
The splints should be made of broad halves of cane, cut and shaped with skill; or the splints may be made of the wood used for sieves, which are made of pine; or of palm branches; or of brier or giant fennel or the like, whatever wood be at hand.
The size of each splint should be of this form and shape, except that the splint that is placed on the fracture itself should be a little thicker and broader than the others.
As to the length of the splint, it should be greater or less as suits the fractured part.
Figure of a splint.
Then bind over the splints another bandage just as tightly as you did your first; then over that tie it up with cords arranged in the way we have said, that is, with the pressure greatest over the site of the fracture and lessened as you move away from it.
The cords should be of medium thickness, of linen supple of quality.
For if the cords are too thick, such as I have seen ignorant people use who made their cords of twisted bands of linen, that will be a grave error, for moderate tension with these is impossible.
Nor are fine threads suitable either, for with these you cannot achieve sufficient tension.
Between splints there should be a space of not less than a finger's breadth.
If, after bandaging, the patient is hurt in the sound parts by the ends of the splints, then put a little soft tow or carded wool under them until they no longer hurt him thus.
As for the case of a fracture accompanied by an open wound, it will be mentioned in a special section on its own.
You should know that not every fracture should be bound up with splints on the first day; that is, when the part is big you should not apply splints until five or seven days after, or more, depending on when you are satisfied that there is no effusion.
This is a description of the plasters that the Ancients used for repair, applied to a fracture, dislocation, or sprain.
Description of a common simple plaster for the repair of fractures, suited to most constitutions, particularly for women and children, because in it there predominates neither hot nor cold.
Take mill-dust, that is, the fine flour that sticks to the walls of a mill as the grindstone moves.
Pound it as it is without sieving, with egg-white, to a medium consistency; then use.
Description of another plaster for the repair of a fracture, luxation, or dislocation: take ten drachms each of pulse, gum-mastic, acacia, elecampane, mughath, and sukk; five drachms each of myrrh and aloes; twenty drachms of tamarisk and twenty drachms of clay of Armenia or Asia Minor; all should be pounded fine and mixed with water of tamarisk, or with eggwhite if the patient be of a warm constitution; then use this plaster, which is excellent for uniting, quickly repairing broken bones, and suits most people because of its mildness.
 Description of another plaster valuable for a fracture or sprain: let there be taken ten drachms each of mughath, pulse, and white marsh mallows, five drachms each of myrrh and aloes, six drachms of acacia, and twenty drachms of Armenian clay.
Let them all be well beaten up and passed through a sieve and made into a paste with water or egg-white and used.
Description of a plaster for dislocated joints or bones, soothing the accompanying pain, and for a crack or fissure of bone: let unwashed wool be taken and soaked in a decoction of oil and vinegar and applied to the place.
Now this plaster has no power of repair but it is outstanding for reducing effusion and dispersing pain.
Description of another plaster for the repair of a broken bone: let there be taken the leaves of the hard fig and of the wild poppy and both be beaten up together and a plaster made of them while still fresh and damp.
Description of another simple plaster used when a fracture is mending and you wish to disperse residual swellings: take one part each of marsh mallow root, chamomile, violet flowers, and flour of vetch; pound it all and make a paste with decoction of wine, if the part be not inflamed.
But if it be inflamed make it up with water of fresh coriander or plain water, and use.
 Description of another plaster stronger than the former for resolving, used if a hard swelling arises as the bone sets: let there be taken equal parts of each of marsh mallow roots, linseed, fenugreek, melilot, sweet marjoram, violet flowers, and chamomile; they should all be beaten up together and made into a paste with willow infusion or sweet water or wine, according to whether the part is inflamed or its heat has subsided.
 Now Hippocrates in his book did not mention any application for the repair of a fractured part except a wax plaster made of wax and oil, nothing else.
He prescribed that it be of a consistency midway between thick and thin.
Galen, on the other hand, thought it good to apply to the broken limb, when it is mending, things which have a certain power of drying, with some heat, such as myrrh, aloes, olibanum, and the sort of thing we have mentioned.
 Description of a plaster valuable for debility and pain: let equal parts of each be taken of mughath, chickpease, minced human hair or birds' feathers, marsh mallows and salt; grind it up and pass through a sieve and make into a paste and use as a plaster.
As to the length of time the bandages should remain on before being loosened: you should keep an eye on the patient and if he suffers no pain or itching or any shifting of the broken bone, then they should not be loosened for a number of days; but if he experiences at the place a violent itching or a disturbing pain or swelling, then hasten to loosen them and make no delay; and remove the plaster.
Then you must take a soft cloth or a soft marine sponge and dip it in tepid water and bathe the place until the itching subsides and the pain settles; then let the limb rest for an hour; then apply to it raw wool soaked in oil and vinegar or oil of roses, and bandage it on for one night until you are sure there is no effusion and the swelling of the limb has subsided and the pain has gone.
Then put the bandage on again gently, and a light plaster; do not bind it up as you did at the first but go gently with it until it heal.
If you see that the effusion, inflammation, pain, swelling, and other symptoms are totally gone, and you need to plaster and bandage it, then repeat just as you did at first.
But if none of these things that we have mentioned occur, then do not loosen it until after three, four, or five days or a week; sometimes it may be left up to twenty days, depending on how the limb appears to you, as we said, until the fracture be united and the flesh over it be near to joining.
Then bandage more tightly than before, and increase the heaviness of the patient's food as has been mentioned.
If you see the place of the fracture getting more dry and thin than it should, you may know that nourishment is being prevented from reaching it; so foment it with tepid water each time you loosen it; do this every three days, and ease the bandaging somewhat.
This action makes nourishment flow to the limb and it will quickly heal.
 What some ignorant bone-setters do is to break the bone again if at first the repair is not as it should be and has mended crookedly.
This operation of theirs is mistaken and dangerous; if it were right the Ancients would undoubtedly have spoken of it in their books and would have used it.
But I have not found a trace of it in a single one of them; and the right course is not to use it.
