 CHAPTER six.
On the treatment of things that fall into the ear.
 All that falls into the ear comes under four categories: mineral stone, or what resembles stone, such as iron or glass; vegetable grain such as pea or date-stone or the like; or liquid such as water or vinegar; or animal.
When a stone or something of that sort that does not grow gets into the ear, turn the ear toward the sun.
If you see the stone, pour upon it a little oil of violets or sesame; then try to get it out by moving the head or by inducing sneezing with ptarmica and keeping the nose closed at the onset of sneezing, having first made round the ear a circle of pieces of cloth or wool and drawn the ear upwards.
This treatment will usually bring it out.
But if it does not come out, try to get it out with a fine pair of tweezers shaped thus.
 If it comes out with the tweezers, good.
But if not, try to extract it with a fine blunt hook slightly curved.
And if this does not bring it out, make a bronze tube and introduce the end of the tube well into the meatus of the ear and fill in round with wax softened with oil so that there may be no outlet save through the tube; then suck it out with all your breath; it will often come out with this.
But if it does not come out with these means we have described, take turpentine resin or bird-lime, a very little; twist some compact cotton wool on the end of a probe and put this on the tip; then introduce it gently into the ear after you have dried out all the moisture from the ear.
But if your treatment so far is unavailing, then be quick and incise before an abscess or spasm supervene.
Now this is the way to incise: first, the patient's cephalic vein should be cut and blood drawn, in proportion to his strength; then seat the patient in front of you and turn his ear upwards; make a small incision at the lobule of the ear in the depression there (the incision should be crescent-shaped) until you reach the stone; then extract it with whatever instrument you may.
Immediately afterwards sew up the incision and dress it till healed.
 If the object that falls into the ear is one of those grains that grow or swell, then try to extract it by the means already mentioned.
If it does not respond to your efforts to get it out, take a fine narrow scalpel like this and with it attempt to cut out whatever kind of grain has entered the ear.
You should not do this except when you are sure that this grain has become moist by reason of the vapours of the ear, so that you may cut up the grain into several small pieces.
Then you may extract them with a blunt hook or fine-headed tweezers, or by suction, as we have mentioned; for their extraction will be easy.
As for water getting into the ear, the patient should first employ sneezing excited by ptarmica, his ear having been plugged with a piece of teased-out cotton; he should lie upon that ear in which the water is; and if it so come out, well and good.
But if not, take a number of small stones about a finger's length, thin and smooth, and warm them a little in the fire; and have the patient put one of them into the meatus of the ear and let him hop on that one foot on that side; and, with another stone, tap upon the one put into the ear; he should keep this up with stone after stone till all the water has come out.
Sometimes the water is extracted by taking a reed or quill and introducing one end into the ear; then the other end is set alight till the greater part of it is burnt; then repeat time after time with more quills till all the water is got out.
Or else suck it out with a cannula as described for a stone.
 As for the extraction of a creature getting into the ear, look to see if it is small of body, such as a flea or the like, in which case treat by those means mentioned in the section.
But if it has a large body, conspicuous to the touch, try to get it out with tweezers and hooks; for of all things that stick in the ear this is the easiest to extract.
As for the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you have unavailingly treated it by those methods mentioned in the section in the treatise on instillations, you will need to examine the ear in the sunlight; and if you can see any worms, extract with tweezers or fine hooks.
But if you cannot see any, then take a cannula of this form narrow in its lower part, broad above; and introduce the narrow part into the ear as far as the patient can bear it; then make strong suction through it, repeatedly, till all the worms are extracted.
But if they do not come out in response to your treatment, plug all round the cannula with wax as bidden in treating for a stone.
If nothing will bring them out, employ the instillations which I mentioned as having been tried by the Ancients for killing worms; you will find that in the treatise on instillations.
 The instillation of oils or drugs should be done with an instrument like this, as you will see; you make it of silver or bronze, narrow at its lower end, with a small perforation, and wide at its upper part.
If you wish, you may make the obturator which goes in the cannula of strong bronze; or, if you like, take a probe and wrap cotton wool tightly round its tip; then pour into the cannula oil, juices, or whatever of these remedies you want, with the cannula in the ear.
Then introduce the probe with cotton wool on it and press moderately until the oil is ejected into the meatus and the patient feels it enter.
Let that which you put into the ear first be slightly warmed at the fire; and be careful that it be neither very hot nor very cold, for the ear is not suited to bear that.
