 CHAPTER THIRTY-THREE.
On the treatment of dislocation of the ankle.
The ankle is sometimes slightly displaced, sometimes fully dislocated, the dislocation being either internal or external.
The sign of its dislocation is that you will see the ankle swollen, and projecting on the side to which it is dislocated.
As to the treatment of its displacement, the reduction of it is easy: if it is gently extended with the hands and straightened, it will go back.
As to treatment when it is dislocated completely, you should make the patient sit upright with a strong and sturdy assistant holding him about the middle from behind.
Then hold the dorsum of the foot with your right hand, and with the left grasp the foot from below about the heel.
Then draw the foot toward you with your right hand, then with the left, twice.
Then extend it with the left hand and thrust the metatarsus with the right hand without violence toward the leg.
Do this as we have described, twice.
Then thrust the metatarsus toward the leg a third time while exerting traction at the heel.
If it goes back in one or two attempts thus, and you see the foot is straightened, well and good.
If not, repeat the operation and it will go back.
If you find it impossible to reduce it by what we have said, make the patient lie on his back on the ground and firmly fix in the ground between his thighs a stake wrapped in material so as not to hurt him.
Then an assistant should grasp his thigh and another assistant should extend the foot, either manually or with a cord tied round the narrow part of it; the assistants should pull one against another, with the stake upright between the patient's thighs holding him so that his body will not be dragged down with the extension.
Then the doctor should straighten out the dislocation with both hands, while another assistant holds down the sound leg; then the dislocation will speedily go back.
Then when the dislocation is reduced and the soundness of the reduction is manifested to you, apply a plaster and packing, bandage firmly and bind the foot downwards.
You will have to be careful of the tendon above the ankle at the back, not to bandage tightly over it so as to injure it.
Then leave him for two or three days; and if the binding works loose, tighten it up.
Then on the third or fourth day loosen it, but the patient is to abstain from walking for forty days, for if he tries to walk before this lapse of time you cannot be sure that the dislocation will not collapse and corruption set in and thereafter be incurable.
If an abscess occur you must allay it by the application of such dressings and embrocations as we have already described more than once, until it is gone.
