 CHAPTER EIGHTY-FOUR.
On the cure of wounds.
 I have already mentioned in the appropriate section the treatment of such wounds as are suitable for cauterization.
Here I shall describe the operative and medical treatment in full.
So I begin by saying that wounds differ according to that which causes them and according to the site.
Those things that cause wounds are many: a knock from a stone, a cut from a sword or a knife, a blow by a spear, stick, or arrow; and many such things.
To consider wounds according to their site on the body, they are such as a wound occurring in the head, or neck, or chest, or belly, or liver, and so on.
 Now I am going to describe the treatment of certain wounds, so that you may take them as a standard and a guide for other wounds.
I shall begin particularly with the simple wounds of the head; for mention of the compound wounds will be made at the beginning of the third book.
I say then, that when there occurs a simple wound of the head, with no accompanying bone-fracture, you should look; and if it be caused by a knock from a stone or the like, and has only broken the skin, but it is a big wound and you fear lest there occur an abscess, then bleed the cephalic vein at once without delay; draw off from him blood in proportion to his vigour if there is no contra-indication to venesection; and particularly if the haemorrhage from the wound be slight.
The venesection should be on the opposite side to the wound; and caution the patient against gluttony and wine and rich food.
But if from any cause venesection is prevented, he should be on a light diet and avoid meat and wines.
And apply to the wound, if there be any inflammation, cotton wool soaked in oil of roses, either alone or with a somewhat astringent wine.
And if you are sure there is no inflammatory swelling, then apply directly to the wound, if its blood is fresh and it is unaltered by the air, the powder that I shall describe to you a little later.
But if the air has already changed the wound, apply to it one of the ointments to cause it to discharge the pus; then dress until healed.
 Now if it be a great wound, being caused by a sword-cut or the like, and dressings will not bring the edges of the wound together, you should suture them together in the manner I shall describe in dealing with the suture of abdominal wounds.
But if the skin has actually disclosed the bone, and is attached by a small strip only, then cut it away and dress the wound with medicaments that will produce firm flesh to replace the skin, and bid the patient go on a diet of solid food such as brawn and gruels and the like.
And if decomposition arise in the skin and it will not adhere to the bone, then excise all the diseased part and discard it and then dress.
 If in these wounds there be an artery or vein shedding blood, and medicinal applications do not stanch it, then examine the artery, and if you find it not quite severed then cut it through with a scalpel and ligature it; and if you are compelled, our directions being unavailing, then cauterize until the haemorrhage stops.
If these be small and simple wounds their treatment will be a light and easy matter; it is sufficient to sprinkle some of this powder on while they are still bleeding, before the atmosphere causes a change.
Description of the powder: let one part of olibanum and two parts of dragon's blood be taken, and three parts of quick or slaked lime, all beaten up together and passed through the sieve; and let the wound be packed with this and bound up tightly so that the powder sticks in position and coagulates with the blood.
Then bind pads above and let it be, not undoing it so long as it remains without swelling; for the dressing will not come away of itself until it is healed.
Lime alone can do this if you have no olibanum and dragon's blood at hand.
It has exactly the same effect too on most large wounds, when the application and bandaging are properly done, and when the haemorrhage is recent, so long as the air has not changed them.
If, however, the air has brought about some change, especially if it be in the summer season, then there is no point in the application of this powder.
Treat it then as we have said, by applying one or other of the suppurative ointments; or by applying a gruel of barleymeal with water and honey, so that the pus flows; then treat by all the usual methods until cured.
If, with the wound, there be also fracture of a bone, if it be slight, you should extract it with forceps.
I mention the treatment of fractures of the head later on.
 On wounds in the neck:
 If a wound occur in the neck the treatment of it does not differ from that of a head wound, if it be simple.
But if a nerve or artery in the neck happens to be cut: if it be a nerve, there is no device that will serve except to avoid treatment of it by strong styptic remedies such as verdigris and vitriol and the like; for these injure the nerve and cause spasm; and under no circumstance let anything cold be applied to the wound, for the substance of the nerve is cold and it is continuous with the brain, which is the most noble among the organs.
But let your remedy for it be mild, such as lime slaked in sweet water many times and moistened with olive-oil or oil of roses; and with tutty, likewise washed in sweet water; and other minerals according to this prescription, and with bland ointments.
If the wound be large, use stitches or draw the edges of the wound together with pads; then dress until cured.
But if there be depth to the wound and a sinus appears at the bottom of it, in which pus has collected, then make an opening at the site of greatest depth.
Now if an artery has been cut in the wound and you are in time to find it still bleeding, divide it or ligature it; or cauterize it if you are compelled to.
If it be such a wound that some of the cartilages of the trachea are laid open, or the whole trachea, the jugular veins being safe and sound, then join the skin edges together with a suture over the windpipe, and do not touch the windpipe, but straighten it and restore to its natural form; then tie firmly and leave for some days; then treat with salves having some styptic and astringent quality, until healed.
If the wound has affected bone, examine it, and if there be fragments of bone in it get them all out, or all you can.
Those you cannot get hold of, leave until the wound suppurates and heals, and it will be easy to extract them.
If it be a fresh wound, sprinkle on the powder I have described ; and if any bone corrupt in the wound and it becomes a fistula, treat it by those means we shall mention in their place.
 On wounds in the chest and between the shoulders:
 If it be a piercing wound by a spear or a knife, and you see that it is deep, examine if there be a passage of air out of it when the patient breathes; whence you may know that the injury is mortal.
But if it is not deep and the haemorrhage is fresh, then do not straight away apply powder or bandage lest it keep the blood in the depths, so that it be returned to the heart and kill the patient; but apply to it a drawing ointment, and uncover it twice daily.
If you have no ointment, apply carded cotton to the opening of the wound to soak up the humidities issuing from it.
And make the patient sleep on the (side of the) wound so that what collects therein may flow out.
And if three or four days pass by after the wound, and the patient have no spasm or harmful palpitation of the heart nor obstruction to drawing breath, and you see that in other respects he is doing well, you may know that the wound is not dangerous; so treat it with pads and the usual dressings until it heals.
But if it will not heal and it permanently discharges pus, you may know that it has become a fistula; look for the treatment of this in the proper place.
If the wound be from a cut with a sword or knife, a straightforward surface wound in the breast or back, then treat it as described before; that is, by suture if it be a great wound or by powder if it be a small one.
But if there has also been injury to the bone, cutting out fragments from it, you should explore the wound and hasten to draw out the fragments if they are detached from the bone; but if they are not detached then let be until the wound suppurates, when the removal of the fragments will be easy.
Then with regard to other wounds occurring in other parts of the body, the same class of treatment should be used for them as for those already mentioned.
