 CHAPTER TWENTY-THREE.
On the couching of cataract.
 We have already mentioned in the appropriate section the varieties of cataract and those in which depression is useful, in full detail; so you may take it accurately from there.
You should cause the patient to sit down cross-legged before you, facing the light in full sun, and firmly bind up his sound eye.
Then lift up his eyelid with your left hand, if it be the left eye in which the humour is; or with the right hand if it be the right eye.
Then take the couching needle in your right hand if it be the left eye; or in your left hand if it be the right eye.
Then put the tip of the needle near the corona, about the thickness of a probe away, onto the white of the eye itself, on the side of the lesser canthus.
Then thrust the needle firmly in, at the same time rotating it with your hand, until it penetrates the white of the eye, and you feel that the needle has reached something empty.
The depth the needle goes in should measure as the distance from the pupil to the edge of the iris, which is the corona of the eye; you will see the metal in the pupil itself because of the transparency of the corneal tunic.
Then put the needle up to the place containing the humour; then press the point downwards time after time.
If the humour comes down at once, the patient will at once see whatever his vision is opened upon while the needle is still in his eye.
Then let him rest a little while; and if the humour goes back up again depress it a second time without taking the needle out.
When it stays down firmly and does not come back again, gently draw the needle out, twisting it ever so slowly with your hand.
Then dissolve a little pure rock-salt in water and wash the eyeball with the solution; then apply all over the outer aspect of the eye carded linen or wool moistened with oil of roses and egg-white, and bandage it up together with the sound eye.
Now we and our contemporaries apply pounded cumin with the egg-white.
But if the couching needle does not serve, failing to enter the eye on account of its hardness (for there are some whose eyes are hard indeed), you should take the scalpel called al-baridl figured thus.
With this make a perforation in the conjunctiva only, not piercing any further; for that is only to make a little entrance for the needle.
And then thrust in the needle as we said before.
 At the end of your operation, prepare a solidly-built bed on which the patient may lie on his back, in a dark room; and keep him from all movement or coughing.
And prescribe such a diet for him as will relax his system; neither let him move his head to right or to left.
Let the bandage remain in the same position till the third day.
Then loosen it in the same dark room and make trial of his sight, putting before him objects to be seen; then replace the bandage till the seventh day.
You should not do this at the time of treatment nor immediately after the perforation by the needle; but on the contrary you should avoid it, for intensive use of the eye causes a rapid ascent of the humour.
But if an abscess occur you should unbandage the eye before the seventh day and restore it to health by those methods that allay swelling.
When it has subsided, allow him free sight, putting over his face a dark veil beneath which his vision may be exercised for a few days while he is still in the dark room.
Then let him come out of the room gradually and take up the exercise of his business.
But you should know that in the case of a depression of a cataract the student cannot manage without having seen that operation performed several times; then he may perform it himself.
I have heard that a certain Iraqi has said that in Iraq he makes a hollow needle by which the humour is sucked out.
In our land I have never seen anyone do it in this fashion, nor have I read of it described in any of the books of the Ancients; perhaps it is newly invented.
Here are the figures of some kinds of needle for the information of those who do not know them.
They are mostly made of brass; and their extremities should be of this very fineness, triangular at the tip and sharp.
