 CHAPTER FIVE.
On the repair of a broken collar-bone.
 The collar-bone is very often broken from the end of the humerus anteriorly, and the fracture of it may be in one of three ways.
It may be broken and separated into two without splintering; this is the easiest to repair.
Or else splintering occurs, which is most difficult to repair.
Or it is a compound fracture.
When it is a simple fracture the operation involves having two assistants present; one of them to hold steady the arm adjacent to the fractured clavicle, and the other to stretch the neck in the opposite direction.
Then level the fracture with your fingers until it is reduced to its proper form and there is neither prominence nor concavity.
If there is need of still greater extension, place in the armpit of the patient a ball of cloth or wool made to a suitable size; and stretch and lift up the clavicle and squeeze the roll with your hand until the fracture is set in the proper way.
If you are unable to draw the extremity of the clavicle outwards on account of its being depressed, the patient will have to lie on his back and there must be put under his shoulder a medium-sized bolster.
The assistant is to press the shoulder down until the depressed collar bone is elevated, and then you can set the fracture and even it out with your fingers.
If you feel a splinter separated from the clavicle and movable, you must cut down upon the splinter and gently remove it.
If the splinter sticks to the bone, you must contrive to cut it with one of the chisels you have prepared for that, having first put beneath the clavicle the instrument to protect the membrane; an instrument made of wood or iron, of which this is the figure.
It resembles a spoon but without a hollow.
It should be as broad as you need, having regard to the size of the bone, and as long as you can use at operation.
As you see, it should be provided with one wide and one narrow extremity.
If the opening you made when you extracted the splinter of bone be wide and you feel safe against an abscess, suture the edges together.
But if the opening be small or you fear an abscess, pack the wound with material and pads proportional to the opening.
If an abscess occur, soak the dressing with oil of roses and vinegar or wine and apply.
As to bandaging the bone when it is without wound or incision, it is thus: apply over the bone the plaster composed of mill-dust with egg-white and put over it soft tow; then put a pad in his axilla if necessary; then take a very long sling about a span broad; then place a doubled pad over the tow and plaster; then take a splint made of thin board; its width should be three fingers and its length the same; then wrap it in a rag; then wrap the rag together with the splint in that part of the sling that is over the site of the fracture; then tie the sling round the fracture and wind it round his neck and under his sound axilla and under his injured axilla and carry it several times in every direction as you judge best that the bandaging will hold the fracture firmly, for it will be apparent to you.
The whole point is that the splint should not slip from over the fracture; so you should examine the patient every day, and whenever the bandage has loosened and you see the splint has shifted, then put it right and tighten the bandage.
Make the patient sleep lying on his back, and at night when he is asleep place a small bolster under the axilla so as to raise his arm from his side, for with the raising of the humerus the fracture of the clavicle will be elevated.
Or bind his arm to his neck.
Do not loosen the bandage for twelve days unless there arise at the place any pruritus or swelling.
Then renew the plaster if you think it necessary, and bandage again and leave until the fracture of the collar-bone is set and knits.
The majority of these cases are firm and strong in twenty-eight days, though in some people it takes less.
