 CHAPTER SIXTY-FIVE.
On the treatment of intestinal hernia.
 This hernia is due to a split occurring in the membrane stretched from the hypogastrium over the belly in the region of the groin.
Through this opening the bowel descends upon one of the testes; this opening is due to the membrane's splitting or stretching.
And these two kinds occur from a number of causes: from a blow or jumping or shouting, or lifting a heavy weight, or a similar cause.
The symptoms of it, when it arises from a stretching of the membrane, are that it is a slow and chronic development and does not happen on a sudden, and the swelling is even and deep down, because the membrane is pressing the bowel.
When it is due to a split in the membrane, the signs will be that it starts with a sudden severe pain, and the lump varies in consistency, appearing close under the skin; that is due to the emergence of the bowel and its passage outside the membrane.
Sometimes also the omentum comes out with the bowel, and this hernia is called intestinal and omental; sometimes it contains wind.
Sometimes also the excrement comes down with the bowel and gets held up there, and this involves the patient's death, for thence arises an intractable pain and borborygmi, specially when pressed upon.
The treatment of the varieties of this disease with the knife is dangerous; so be cautious of rushing at it.
The manner of operating is to bid the patient reduce the bowel back into the belly if it be disposed to return, then lie back before you and raise his legs.
Then do you stretch upward the skin adjacent to the groin, and cut the whole length of the skin of the testicles; then attach to the edges of the incision as many hooks as are necessary to open the incision.
The incision should be sufficiently large to allow the testicle to be drawn out.
Then dissect away the tissues that lie beneath the skin of the scrotum so that the hard tunica albugínea be exposed all round.
Then introduce your forefinger in around the testis in the space between the white membrane beneath the skin of the testicle and the second membrane, and with your forefinger free the attachment at the back of the testicle.
Then with your right hand explore within the scrotum and fold back the covering of the testicles, at the same time stretching the tunica albugínea upwards with the left hand, and bring the testis with the membrane up into the opening, and bid your assistant to stretch the testis upwards; and do you fully free it from the posterior attachment.
Feel with your finger that there be no part of the intestine that has got twisted within the tough white membrane; and should you find any push it back into the abdomen.
Then take a needle with a stout tenfold thread and enter it near the end of the membrane which lies beneath the skin of the testicles alongside the rupture; then cut the end of the loop of thread to make four sutures and arrange one over the other in the form of a cross; and with these ligate the membrane of which we have spoken with a strong ligature on each side; then twist the ends of the thread and tie them with a strong knot to prevent anything from reaching the nutrient vessels of the testicles, lest an abscess occur thereby; and make also another ligature outside the first one, rather less than two fingers' breadth from it; and after making these two ligatures leave a finger's breadth of the membrane that is beneath the skin of the testicles and cut the rest away round, and with it remove the testis.
Then make a counter-incision in the lower part of the skin of the testicles, to let the blood and matter drain away as we bade you before.
Then apply wool soaked in oil to the wound, and the bandage that we prescribed (sometimes also the white membrane that we spoke about is cauterized after the incision to forestall haemorrhage, for that usually happens) and let the ligatures be until they fall away spontaneously.
If they are slow in coming away, then foment with hot water and apply something to sweat them off.
Then dress the wound in the usual manner until it heals.
