 CHAPTER ELEVEN.
On the various methods of blepharoplasty.
 When superfluous lashes grow on the eyelid outside their natural place, below the natural lashes, and continue, they injure the eye and give rise to many kinds of disease, such as chronic lachrymation, dropping of the eyelids (ptosis), and whiteness and opacity, eventually resulting in the destruction of the eye.
The plastic operation on the eye is carried out in four ways: by the actual cautery; by caustic in the way mentioned above in the book on cauterization; by incision and suture; or with canes, as I shall describe.
 You should place the patient's head in your lap, then with your left hand turn out the eyelid.
Now if it thus becomes everted, good; otherwise introduce a threaded needle beneath the eyelid and pass the needle up; let that be near the hair itself.
Then draw the thread up with the lid and invert the lid with a probe; then make an incision on the inside of the lid below the superfluous lashes with the lancet, from the greater to the lesser angle.
Then draw out the thread and put beneath the lid a small pad of cotton or linen; then mark with ink on the eyelid the shape of a myrtle leaf.
The shape should be according to the amount you wish to raise the lid, and varies in different people.
In some cases you should cut away a fair amount in proportion to the ptosis but in others a smaller incision is enough; all this in due proportion to the extent of the ptosis.
Then with a scalpel incise over the two lines you have marked, beginning at the greater angle and going toward the lesser angle; and let one incision be close to the natural lashes, at a distance of about the breadth of a probe.
Then introduce a hook into one angle of the skin and peel it all off; then join the edges with a needle and a fine woollen thread and wipe away the blood; and stick the ends of the threads to the eyebrow with adhesive, if you like; but if you do not it does not matter.
Then let the suture and the threads remain for about three or four days, then dress.
If you like, you may leave the wound without suture and treat it with drying medicaments and styptics; then the eyelid will be lifted as the wound heals and comes together; but suture is better.
The Ancients mention this method of operating.
It involves some burden for the patient; but the operation is good and safe.
Yet another way of operating is to mark on the eyelid the figure of a myrtle leaf as we have described; then lift the eyelid with three hooks, either separate or joined thus.
Then cut away the superfluous lid with a small pair of scissors with an even incision.
The scissors are of this pattern.
But if you cannot conveniently hold with the hooks, take a threaded needle and introduce it into the middle of the marking; and put another thread through near the greater canthus, and a third thread near the lesser canthus.
With your fingers hold the threads evenly and then raise your hand evenly and you will raise up the whole of the marked skin as we have said.
Then bring the edges together with a suture and dress till healed.
But if in your incision, or the opening you have made, a swelling arises, then allay the swelling with wax and similar sedatives.
Sometimes the lower lid also has the lashes inverted.
For this you should use any of the methods we have mentioned: the incision and suture, and the operation by the actual cautery and by caustic. (
The operation by the actual cautery or caustic) is more effective, and easier on the patient, than incision and suture, (but incision and suture) is more workmanlike in either lid.
 Trimming the lid by means of canes is done as follows: you invert the eyelid and cut the inner slit as I have described; then you prepare two slender canes or rods of a length equal to that of the eyelid and a breadth less than that of a scalpel; and at either end of each you make a notch to hold the threads.
Then gently put them together over the superfluous part of the eyelid and tie them firmly together at both ends and leave for a few days; for the ligated flesh will necrose and turn black and putrefy and eventually fall away spontaneously.
But if it is slow in sloughing, cut off with shears; then dress till healed.
And when it is healed the eyelid will be raised and the lashes will no longer irritate the eye.
Now this is the figure of the canes; you should prepare them exactly in this shape and of this length and breadth.
