 CHAPTER NINETY-SIX.
On cupping and the manner of employing it.
 Cupping-vessels are made of horn, wood, bronze, or glass.
Cupping is carried out in two ways: one with scarification and drawing blood, and the other without scarification.
The latter, cupping without scarification, may be carried out in two ways: with fire and without fire.
 The points at which cupping with scarification and extraction of blood is performed are fourteen places in the body: the occiput, which is the back of the head; the interscapular region, which is the middle of the back of the neck; the two sides of the neck, equally on both sides; the chin, that is, beneath the lower jaw; the two shoulders; the coccyx, at the base of the tail; the antibrachium, the middle of the forearms; the two legs; and the two heel-veins.
 What cupping does is to draw blood out of the fine vessels dispersed over the flesh; for this reason it does not cause the strength to decline as does venesection; nor may you use cupping, either with fire or without fire, in any disease due to plethora, until the whole body has been evacuated.
If disease or custom prescribe cupping we may apply it at any hour, at the beginning or end or middle of the month, at whatever time it may be.
For there are some people who, when there is an abundance of blood in them, so as to need cupping, feel heaviness and pain in the head.
Some find they have a fullness and redness of the face and also of the head and neck; some have an itching in their face and forehead and a dimness and irritation in their eyes.
There are some who scratch the places where the cupping-vessels are applied; some laugh immoderately; some find a taste of blood in the mouth, and the gums swell up and they spit blood; some sleep overmuch; some frequently dream of seeing blood and redness and murdered men and wounds and the like.
So when we see anything of this kind, and especially if it be in the middle third of the month, we thereupon prescribe cupping after the second or third hour of the day has passed.
 The effect of cupping the nape of the neck is to help in heaviness of the head and in a fluxion of humours into the eyes; but it should be done after a complete evacuation of the body.
This use of cupping may take the place of venesection of the cephalic vein.
But anyone suffering from coldness of the brain or catarrh should beware of using it, for this will cause serious harm.
So it should not be employed on old men or on anyone suffering from a cold disease of the head.
If anyone becomes addicted to it it brings about oblivion.
You should therefore bid the cupper bring the cupping-vessel a little lower down lest oblivion supervene.
 Now as to the application of cupping-vessels to the interscapular region: it is instead of venesection of the median and basilic veins; so it is effective for asthma and dyspnoea and for rupture of the organ of respiration, and for cough and plethora.
The cupping of the interscapular region should be made a little high, for if it is too low it will bring about weakness of the heart and stomach.
Cupping the sides of the neck helps in pains occurring in the head, ophthalmia, migraine, and in quinsy and in pain at the roots of the teeth; it replaces venesection of the basilic vein.
And you should bid the cupper not to scarify very deeply lest he cut an artery and cause haemorrhage.
 The application of cupping under thé chin helps against ulcers in the mouth and corruption of the gums and similar diseases of the mouth ; and may replace venesection of the four labial vessels.
The application of cupping to the shoulders helps in palpitation of the heart arising from plethora and heat.
The application of cupping to the inside of the forearms helps in place of venesection of the three veins, namely the basilic, median, and cephalic; for it draws blood from all the capillaries of the flesh.
These capillaries draw blood from other larger veins till the drawing reaches those three great veins.
You should bid the person who applies the vessels not to scarify deeply; for the place is bare of flesh and there are tendons and arteries beneath.
The application of a single cupping-vessel to the coccyx is effective for haemorrhoids of the anus and ulcers of the lower abdomen.
You must tell the cupper that the cupping-vessel should be large and of bronze, for the place requires strong suction, and a glass cupping-vessel may break; and he should scarify deeply.
Cupping applied to both legs reduces plethora manifestly, because it draws off blood from the whole body, and so is beneficial for chronic pains in the kidneys and uterus and bladder; and brings on the menses.
It also serves for pustules and boils; and takes the place of venesection of the saphenous veins and the heel-veins.
But it greatly exhausts the body and causes fainting in most people.
The advantage of cupping of the heel-veins is much the same as that of the legs.
The way to apply the cupping-vessels: the vessel is first put in position empty; then you suck moderately; do not long hold the cupping-vessel in place, but apply it quickly and remove it quickly so that the humours gather evenly at the place; and go on doing it time after time until the place is seen to redden and to swell, and the redness of blood is manifested.
Then scarify, and repeat the suction very gently; then consider the bodily condition.
The person who is tender of flesh and porous of skin you should scarify once only, not more, lest the place ulcerate.
Tell him who applies the cupping-vessels to scarify rather widely and deeply, and to control the suction with gentleness and a delicate motion.
If there be a thickness of the blood he should scarify twice; the first time to make a way out for the thinner blood and serum; and the second time to complete the extraction of the thick blood.
If the blood be very turbid let him scarify a third time for completion.
In general, one scarification is enough when we wish to draw a little thick blood; but if we wish to draw much blood we make more scarifications.
If we judge that the blood is thick we should scarify deeply.
A fair depth for the scarification is the thickness of the skin, and no more.
 The oils and water to be used in applying cupping-vessels, and what he who is to be cupped should avoid.
He whose skin is thick, solid, desiccated, and narrow of pore: the operator should anoint the place with opening and emollient and resolving oils; if it be in the summer season, with, for example, oil of yellow gilliflower or of violets or of sweet almonds or of pumpkin-seeds.
If it be in winter, with narcissus oil or oil of lilies or camomile oil, or of jasmine, or the like.
And if the superfluity be thick and cold, then with oil of marjoram or oil of wild thyme or oil of ben or oil of dill.
If he who is to be cupped has wide-open pores and tender flesh, he should be forbidden oil.
After cupping, such people should wash the sites with rose-water or cold water or water of black nightshade or of gourds or of garden purslain, or the like.
But he whose blood is very humid should wash the sites of his cupping with vinegar or water of myrtle or sumac, and the like.
He that has thick superfluities should wash the sites of his cupping with old wine or water of purslain or decoction of dill or of camomile or the like.
One should beware of cupping in the bath or just after the bath, but should use the vessels one or two hours after leaving the bath.
And no one should sleep after cupping.
 The correct procedure to be observed before and after cupping by him who is to be cupped or venesected.
It is necessary for you first to consider, and if he that is to be cupped or venesected be bilious, and bitterness and inflammation prevail in his blood, he should take cooling things such as pomegranates and endive with vinegar and lettuce and oxymel and julep, and the like.
His diet should be chicken and mutton made into stews with vinegar, and soups with verjuice, and the like.
The man of frigid constitution should drink syrup of honey or syrup of quince or spiced oxymel; he should also take perfumed raisin wine, not too old and not too new; he should be bidden to be moderate in eating and should make his diet young pullets and larks and sparrows and young pigeons in white stews.
And on the day of cupping and venesection he should drink rather than eat.
It may sometimes be necessary to have some people drink the great theriac or musk-medicine or shllitha before cupping and before or after venesection, to strengthen the chief parts and to render the blood thin; but these draughts should not be given to the feverish.
 Cupping without scarification is the cupping practised on the liver, the spleen, the breasts, the belly, the umbilicus, the region of the kidneys and the acetabulum of the femur; for these parts do not tolerate scarification.
Now the purpose of the vessels is either to draw blood from one part to another, as when we apply cups over the breasts in the case of nose-bleed; or to loosen from the part a frigid vapour that has become fixed in it, as when we place cupping-vessels on the abdomen and umbilicus; for they stimulate the part and warm it and remove the pain because they loosen the vapour.
Sometimes they are applied over the kidneys when there is an obstruction or stones in them; for often, by virtue of their drawing, the obstruction is opened up or the stones are dislodged from their site.
They act in the same way when they are applied over the liver and the spleen when flatus is permeating them.
These cupping-vessels may be used empty with suction only; or they may be used with fire.
Sometimes in pleuritic complaints they are applied filled with tepid water.
This is done by filling the vessel, which should be large, with plain hot water, or with hot water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Then it is applied to the place, full, and held there, then removed; and the process repeated as often as is necessary.
 This is the figure of the cupping-vessel for use with fire.
Its mouth should be the width of two opened fingers, as we have illustrated; the depth should be half a span; and in the side about halfway down there should be a small hole of a size to admit a needle.
It should be made of Chinese bronze or of brass.
The edge should be thick, smooth, even, and polished, so as not to injure the part to which it is applied.
And in the middle there should be a transverse rod of bronze or iron to carry the lighted lamp.
You may make this kind of cupping-vessel in a large size, larger than we have described; and in a small size too, to suit various ailments and the age of the user.
For the cupping-vessels for boys and thin persons differ from those for men and stout persons.
 Now this is the manner of applying this cupping-vessel with fire to a part of the body.
You set light to a strongly twisted wick of linen or a small wax candle, and you set it on the middle of the cross-piece in the middle of the vessel so that the flame be directed toward the lower part of the cupping vessel and not burn the patient's body.
Then the vessel should be placed on the part with the finger kept over the above-mentioned hole; then when we have held the vessel sufficiently long there the finger is taken away, the vapour will come out through the hole, and the vessel will become loosened at once.
Then light the wick as prescribed and repeat if necessary.
But the cupping-vessel that is used in pleurisy, with water, has no cross-piece nor hole; it is used by simply filling with water and applying to the part.
This is the figure of it.
Now the larger this cupping-vessel is, to hold much water, the better.
