 CHAPTER NINETEEN.
On the repair of fractures accompanied by wounding.
When a man has a compound fracture, especially when it is a large bone such as the femur or humerus or the like, you should at once venesect him if the conditions are suitable for venesection as set out above.
If there is bleeding from the wound you must hasten to stanch it by sprinkling it with powdered vitriol if you have nothing else at hand.
Then begin on the reduction of the fracture the very same day; do not put it off unless an abscess occur.
But if an abscess does occur, leave the reduction until the ninth day so that the abscess may subside, and in no circumstances touch it on the third or fourth day, for you will bring evil consequences on him.
If the fractured bone be overriding the skin you must try to reduce it and to straighten it out by hand, gently and with moderate extension.
If reduction and straightening by hand is unsuccessful, then reduce it with this instrument; it is made of iron, seven or eight fingers' breadths long, and wide in proportion to the size of the wound; that is why the doctor should have three or four of them in the sizes he may need for treating every kind of fracture.
It should be round and somewhat thick so as not to bend when pressure is put upon it at the time of operating.
It should be sharp-ended with a bend at the end; the upper part should be of some thickness, but from the middle to the lower part it is a good bit thinner.
This is its form.
It is called in Greek bayram, meaning a small lever.
You must place the sharp incurved end of it over the end of the protruding bone, and push it firmly with it.
When the bone is repositioned and straightened in some measure, try to straighten the ends of the fracture, one to another.
If the fractured end be very thin and the instrument does not grip it firmly you will have to cut off that end so as to give purchase for the instrument.
If you cannot reduce the bone at all by the means we have described, cut it off with any of the osteotomes we have mentioned that is suitable, or saw it off with one of the saws as best you may.
Then strip away any remaining roughness of the bone and fine pieces of shell.
If, when you have reduced the bone, the patient feels severe and troublesome pain, you may know that the bone has not returned to its natural site.
If you can restore it to its natural site, do so, for you will render the patient a signal service.
 When your setting of the bone is complete, soak a dressing in dark sharp wine, especially if it be in summer, but do not put wax or anything oily upon the wound lest it cause putrefaction or corruption.
Then apply splints the moment you have finished setting the bone; and leave the wound open, that is, by making with scissors an opening in the coverings the size of the wound.
And take the utmost care not to bandage up a wound with a fracture; for many ignorant doctors have done that, thereby causing their patients either death or ulceration or a defluxion; so make your bandage soft and loose, as opposed to that of other fractures.
If the wound be severe or of great size and you fear for it some one of the grave accompaniments such as we have described, and the patient feels a disturbing pain at the place, then you should not put on splints; but instead of splints make wrappings of a stiff material and bind them on.
If, after one or two days have passed, you see that the wound is beginning to suppurate, remove the dressing with wine that you had put on it, and then apply the pads and ointments with which it is our custom to heal wounds, such as Tetrapharmacon ointment and the like.
Every evening and morning you will have to loosen the bandaging and carefully examine the wound until it knits and is healed.
You must also place the limb in such a position as to let the pus flow down easily.
 If, after many days, the wound is unhealed and it goes on suppurating, you may know that there are some little fragments of bone there; so you will have to examine the wound with a probe; and those fragments that are loose take and extract; and those that are not loose but nevertheless pierce the limb and cause pain, attempt to cut them out and extract them by whatever means you can.
If a defluxion or ulceration or other kind of corruption or putrefaction happen to the wound, you must meet all these occurrences with the proper remedy described before in its place.
One thing that is necessary is that you should comply with my words and keep them in mind: when a large bone is broken and protrudes from the limb, such as the femur, the humerus, and the other bones of the long limbs, do not meddle with pulling or extracting it, for this often causes death; but leave it to suppurate.
It may come away of itself in twenty or thirty days.
Then dress the wound if you find occasion; if not, let be.
