 CHAPTER THIRTY.
On the treatment of dislocation of the spinal vertebrae.
When any of the vertebrae of the back or the neck are completely dislocated or a number of vertebrae are displaced, there is no treatment in this case for death is hastening toward the patient.
The sign of this is that the injured man passes a motion involuntarily, being unable to hold it back; often too some of his limbs go limp, either both legs or both arms or one of them.
If, as often happens, a single vertebra is displaced, the displacement may be in any of four directions.
When there is a displacement backwards it is called 'curvature of the spine'.
As to its treatment: examine it; if the curvature dates from childhood then there is no treatment or cure at all for it.
As for the sort that occurs from a fall or a blow or the like, the Ancients indulged in lengthy dissertations thereon, giving many kinds of treatment, the greater part of which is of no use.
But I have abbreviated from it, making a little which will serve in place of their much, consisting in my clarification and exposition of the sense.
I have also depicted the instrument differently from their account and their explanation.
 I say then, that in a curvature occurring forward there is no technique or cure for it.
And likewise in a curvature laterally.
The only curvature that can be treated is that of the dorsal spine exclusively, by the means I now describe.
The patient should be stretched prone upon a level bench near a wall, and a soft palliasse should be spread under him so that his chest may not be hurt.
Then put a straight spar, set in a hole in the ground at the end of the bench where his head is, and another spar where his feet are at the other end of the bench.
Let an assistant hold this spar, which is not to be firmly fixed in the hole, while another assistant holds the other in the same way.
Then wind round the patient's chest and beneath his axillae a soft strong wrapper, and stretch one end of the wrapper to the spar at his head, and tie it to it.
Then bind other wrappers: over his hips, his knees, and by both tendons of Achilles; then bring the wrappers together and tie them to the other spar at his feet.
Then each assistant extends the spar with the tie towards himself; the two spars will not shift from their places in which they are planted, but, as we have said, they are not to be fixed.
Meanwhile the doctor is to press hard with both his palms upon the spine until it goes back; or he may place a board upon it and apply pressure to the board with his feet until it goes back.
But if it does not go back under this treatment then let a board be taken, about three cubits long, and let a place be hollowed out in the wall, which, as we said, should be near the patient, into which you put the end of the board; then place the mid-point of the board upon the hump, and he—the doctor—should place both his feet on the other end and strongly thrust upon the spine until it is forced back into position.
 If you wish you may operate by means of a winch turned by hand; thus: you fix in the ground at the head of the patient, at one end of the bench, two wooden spars each one cubit long; and the same at the lower end, at his feet; there should be the distance of a span between the spars (of each pair).
In each spar there should be a hole in which the shaft may run, and each spar should be firmly fixed in the ground so as not to move at all.
Then you introduce a round piece of wood, the shaft on which the rope is wound, into the two openings of the two wooden spars.
At one end of each shaft is a hole into which is firmly fixed a piece of wood a span long by which it is wound.
Likewise with the other two spars.
Then bind the wrapper that you have bound round his chest to the shaft at the patient's head, and those bound round his legs to the shaft at his feet.
Then have an assistant standing at each shaft to turn with his hand the handle by which the shaft is revolved, while the doctor straightens out the curvature in the way we have described.
This is the figure of the winch, the bench and the patient.
 After the spine has been restored and the place has been straightened it will be necessary for you to apply an absorbent plaster with egg-white, then packing, then over the plaster apply a flat splint about three fingers wide and long enough to cover the site of the curvature and several sound vertebrae on either side.
Then let it be bandaged as is needful and let the patient follow a mild diet until he is cured.
If after he is healed there still remains some prominence at the site, it will be necessary to employ remedies to relax and soften the parts, together with the use for a long time of the flat splint we described; in this case a leaden plate may be employed.
Sometimes there occurs a prominence at the end of the dorsal vertebrae, from which one may form the opinion that there is a dislocation, whereas it will be a superfluous bone that has become prominent; do not interfere with it by this treatment, for death may result.
