 CHAPTER THREE.
On the repair of a broken nose.
You should know that the only portion of the nose that can break is the upper portion in its entirety or in one of its two parts; for it consists of two bones.
The lower portion is cartilaginous and unbreakable; what can happen to it is contusion, twisting, or flattening.
If one of the two (upper) parts be broken you should pass your little finger into the nostril and straighten out the fracture from inside, with your index and thumb outside, until you reduce the nose to its natural shape; do it gently, and take care that you do not cause the patient pain in doing it.
If the fracture be in the upper part of the nose and your finger does not reach it, it should be evened by means of a probe with some thickness to it.
If the break be on both sides, follow the same course.
Haste must be made to set it on the first day if possible; but if not, after the seventh or tenth day when the effusion has subsided.
Then introduce into the nasal foramen a linen pad, if it be a unilateral fracture, or two pads if it be bilateral; the pads should be thick enough to fill the nasal foramen.
Certain of the ancient bone-setters suggest that you should soak the pads in butter and change them daily, but I do not think so; you should rather soak them in egg-white made up into a paste with mill-dust; then leave the pads in until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardens.
Sometimes, instead of pads, the stems of goose-quills are introduced into the nose after being wound round with a piece of soft cloth, so as to make a stronger support for the fracture of the nose and not to hinder the patient's breathing.
This is not absolutely necessary; do it if you prefer; or, if you prefer, put in pads.
If during your operation an abscess occurs, apply to the nose a wax plaster or cotton wool soaked in vinegar and oil of roses or a little diachylon ointment.
If no abscess occurs you should apply externally a plaster of white flour and frankincense made into a paste with egg-white; then put on top some soft tow, but do not bind up the nose at all.
If the nasal bones are broken into small pieces or crushed, you should cut down upon them, remove them with a suitable instrument, and then suture the incision and dress with suitable ointments which encourage granulation and scarring.
If there occur an internal wound of the nose, you should dress it with pads and employ leaden tubes until it heals.
