 CHAPTER EIGHTY-ONE.
On cutting and incising piles that are bleeding, and the treatment of fissures.
 Haemorrhoids are of two kinds: either internal, resembling red bubbles or grape-seeds, small or large, with blood perpetually flowing, and they may be single or multiple; or they may be external, round about the anus.
External ones are for the most part fairly dry; a little yellowish fluid or blood constantly oozes from them, and they are of the colour of the body.
 The treatment of internal piles: bid the patient open his bowel and bear down until the anus opens out and the swellings are disclosed to you; then quickly take hold of them with hooks or with your finger-nail and cut them off near the roots.
If the hook does not retain its hold on them because of their humidity and softness, then cut them with a piece of rough material or a rag of goat-hair, or draw them out with your fingers and cut them off; and after excision sprinkle some caustic powder on to act instead of the cautery; or cauterize them as previously described in the book on cauterization; then dress in the usual way until healed.
But if the anus will not open out for you then give a slightly corrosive enema so as to wash out what is within, and then, the anus will open out quickly when the patient bears down.
 Now the treatment of external piles is easy and simple: take hold of them with your finger-nails or catch them up with a hook and cut them away; and treat as before mentioned until cured.
 But with the patient who refuses excision with the knife, this manner of removal should be practised: thread a twisted thread into a needle, then draw the piles upward and run the needle through the root of each, from one side to the other, and wind the ends of the thread round beneath the needle as it lies crosswise, and bind the pile firmly; then knot the thread and remove the needle.
Do this with each pile, but leave one not destroyed so that the superfluous blood may flow from it.
Then apply to the anus a piece of material soaked in oil of roses or wax; apply it and bid the patient lie quiet; then leave him until the piles fall away.
When they fall away, dress with ointments and the usual dressings until healed.
The treatment of fissures: these often arise from dryness of the faeces and from constipation.
If they become chronic, and medical treatment is unavailing, you should scrape them with the edge of a scalpel or with your finger-nail until they become soft and the upper layer, that prevents healing, is removed; then dress until they mend as they should.
But if they do not heal, repeat the scraping more strongly than at first until they bleed freely and become raw; then apply dressings and they will heal.
