 CHAPTER EIGHTY.
On the treatment of fistulae occurring in the lower parts.
 Fistulae in the lower parts are a knotting and thickening of the tissues occurring externally near the anus or in the perineum to one side.
A fistula may be single or multiple.
When a thickening of this kind has become chronic it opens and there flows out a white watery humidity or thin pus.
These fistulae may be perforating into the rectum or bowel, or non-perforating.
The former may be known by faeces or flatus coming out of them when the patient opens the bowel.
Often also worms come out of them.
Sometimes also there are fistulae occurring in the perineum which penetrate to the urinary bladder and to the urethra; and some also penetrate to the hip-joint and to the coccyx.
A fistula penetrating to the anus may also be distinguished from one not so penetrating by introducing the finger into the anus and a fine probe into the fistula, made of either bronze or iron, if there be no bend in the course of the fistula.
But if the course of the fistula be tortuous, then introduce a thin leaden probe or a horse-hair, until you feel the probe or horse-hair come on to your finger.
But if you do not feel it at all and if no faeces nor flatus nor worm come out of the opening, as we said, you may know it is not perforating; so hurry on with treatment.
When the fistula penetrates to the bladder or the urinary passages it is signified by the passage of urine and by the fact that medical remedies cannot cure it.
But if it penetrate to the hip-joint or coccyx, this will be signified by the probe's passing right through to there if it be a straight passage to the bone; and by the pain felt in that part; and by the chronic purulent discharge; and the fact that medical treatment does no good and ointment does not heal it.
There is in these perforating sinuses no cure whatever; and their treatment is labour in vain for all the ignorant doctors who pretend that they understand them.
But there is hope in operative treatment for those that are not perforating and chronic, as I know from experience and shall now describe.
 Thus: have the patient lying on his back before you and let both his legs be raised with the thighs flexed back upon his belly; then introduce a probe of bronze, or of lead if the course be tortuous, until you determine where the probe reaches.
Then, if the patient feel the probe somewhere in the region of the anus, put your forefinger into the anus.
If you feel the probe itself with your finger, coming through bare, and you do not feel anything interposing between your finger and the probe, either membrane or flesh, then you may know for certain that it is a perforating fistula; do not spend your energy over it, for, as we have said, there is no cure.
Yet some have said that it may be cured in certain cases, but rarely.
The treatment from which some relief may be hoped is to heat a fine cautery corresponding to the width of the fistula, as we have said before, and pass this, hot, through the fistula to the anus; then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those compact tags of superfluous flesh, which resemble quills, are burnt away.
Then dress with a pad soaked in oil until the burnt tissue comes away.
Then treat with healing ointments and, if it heals, well and good.
If not, it will never heal with any other treatment.
 If you introduce the probe and it does not come through to your finger in the anus, and there be between your finger and the probe something firm interposing, either tissue or lining, and you see the fistula to be close under the skin, then cut open the skin at the origin of the fistula and continue your incision, with the probe in the fistula, until you come to the place where the tip of the probe has reached and the probe is freed and falls out.
Then clean out all the solid quill-like pieces of tissue and let none remain.
Then treat with healing salve until healed.
 If the haemorrhage be too much for you and interferes with your operating when cutting away the tissues, then the best and most speedily efficacious thing you can do is to cauterize, either with fire or with caustics.
For cauterizing with fire unites two good characteristics, the burning away of those superfluous tissues, and the stanching of the bleeding, as well as the drying-up of humidity.
Then treat with a dressing soaked in butter, or sulphur pounded with oil, until the place putrefies and the burnt tissue comes away in the pus.
Then treat the wound with salves to encourage healing and the growth of firm flesh, these remedies having also a styptic and drying quality.
Then when the wound is healed over it is cured for good and there is no fear of a recurrence.
 If the fistula reaches deep into the anus and is far from the surface of the body, then put your finger into the anus and palpate.
If you feel a barrier of flesh or membrane interposed between the probe and your finger, and it be nearly through, then there is nothing to be done except to try a remote hope.
There are three methods that you may employ.
The first is to cauterize it, as we have said.
Or you may cut it open until you reach the termination so as to be able to insert a dressing and bring the medicament into contact with it, but do not extend your incision too far lest you cut into the sphincter muscle and the patient become incontinent of faeces; then dress in the manner we have said and perhaps it may heal.
Or you may perforate the barrier and pierce it through, after incising to the vicinity of the anus, as we have said, either with the probe or with some other sharp-pointed instrument; then clear away the fleshy granulations in the incision as far as you are able; then attempt the repair of the whole wound with the incision and the upper opening, until it heals.
Let the inner end of the fistula remain open, for this will ease the patient.
Sometimes also a fistula is cut out in this way: namely, you pass a probe into the fistula; it should be near the circle of the junction of the outer skin with the anal mucosa; then take a probe with an eyed point like a shoemaker's needle; put into it a thread twisted of about five threads, and insert into the fistula until it reaches the end.
If it has perforated through at the anal margin within, nearby, draw the thread out of that perforation by introducing your finger into the anus.
Draw out the end of the thread and tie the two ends together and leave for one or two days.
As the thread cuts into the tissues, tighten it up well until those tissues enclosed in the thread are cut through and fall away.
Then dress the wound until it be healed and sound.
If the mouth of the fistula is not perforated, perforate it as best you can, unless the depth is too great; in which case you must not do so lest you cut the muscle.
Then treat as we have said until it heals.
Figure of the sharp-pointed scalpel for cutting open fistulae; the curved edge should be exceedingly sharp and the other blunt, lest you cut what should not be cut, as you see.
