 CHAPTER ELEVEN.
On setting a fracture of the humerus.
 The humerus is what lies between the elbow and the head of the scapula.
If it is fractured it may be set in one of two ways.
One is to take a smooth bow-shaped piece of wood of medium thickness, like this.
You tie two bands at the two ends and then it is hung from above.
The patient is to sit on a seat; then his broken arm is folded upon the piece of wood in such a way that his axilla fits into the middle of the curve of the piece of wood.
Then hang a heavy weight from the arm, or have an assistant pull it downwards; then the doctor should straighten out the fracture with both hands together until it is properly reduced.
The other way is to make the patient lie back and to suspend his hand from his neck by a band, then you instruct two assistants.
One is to grasp with both hands the arm above the fracture, and the other the arm below the fracture; and each should make extension toward himself.
And if you wish to extend more strongly, tie a band below the fracture and another above, and let each assistant pull toward himself.
If the fracture is near the extremity of the shoulder you will have to put one band beneath the axilla and the other below the fracture near the elbow.
Similarly, if the fracture be near the elbow you will have to put a band over the place and over the elbow itself.
Then gently and without violence straighten out the fracture until it is restored to its proper shape and fits together well, and then tighten it if no abscess occur.
But if an abscess occur, leave the bandaging until the seventh day and apply raw wool soaked in vinegar and oil of roses until the abscess subsides; then bind it up.
 The method of binding it is to apply a plaster to the fracture; then wind round the plaster a bandage of new material; then bind the forearm to the humerus, placing his hand open on his shoulder.
Then apply pads and bandages to the arm and forearm so that the forearm serves instead of splints, if there is no contra-indication and you see no pathological change in the broken bone.
But should you fear any such change then use splints.
The way to use these is to place over the fracture itself a splint that is broader and stronger than the rest; and leave a space of a finger's breadth between splints; the splint should be of a length to suit the fracture with the addition of three fingers' breadth all round.
Then bandage over the splints in the manner mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
That is, you should bandage more tightly over the fracture itself and more lightly as you get away from the fracture.
If you decide to put on splints and bandage, as we have said, at the time you set the limb, do so.
But if you fear an abscess, leave the splinting and bandaging until the seventh day as we have said.
Then examine the bandaging every third day lest there be itching or swelling at the place; or nourishment be prevented from reaching the limb on account of excessively tight bandaging; treat all these in the proper manner according to our prescriptions.
But if you are confident that nothing of this sort is happening then do not loosen the bandaging until after many days.
The patient should be made to sleep on his back with his hand on his stomach, and under the humerus there should be placed a cushion evenly filled with wool.
And examine it at all times of the day and night lest the shape of the broken limb suffer any deformity or the binding loosen; do your utmost to put any such thing right.
You should also direct the patient's diet along the line that we have given earlier; namely, at first the food should be light until the bone has begun to knit; then you should order heavier food.
Now it is the nature of the humerus and of the leg to knit in forty days; then they should be loosened and the patient should go to the bath and be treated with suitable ointments.
If the fracture be ugly and contused, do not unfasten it for fifty days or even two months.
