 CHAPTER EIGHTY-SIX.
On the treatment of defluxions and fistulae.
 You should know that any wound or tumour, when it becomes old and chronic, and turns into an ulcer, and does not heal over, but discharges pus chronically and constantly, is generally called a fistula, in whatever part of the body it may be; but we call it a defluxion.
The fistula proper is a compact hard white painless induration with a central hollow like a bird's quill; on which account some call it a quill.
At certain times it may be moist, constantly discharging pus; and again at certain times the moisture may cease; and the discharge may be greater or less; and it may be thick or thin.
I said previously in the appropriate section, when I was discussing abscesses, that any ulcer that would not heal nor show growth of tissue was due to one of nine causes.
One is lack, or poorness, of blood in the body; or it may be because the hardness of the tissues, internally and at the edges of the opening, prevents the growth of sound tissue; or it may be because of the abundance of foul and evil matter; or it may be because the ulcer is necrotic in itself and the matter that it discharges is of bad quality; as also it may be because the remedy used in treating it is not suitable; or again it may be because of corruption arising at that locality, of the nature of pestilence; or it may be due to something special and peculiar in the locality—as happens in the city of Saragossa, where diseases tend to linger and tumours are naturally slow to heal; or it may be due to one or more bones in it.
I have indeed already, in their proper place, explained all these causes and their symptoms and their medical treatments.
Now here I must explain to you the operative treatment of fistula and defluxion.
 You should know that a fistula may happen in any part of the body; and some fistulae reach as far as some great vein or artery or nerve or membrane or intestine or the urinary bladder, or one of the ribs or dorsal vertebrae, or some highly complex joint such as the hand or foot, while some terminate quite near some major organ, and so on.
Fistulae of this kind are among the diseases from which recovery is difficult; they are not amenable to treatment and to occupy oneself with them is labour in vain.
But if there are any fistulae which do not reach in depth the places we have mentioned, and you have some hope and expectation of curing them, and you wish to attain to recognizing these, then you take a probe of bronze or iron, if the fistula run in a straight line, and investigate it with that.
But if the fistula be tortuous then investigate it with a thin leaden probe; for lead is soft, so as to flex on entry and follow the curves of the fistula.
But if the fistula have multiple openings so that you cannot explore it with the probe, then make an injection into one of the openings.
The fluid you inject into that one will run to the other openings and flow out from them.
Then make a complete exploration by whatever means you can, to find out whether there be at that place a bone or nerve, and whether the fistula be deep or superficial, and whether the fistula be one with multiple openings.
Inform yourself of all these points, exerting yourself to inquire of the patient whether he feels pain while you are compressing with the hand, and seeking other indications and causes of tumour that may arise.
When you have made quite certain of all these points, then proceed confidently with the treatment, namely: see if the fístula be obvious and accessible, or in a harmless situation far removed from a joint or vein or artery or tendon or any of the other places I have mentioned to you.
Then lay open the fístula by the method I have described and fetch out of it all the granulations and diseased and superfluous tissue and whatever tissue or growth be arising in its opening, and dress until healed.
If the termination of the fistula lies deep and its course be straight, you should cut it open as far in as you can and then clean out of it all diseased tissue; then use swabs soaked in corrosive, and push them to the bottom of the fistula, which is as far as you can reach with the probe.
Do this repeatedly until the caustic has destroyed all the superfluous matter remaining at the bottom of the fistula.
Then dress it with ointments that make the flesh grow sound, until it heals.
But if it does not heal thus, then cauterize it in the prescribed way.
 If a bone be the cause of the fistula, and you are sure of that, then examine the fistula and open it up in the way I have told you, if there be nothing in the way like a blood-vessel or nerve or important organ, as we said.
And if the bone is laid bare to you and there be in it some corruption and blackening, then scrape it until all the corruption be removed; then put on dressings that will encourage granulation, until it be healed.
If it does not heal but discharges pus in the way it did before, then you may know that you have not yet managed to extirpate the corruption completely.
Therefore you must expose it again and with the utmost diligence carry out the scraping and cleaning of it.
Then dress it; and if it heals, good; if not, then you may know that this corruption is very deep-seated in the body and out of reach, and there is nothing you can do for it but leave it to nature.
If the diseased bone be a small one, and it be possible for you to extract it, then do so with a pair of fine forceps suited to the purpose.
And if there be a number of bones then you must accurately carry out the extraction of all of them, and spare no effort to ensure that none is left.
If any ligaments lie in your way and there be no danger in incising them, then make an incision into the ligaments and whatever tissues are there, and free the bones.
If it is not possible for you to extract the bone immediately, apply over the wound something to induce suppuration, and leave it for some days until suppuration has set in in the tissues and ligaments around the bones.
Keep an eye on the wound lest the incision that you made during your operation close up; if you fear this, apply to it cotton wool soaked in sulphur beaten with olive-oil, or cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment or in one of the green ointments.
Then, when those ligaments have been softened by putrefaction and the bones crumble, it will be easy to shift them and take them out.
If it be one large bone such as the tibia or the femur or the like, and the diseased part be only the surface, then scrape it thoroughly until all the blackness and corruption is gone, then close the wound.
If the corrupt portion be very extensive and reach to the marrow of the bone, you will not be able to avoid sawing it off and cutting it all away to the point where the corruption ends; then dress until healed.
 Now I shall tell you of a defluxion that once occurred in a man's leg, as an example and a help to you in your treatment.
This man was young, about thirty years of age.
He once got a pain in the leg from something internal, which so worked that eventually matter came into the leg and caused it to swell greatly, there being no external cause.
And time passed by, to the accompaniment of error on the part of the doctors, until the tumour opened and much discharge came away; and the treatment was so mismanaged that fistulae formed in the leg and many sinuses opened up, all of which discharged pus and body humours.
A whole host of doctors had been treating it for a matter of two years, not one of whom had any skill in the surgical art.
Eventually he sought me.
I saw his leg, with matter coming away from the orifices in large quantities; and the man's body was wasted and jaundiced.
So I introduced a probe into one of the openings and the probe touched bone.
Then I investigated all the openings and found them all communicating with one another in all parts of the leg.
So I quickly cut down upon one of these openings until a part of the bone was laid bare, and I found it diseased, by now eaten away, and black and foul and full of holes, down to the marrow.
So I sawed off as much of the diseased bone as I had exposed and could get at.
In fact I thought that there was no more disease in the bone beyond what I had cut and sawn away, and that I had completely eradicated it.
Then I tried for a very long time to heal the wound with medicines encouraging growth of flesh, but it would not heal.
Then I again uncovered the bone, above the first opening, and found the corruption co-extensive with the bone.
So again I sawed away as much of the corruption as I could see; then I tried to heal it, but it would not heal nor unite.
Then I opened it up once more and went on cutting away the bone piecemeal and trying to heal it, and it would not heal until I had cut away about a span of bone with the marrow; then I treated it medicinally and it quickly healed over and was cured.
But it would not have been necessary to repeat the operation and the incision thus, were it not for the patient's weakness and inability to tolerate much at a time, and because of my fears for his life, since an evil faint was constantly seizing him on account of the heavy drain.
But he was completely cured, and in place of the bone there grew up firm tissue; his bodily state was sound and his strength was restored.
He went about his business, and no hurt whatsoever came to him from walking.
 Now in the case of a prominent bone that has been broken in any part of the body, it should be sawn off in this manner: you take a ligature and tie it to the extremity of the prominent bone and bid someone keep it stretched upward; then you put on another ligature of wool thicker than the first, tying it to the tissue that is beneath the bone, and pull on the end so that the flesh is drawn down and you lay bare of flesh the spot where you intend to saw, so that the saw does not injure the flesh.
You should place a block of wood or a board firmly beneath the bone; which done, there is no hindrance to the saw's cutting through the diseased bone.
The saw-cut should be made a little above the site of the disease in case there should be disease in the cavity of the bone that is not apparent on the surface, which might compel you to carry out the sawing a second time.
If the bone be diseased without any swelling, but it all seems the same from one part to another, and the disease be in the middle or in one segment of it, then expose it on all sides; put the block beneath, and saw it from the first side, where the disease is.
When you have finished this, saw it from the other side.
The saw-cut should be at a little distance from the diseased part, as we have already said.
 If the disease be in one of the phalanges, amputate the diseased phalanx and saw through the bone where it is continuous on the other (healthy) side.
If the disease be in the joint between two members, then there is nothing to be done but scraping.
If the disease be in the carpus or tarsus it is a very difficult matter treating them; you must peel off the disease in whatever way seems possible, and scrape it away and clean up the part in whatever way you can and by whatever technique is convenient for you, so long as there is no vein or nerve in your way.
Now you should know that there are a great number of cutting instruments and saws for cutting these bones, varying according to the different sites and arrangements of the bones; their thickness or thinness; their greatness or smallness; their hardness or sponginess; so you should have ready for every sort of operation an instrument suitable for that operation.
You should know too that when you have long experience and knowledge of the branches of this art the operations themselves may well indicate the kind of instrument needed; for the man who is skilled in the art and has seen various kinds of disease may think out for himself which instrument is suitable for each disease.
At the end of this chapter I give you illustrations of a number of instruments as types for you to copy and as a pattern upon which you can base others, God willing:
 Saw.
Another saw.
 A small saw.
 A large saw.
 Scraper; the head of this scraper should resemble the head of a nail, stellate, engraved like a file.
What it is suitable for is to scrape the diseased heads of joints, or big broad bones.
Another scraper, small.
 Broad scraper.
Firm (bow) saw.
The upper bow and the blade are made of iron, the handle of box-wood, turned and firmly fixed.
Scraper with concavity.
Another scraper, fine.
 Scraper.
Another scraper, with bent extremity.
Small scraper resembling a probe.
Osteotome.
 Another osteotome, small.
Another scraper.
Its extremity is like a probe, and it is handy in many places for scraping bone.
A scraper suitable for perforated bone.
Its extremity is triangular, with sharp edges.
It is made of Indian iron, as should be all the scrapers and cutting instruments we have mentioned.
