 CHAPTER TWENTY-SIX.
On the reduction of a dislocation of the humerus.
 You should know that there are three ways in which the humerus may be dislocated.
One is a dislocation down into the axilla, another is a dislocation toward the breast; it may also be dislocated upward, which is rare.
It is not dislocated backward, because of the scapula; nor is it dislocated forward, on account of the tendons.
Mostly it is dislocated and displaced down into the axilla, and particularly in those of a spare build; in such it quickly comes out and quickly goes back.
But in those of a fleshy build it is the opposite; it comes out with difficulty and goes back with difficulty.
Sometimes a man suffers a blow or a fall, so that the upper arm swells up with an effusion, whence he forms the opinion that there is a dislocation.
So you must examine it to make sure of it and then proceed to treat it.
A dislocation down into the axilla may be diagnosed by comparing the sound and the dislocated humerus; for you will find an obvious difference between them; you will find a hollow at the head of the humerus, and in the axilla the head of the humerus may be palpated like an egg, and the patient is unable to lift his hand to his ear, and full movements are restricted.
Similarly if it is displaced toward the breast or upward you will find it obvious to the touch and not hidden.
The reduction of this dislocation will be quite simple if it be only recent or the patient be a child.
To reduce it, his hand should be lifted up by an assistant, then you should put both your thumbs under his axilla and lift the joint up powerfully into its place, while the assistant lifts and stretches his hand upward; then he puts it down and the dislocation will at once go back.
If it is not reduced by the means we have stated, being a dislocation of many days' standing, the patient should take a hot bath and use relaxing and softening fomentations, such as decoction of marsh mallow root and fenugreek and melilot.
Then the patient should lie on his back and you put under his axilla a ball of wool of moderately hard consistency.
Then the doctor should put his heel on the ball and grasp the patient's hand and draw it downward, while pushing the ball with his foot, and it will straightway be reduced.
Or, if you prefer, reduce it in this way: get a man taller than the patient to stand on one side and pass his shoulder under the patient's axilla and lift it up until the patient is suspended in mid-air, while another assistant pulls the patient's hand down towards his lower abdomen (if the patient is light it will be necessary to hang a weight from him); then the dislocation will straightway be reduced.
 It is also reduced by another method: that is, to fix in.
the ground a long spar of wood; its head should be of a round shape like the pestle of a mortar, neither massive nor slender; then after a soft pad has been put on the head of the spar it should be placed under the axilla of the patient, who should be standing alongside the spar; then let his hand be drawn downward on one side and his body on the other, powerfully.
Then the joint will immediately return to its place.
 If it proves difficult to reduce it by any of the means we have stated, employ this treatment: take a wooden spar some two cubits in length, two fingers thick, and four wide; it should have a round head to facilitate its introduction into the hollow of the axilla; of this shape.
Then you bind on the round head soft rags so that the wood will not hurt the patient.
Then it is placed under the patient's axilla, and his whole hand and arm are stretched down over the spar, which is to be bound down to the upper arm, the forearm, and the tip of the hand.
Then let the arm be placed cross-wise over the rung of a ladder and the hand stretched downward, and let the rest of the body hang down on the other side; then the joint will very quickly go back.
Once it has gone back properly, in whatever way is possible, there should be put under the axilla a ball of wool of moderate size; then apply the plaster prepared from mill-dust with olibanum and egg-white, all round the shoulder.
Then firmly bandage the ball under the axilla and carry the bandaging round over the plaster.
Sling his hand from his neck, then let him be left without moving his hand for a week.
The patient's diet should be light until the limb gets strong, for that will hasten the cure.
After five or seven days it can be unfastened and he can make trial of its movement; if it is firm and not slack then it is healed.
 If the joint is frequently dislocated, on account of a humidity arising in it or some other cause, then use should be made of the cautery with three prongs spoken of earlier, in the book on cauterizations.
If you do all this and loosen the bandaging after a week and the joint is still not firm, and you repeatedly plaster it and bandage it, and it is still loose and comes down and dislocates and you are unable to raise it up, then you may know that the tendons at the head of the humerus are either cut through or stretched or loosened; in which case you may know that the joint will never stay firm in its place.
As to the dislocation toward the chest and breast, and posteriorly, the reduction of this is done by thrusting and extension with both hands until it goes back.
And apply the usual bandaging and treatment until it is healed.
If, after it has healed, a callosity arises in it, and it is slow in movement, the patient should take frequent hot baths until that callosity is softened and the member returns to its original condition.
