 CHAPTER FIFTY-TWO.
On the treatment of protruding navel.
The navel becomes prominent from many causes; either from a rupture of the peritoneum over the abdomen, so that omentum or intestine comes through it as in other ruptures; or from blood extravasation from an artery or vein, as we have mentioned; or else from wind trapped in it.
If it be due to ruptured peritoneum and protruding omentum, the colour of the tumour will be the same as the rest of the body; it will be soft and painless and will seem to change its position; But if it be due to an escape of bowel the change of position, compared with what we have described, will be greater, and it will disappear on digital pressure, and then will recur; and often there will be crepitus with it, and it will increase in size on entering the bath or on violent exertion.
If it be due to fluid, it will be soft and will not disappear on manual pressure, nor will it grow larger or smaller.
If it be due to blood, then in addition to these signs the tumour will appear blackish.
If it arise from a fleshy overgrowth, the tumour will be solid and hard, remaining always constant in bulk.
If it be due to wind, it will be soft to the touch.
The operation for these is to examine, and if the exomphalos be due to arterial or venous blood, or wind, you should withhold treatment since it is dangerous in these cases, with an uncertain outlook, as I taught you in the chapter on tumours arising from an artery or vein.
But if it be due to bowel or omentum, bid the patient hold his breath and stand stiffly upright; then make an ink mark all round the umbilicus; then tell him to lie on his back before you; then with a broad scalpel cut all round the umbilicus along the line marked out; then draw up the middle of the tumour with a large hook; then ligature the site of the incision with a strong thread or silk cord, tying it securely with a slip-knot.
Then open the middle of the tied tumour above the ligature and insert your forefinger and search for the bowel; and if you find it caught in the ligature slacken the slip-knot and push the bowel back into the abdomen.
But if you find omentum, stretch it with a hook and cut off what is superfluous.
And if you come across an artery or vein, tie it securely and go on with your work: take two needles and thread them with two strong threads and insert the two needles into the incision that you have made around the tumour, pushing them in so that they cross one another.
Then ligature the tumour in four places over the needles.
If you wish, you may remove the needles and let be until the ligatured tissue necroses and falls away of its own accord; or cut it away when it is thin and necrosing.
Then dress with the needful ointments until healed.
But if the prominent navel be due to an overgrowth of flesh there or from humidity, you should slice the tumour as we have said and get out all the blood or humidity to be found there.
Then dress it with stimulating dressings.
