 CHAPTER THIRTY-ONE.
On the treatment of a dislocated hip.
 You should know that a complete dislocation alone is sustained by the hip and shoulder joints; they do not sustain the lesser displacements, with concavity, as do the other joints.
Now the hip joint is dislocated in four directions, interior, exterior, posterior, and anterior.
Most commonly it is dislocated interiorly; and rarely is it dislocated anteriorly or posteriorly.
The indication of an internal dislocation is that when you compare the patient's sound leg with the injured leg it will be longer and the knee will be prominent as compared with that of the sound leg; nor will it be possible for the patient to flex the foot back on the groin; and there will be an obvious swelling near the groin because the head of the femur has moved there.
The sign of the occurrence of an external dislocation: the symptoms will be the exact contrary to these.
The sign of an anterior dislocation is that the patient can stretch his leg out fully but cannot flex it without feeling pain in the knee; and if he tries to walk he will be unable to walk forward; and he has retention of the urine and his groin swells, and in walking he hobbles upon his heel.
The sign of a posterior dislocation is that he cannot extend the knee, nor can he flex it before flexing the hip; also the leg will be shorter than the other, the groin will be relaxed, and the head of the femur will be evident at the lumbar region.
 As to the reduction of the various forms of this dislocation, you must examine the case and if it be an old dislocation which the patient has suffered from for a long time and the reduction of which has not been contrived and which remains as it was, there is no treatment for it at all, nor should any be attempted.
But in that case whose dislocation is recent, whichever of the four kinds of dislocation it be, hasten to rotate the joint and extend it internally and externally and move it to the right and the left; for often it will return and no further treatment will be needed.
But if it does not go back thus, you must have ready a sturdy and powerful assistant to extend the leg from below, either with both his hands or with a wrapper bound upon the leg above the knee; while another assistant pulls from above by putting his hands under the patient's axillae; then you should bind a soft wrapper upon the root of the thigh, with a third assistant to hold the end of the bandage.
Then extension should be made either anteriorly from the direction of the groin to the direction of the clavicle, or posteriorly toward the dorsal spine.
Let them all make their extension simultaneously so the patient is lifted up bodily and remains suspended.
This kind of extension is common to all four kinds of dislocation.
If the dislocation goes back by the way we have said, good.
Otherwise, each kind must have the special treatment I shall describe.
 When it is an internal dislocation then the special reduction is for the patient to lie upon his sound side; then apply a wrapper to the root of the hip in the space between the head of the femur and the part below the groin; then carry the bandage upward from the groin toward the upper part of the body, in the direction of the clavicle.
Then another powerful and sturdy assistant is to take hold of his arms while the thick part of the afflicted thigh is clasped and strongly extended outward; then it will return to its place.
This kind of treatment is easier than the others for the reduction of this limb.
But if you find it refractory and it does not answer to this method of treatment, then the patient's two feet will have to be bound together with a strong soft bandage round his two ankles and his two knees.
The distance from each to the next should be four fingers, and the injured leg should be stretched two fingers beyond the other.
Then the patient is to reach upward and grasp any beam that may be in the house; he should be about two cubits from the floor.
Then tell a powerful servant to clasp the head of the hip and another servant to hang from the patient; and the other servant, the one who is clasping the hip, should thrust powerfully; then the hip will speedily go back.
 The special method of reduction in the case of an external dislocation: it will be necessary for the patient to be lying on a bench after the manner described for the one with a curvature of the spine; but wrappers are to be tied only on the injured leg and the chest.
Then the two spars are to be set in position, one at his feet and another at his head; and have an additional spar firmly fixed in the middle of the bench and wrapped in soft cloth so as not to injure the patient; this spar is to be between his thighs so that he will not be dragged down during extension.
Then each assistant is to pull in his own direction while the doctor sets the hip with his hands.
And if it goes back, good.
But if not, place the board upon it and put pressure upon it just as we prescribed for curvature, except that the patient will have to lie upon his sound side.
 When it is an anterior dislocation, extension will have to be applied forcefully to the patient's leg, on the bench, exactly as described; the doctor should place the palm of his right hand upon the injured groin and then apply pressure with the other hand, directing the pressure so as to make extension downward toward the knee.
 If it is a posterior dislocation the patient must not be raised above the ground and extended downward; rather must he be placed upon something hard, in the manner that we prescribed for an external displacement of the hip: he is to lie prone on the bench with the bands tied as we said before.
It will also be necessary to apply pressure with the board to the site to which the joint has been displaced.
When the proper reduction of the joint is completed—the signs of reduction will be plain to you; namely, that you extend both the patient's legs, and when you see that both legs are of equal length and the patient can draw up and stretch out the leg without difficulty, then you may know that the limb has gone back as it should—then bring both thighs together, apply the plaster and bind with a sash so that the hip does not move in any direction; and the patient is to keep perfectly quiet for three or four days.
Then loosen the bandage and the plaster, and compare the leg with the other.
If you see that they are both the same size you may know that the dislocation is cured and you can allow the patient to walk freely.
But if you see any slackening then repeat: replaster and rebandage as you did at first, and leave for another three days.
Then unfasten.
He should be cautious about walking on it for some days, until it is thoroughly strong, God willing.
