 CHAPTER FORTY-SEVEN.
On cauterization for elephantiasis.
 Those suffering from elephantiasis are sometimes greatly helped by the cautery; especially that kind that arises from corruption of the phlegm and black bile.
When you wish to use the cautery, first look, and if the elephantiasis be in the early stage and you treat it with those remedies advised in the section but it does not abate and is not arrested, and you fear lest the corruption spread over the patient's whole constitution, then give him five cauterizations on the head: the well-known one in the middle of the head; the second one lower than that, toward the forehead, about the edge of the hair; and two at the temples; and one behind, on the nape of the neck.
And maintain the application of the cautery a little while till a slight mark is impressed on the bone and the outer table is removed from it, that there be an easy exit for the thick vapours.
Burn him also one cauterization over the spleen itself in the manner described earlier.
If the elephantiasis be widespread over the patient and appears obvious, you should give him, as well as the cauterizations described for the head: one at the end of the nose; two over the cheek bones; two over the cervical vertebrae; six over the dorsal vertebrae; a great one over the coccyx by the last vertebra of the tail; another above that on the flat of the back; two over the hip joints, one on either hip; two on the knees, one on either knee; two over the shoulders; two on the elbows; and two on the upper part of the breast; and burn him once on each joint of his fingers and toes, and on each ankle and on each forearm.
Be careful not to burn the posterior tendons of his heels.
He may also be cauterized once on the pubic bone; another on the cardia of the stomach; and another on the liver.
You should know that the more you cauterize the more beneficial and effective it will be.
You should know also that the patient will not find the cautery painful as a sound man would, since his body is benumbed.
The cauteries should be of the types of instrument mentioned earlier, larger or smaller in proportion to the size of the limb or joint.
Then treat the cauterization with powder of bitter vetch with honey, together with the other treatments, till healed.
