 CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.
On gathering up pannus from the eye.
 Pannus is a network of blood-vessels spreading over the eye so as to interfere with the function of sight and, in the course of time, weakening the eye.
You must first examine, and if the eye with the pannus be strong, with no fault other than the pannus, then the pannus should be gathered up.
This is done by bidding the patient put his head in your lap; then, as skilfully as you may, pick up those blood-vessels with one or two hooks.
The hooks should be of a gentle curve, like this.
Or there can be two hooks joined together on one handle, thus.
Then take up the blood-vessels gently with the fine scissors, and wipe away the blood constantly, till you see all those blood-vessels removed from the eye, and the blood wells forth.
But be careful of the eye lest you damage it with the points of the scissors.
Let your work be done in broad sunlight at midday; and be very steady in your action so as to cut nothing beside the bloodvessels.
When you have finished, instil the red or green lotion into the eye to destroy by its caustic action the remnants of the pannus.
If you are unable to gather it all up at that one time, apply a plaster to the eye such as will allay the pain, and leave him* for a few days till* the pain be eased and there is no danger of an abscess.
Then repeat the operation in the same manner till it is healed.
This is a figure of the scissors. [
The principle in the operation is that the eye be opened with double or triple openers held by a skilful pupil, the patient's head being in that pupil's lap, while another wipes away the tears and carefully watches the internal and external angles of the eye.
You have the choice between beginning the removal from the top or from the bottom of the eye.
The best method is to fix two hooks in the upper side, one at the end of the iris and the other at the beginning of it.
Hold them between your middle and first fingers.
Then attach hooks below the points of the first two, and hold them between your third and fourth fingers.
Raise your hand slightly until you see that the whole pannus has been lifted.
Then cut from the lesser angle, with scissors or a fine scalpel, as you wish.
Introduce the scraping-needle and cut away the entire pannus until it is lifted over the conjunctiva.
Do not interrupt the wiping, for tears and blood will flow and hinder you.
Then cut with scissors what is left over the iris, from above and below, until nothing remains adhering except over the cornea.
If you can remove it from over the cornea, peel with the scraping-needle, for it is better, and in some cases is easily done.
When you cut it, its ... will come out for some days].
