 CHAPTER FORTY-NINE.
On opening a tumour arising from a bloodvessel, called an aneurysm.
 When an artery is injured and the overlying skin scars, a tumour very often arises from this; the same thing happens to a vein: a swelling and a tumour.
And these are the signs by which you may diagnose whether the swelling and tumour arise from an artery or a vein: if it be from an artery the tumour will be a deep and elongated mass; and when you press upon it with your finger there will be a feeling of pulsation.
But if it arises from a vein the swelling will be circular and superficial.
It is dangerous to make an incision on tumours of this kind, specially in the axilla, the groin, the neck, and in many other parts of the body; it is indeed highly dangerous, so in these you must avoid treatment by the knife; also in those in the limbs and in the head it must be avoided.
But any such that arises from the inflation of the mouth of an artery, you may cut down in the skin over that with a longitudinal incision; then open up your incision with hooks and dissect away the artery, freeing it from the tissues till it is laid bare.
Then run a needle beneath the artery to reach the other side, and tie the artery in two places with a double thread, as I showed you for the extraction of the temporal arteries.
Then with the scalpel prick the part between the two ligatures to let out all the blood and get the tumour down.
Then apply dressings to excite suppuration until the ligatures fall away; then dress with suitable ointments until healed.
If the swelling be due to a vein that has been penetrated, you should gather up with your hand as much of the tumour as you can, together with the skin; then pass a needle beneath the place which you have grasped in your hand and run it through, threaded with a double thread, until it emerges at the other side; then with it tie a strong ligature round the swelling as I mentioned to you on ligaturing the swollen uvula, from either side, with the ends of the thread.
If you fear that the threads may come loose, pass a second needle and thread beneath the whole tumour to intersect with the passage of the first needle; and tie your threads in four places.
Then incise the tumour in the centre to extract the contents.
Then cut away the superfluous skin and leave what has been ligatured.
Then put on that a pad previously soaked in wine and oil; then apply the treatment with lint and ointments until healed.
