 AFTER finishing for you, my sons, this book which is the part of knowledge dealing with medicine in its entirety; and having made it as clear and explicit as possible, I thought it well to complete it for you by adding this treatise which concerns surgical operating.
For the skilled practitioner of operative surgery is totally lacking in our land and time; so that the knowledge of it is on the point of being blotted out and its remains lost; and there is nothing left of it except a few traces in the books of the Ancients; where, however, it has been so corrupted by the hands of scribes, and subjected to error and confusion, that its meaning has become obscured and its value diminished.
Therefore I decided to revive this art by expounding, elucidating, and epitomizing it in this treatise; and to present the forms of the cauterizing irons and other operative instruments, since this is an adjunct to explanation and a vital necessity.
Now this is the reason why there is no skilful operator in our day: the art of medicine is long and it is necessary for its exponent, before he exercises it, to be trained in anatomy as Galen has described it, so that he may be fully acquainted with the uses, forms, and temperament of the limbs; also how they are jointed, and how they may be separated; that he should understand fully also the bones, tendons, and muscles, their numbers and their attachments; and also the bloodvessels, both arteries and veins, with their relations.
And so Hippocrates said: 'Though many are doctors in name, few are in reality, particularly on the surgical side.'
We have already spoken of this in the introduction to this book.
For he who is not skilled in as much anatomy as we have mentioned is bound to fall into error that is destructive of life.
Thus I have seen many laying claim to this knowledge and boasting of it, but having neither knowledge nor experience.
I saw an ignorant doctor incise a scrofulous tumour in a woman's neck; and he cut certain arteries in the neck so that the woman bled until she fell dead before him.
And I saw another doctor presume to take out a stone from a man of advanced age.
The stone was large; he rushed blindly at the task and extracted the stone and with it a piece of the bladder itself; and the man was dead in about three days.
I had myself been previously called in to extract the stone but from what I saw of the size of it and the condition of the patient I judged that the outcome would be so.
I saw another doctor who had a regular salary from one of the high officers of our country for medical treatment.
There had occurred to a negro boy of his a fracture of the leg near the heel, together with a wound; the doctor rushed in, in his ignorance, and bound up the fracture, over the wound, very tightly, with pads and splints, not allowing the wound to breathe.
He then let him go as he wished and then dismissed him for some days bidding him not to loose the bandage.
Eventually his leg and foot swelled and he was close to death.
I was called in and made haste to loose the bandage, upon which some ease and reduction of the pain followed.
Nevertheless, gangrene had already taken hold on the limb and I could not hinder its progress; it.
continued to extend in the limb until he perished.
And I saw another doctor incise a malignant tumour; after some days the place broke out in open ulceration, thereby adding to the misery of the patient.
For a cancer that arises from a melancholic humour should never be touched by the knife unless it should happen to be in a part of the body which may be removed thoroughly and in its entirety.
Wherefore you must know, my sons, that operative surgery is divided into two parts, namely, where operation is associated with the health of the patient, and, on the other hand, where it is for the most part fraught with danger.
Throughout the following book I point out wherever I have described an operation that is accompanied by fear and danger.
It behoves you to be wary and to shun such, lest the ignorant have an opportunity to reproach and slander you.
Show, then, caution and care for yourselves and gentleness and perseverance for your patients.
Take the best road that leads to health and a happy outcome.
Illnesses that are very threatening or difficult to cure, leave alone.
Purify yourselves of anything which you fear may cause doubt as to your religious life and your secular life; for this will perpetuate your good name and will elevate your fortunes in this world and the next.
For Galen once said in certain of his admonitions: 'Do not treat mischievous maladies lest you get the name of mischievous doctors.'
I have divided this treatise into three books:
 BOOK ONE.
Concerning the actual cautery; and cauterization by caustics.
It is divided into chapters set in order from the head to the feet.
The shapes of the instruments are shown and the iron cauteries and all things necessary for operating.
 BOOK TWO.
Concerning incision and perforation; blood-letting and cupping; wounds and the extraction of arrows and the like.
The whole is divided into chapters in order; and illustrations of instruments are given.
 BOOK THREE.
Concerning the setting of bones; dislocations; the treatment of sprains and the like.
This is similarly divided into chapters set in order from head to feet, with illustrations of instruments.
