O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, very dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the science of medicine by assembling its filling, and have made its end through his explanations and by his declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it has come to my vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is strongly rooted in our region and has been entirely excluded from everything, the science has perished and been cut off, and nothing remains except the small descriptions in books by the ancients that their hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this came errors and vanities, and the intentions have been closed, and the science has been neglected.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation;	It seems to me that I should vitalize the entire arrangement of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation;
et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	and will assemble the forms of the cautery irons, and other tools of the work with the adjustment of the declaration and preparation of them as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no skilled surgeons are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is fitting that he who undertakes this master the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, their forms and conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and blood vessels and the number of them, and their movements and veins moving and resting, and from where they issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc;	And because Hippocrates said that without understanding is much, and without practice is little;
et meismement en l’art de main.	and especially in the art of manual skills.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes;	We tell you in the introduction of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously mentioned should beware lest he act improperly and harm people.
ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	So many times I have wished more of those who undertake this science and abandon themselves to it without experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col;	For I have seen a fool who incised an abscess of scrophules or throat of a woman, and incised the arteries of her neck;
por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	for so much blood issued forth that the woman fell dead in his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans;	And I have seen another fool who incised a stone from an old man, and the stone was large;
si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	and he took with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to draw the stone, and saw the patient's condition and the size of the stone, and knew well that if it were cut out he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie;	And I have seen another fool who took care of the Duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the burner made a wound;
et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine;	and the surgeons full of ignorance restrain the breakage on the wound with strong ligatures, and do not leave any part of the flesh untied, and leave it thus completed.
et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie;	and he commands that he does not release it at all;
et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	and he delays until the leg becomes entirely swollen and the foot rots away.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe;	I was called to come to him, and hastened to come to release the leg;
et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	and when I heard him dislocate it, he was at ease and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner;	But the corruption of the bone was already confirmed or in the member, and could not be cured.
et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	and the corruption did not cease to spread through the limb until the member was entirely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And take another blade which collapses the embedded abscess, and then inflame through the wickedness of its authority.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For an abscess, when it is pure of melancholic humor, one should not touch it with iron if it is not in such a place where all the corrupted parts can be completely removed.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions:	And for this, dear son, you need to know that the work of hands is divided into two parts:
c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions;	that is to say, work where there is danger in many positions;
et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos.	For this, it is necessary that you take care of it, so that the foolish ones cannot speak ill of you.
Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez;	If you take your instruments in hand and approach your patients lightly and firmly, and use the best way, so that by the grace of God you come to their salvation and be praised;
et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit;	and leave the terrible diseases threatening health;
et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	and remove your arms from that which causes you doubt, and have faith in yourselves so that you may pass from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens:	Galien says in some of his admonitions:
«Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Do not take ill diseases into your care if you are to be called mad.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have dealt with this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez;	The first chapters are about fire cauteries and water medicament cauteries, and are ordered from the head down to the feet;
et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	and the forms of the instruments, and the implements for the cautery, and everything necessary for the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses;	The second chapter is about cutting and piercing, and about suction cups and wounds, and the extraction of arrows, and similar things;
et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	and it is about the chapters ordered and the forms of the instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses;	The third chapter is about resetting dislocations and twists, and similar things.
et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	and it is ordered from the shoulder to the feet, and the forms of the instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus, since we remember the work, it must be that I describe the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus;	I say that the qualities of the aid, and of harm, are the longest discourse and subtle science and the secrets replied to.
et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu;	and on this many wise men spoke, and agreed with it.
et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	and let them speak but little, for I fear the lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions:	I say that the fire cautery helps universally in all complexions where there is matter, whether of two complexions:
c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	that is to say complexion warm with matter, and dry complexion with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide;	In a warm and dry complexion with matter, they debated and said that the fire cautery is great help;
et li autre dirent le contraire:	and the other said the opposite:
que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	that the fire cautery is not useful for a disease that comes from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour;	For the nature of fire is so hot, and should not be applied to a warm disease by heat, nor by dryness.
et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	and he says who says the opposite that the fire cautery does great help for sickness hot and dry that comes in men's bodies.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you examine the body of the man and his moisture according to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it so through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens;	And in all cases, do not intervene unless it is someone who has proven its effectiveness and knows through long practice the art of cauteries, and the diversity of human constitutions, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the outcomes and duration of the time.
des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	of other constitutions we have no fear, especially for cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the more they came together and agreed on the fire cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that fire cautery together with heat is of the secrets of wound treatment, and has greater goodness than a burning medicinal cautery.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire is simple, and affects only the part that is burned, and does not harm other parts to a great extent.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation;	Hot medicines spread from one part to another and cause diseases in the affected parts due to their heat.
et par aventure ocit lou malaide.	and sometimes they cure the patient.
Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The fire for its height and for the goodness of its substance does not do this, if there is no superfluity.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses;	And this I have found through experience and the length of service and study I have devoted to the art, and it is concerning the truth of things;
et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant;	and for this I excuse the length of the words, for it pleases me not to deprive you of the secret, which is about the fire and the quality of the work, how it expels diseases from the body, as the philosopher states in demonstrating;
or le recevez en vos pensees.	receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, boy, when the cauteries ought to be made, and they have chosen times.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere;	And I say that the fire cautery is suitable at all times, for the evils coming about are removed by the aid of the cautery.
et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	and especially if the cautery is for pains urgent and necessary that cannot wait for the time when greater mischief does not arise in the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire;	And never think of it, dear boy, as those foolish men do;
car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue;	for the disease that is cured by cautery has no return;
et il le dient ensi;	and they say thus;
mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	but it is not as they think, for cautery is not medicine that changes the complexion and dries the humors that cause pain, and it works like medicine for the speed of its virtue and the power and authority of its action.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut;	And it is possible that the disease comes once according to the patient's constitution and the location of the disease and its virtue;
et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie;	and they are gathered in him due to the acquisition of meats and similar things, if not, apply cauteries to him where there is little excess and moisture, as with cauteries for pain, and similar things, and the same pain will not return.
mais ce avient poc.	but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir;	And few people understand for what reason cauteries are called the last of medicine, and this is true.
mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	but they do not believe that cauteries work after medicine, and their belief is false. For when we administer methods of treatment for any disease and they do not work, then we apply the cautery, and it works.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is clear that cauterization is the latest in medicine, not according to the intention of wise men.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance;	The ancients said that cautery instruments made of gold are hotter than those made of iron, and they did not say this because of the quality of the gold or its high density;
et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes;	and they said that the coals of the cautery do not cause putrefaction, but this is not true because I have proven it and found that it is indeed true in some people;
et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	and gold cautery instruments are hotter than those made of iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez;	And whenever you heat an instrument made of gold, you cannot tell when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it will cool quickly.
et s’on le chaufe trop;	and if you heat it too much;
si font au feu;	if they do it with fire;
et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	and then there is sufficient obstruction.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this, we use the fire cautery that we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you have ordered this chapter from the head to the feet, because the veins should be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of the olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moisture and cold in the head, and there are two of them, which we make because of a disease called "soda," and due to many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and for the multitude of dreams, toothache, throat pain, and especially all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir;	The form of this cautery is that the patient be purged by medicinal means changing the humor three or four times, according to what the virtues and strength of the liquid and the custom of the patient allow.
et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	and then reapply the cautery to the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis;	And then place it crosswise in your hands, and put his hands on the palms;
aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz;	after place the base of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes;
et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	and when these two means come, bleed from the armpit then heat the cautery called "olive", of which here is its form:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant;	And place it on the armpit mark with ink, and do so by lowering and withdrawing your hand little by little, turning it.
puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit;	then withdraw your hand alone, and raise the armpit if you see bone slightly.
et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit;	and if you do not see it, reapply the cautery until you see the bone as I have told you.
aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors;	after take some thread, and put in soft cotton inside, and place it on the armpit, and let it for three days.
aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre;	after apply a moistened cloth to it in butter;
et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	and keep it there until the cauterization is removed;
aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	after apply the ointment called "tetrapharmacos" until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge;	And the ancients said that the longer the wound remains open, the more it purges.
et por ce si aide mues.	and for this reason, apply herbs.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And any of them said that the fire cautery should be applied so much that part of the bone is burned, and then the burned part of the bone should be removed and cleaned.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors;	And another says that the cauterization should be left on until it blisters, and to apply it so strongly that it causes a blister as wide as the comb that women use in their hairpins, for this causes the fluids to move out.
et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte;	and one must keep the wound widely open;
aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	after which one must treat and dress.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor;	And these two methods of cautery do not seem entirely good in all respects, except for those who have a way to fear;
et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier;	and it seems to me that I should let the fire cautery alone;
car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres;	for the shoulders are weakened by continuous natural solutions, as we testify in other limbs;
et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	and even when the patient's shoulders are weak by nature, and the first application of the fire cautery seems more helpful and soothing to me, and from that I work in this assembly for healing.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres;	When in the entire body there comes chronic pain that lasts long, the patient should use years and pills called "cochie" and purgatives of head and eyes and plasters;
et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	and if we apply the fire cautery as we have said before, and it does not help.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit;	Take care that the head of the sick person is of strong nature, and that it not be too cold;
adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	then the cautery should be applied over that cautery a little as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»;	After apply the cautery on each horn of the head up to the bone, as we have said before, and apply the cautery or reset called "vasselz".
et est I leus en coi on met ventouses;	and this is where one places cups;
et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os:	and lift your hand so that it does not reach the bone:
li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors;	the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak of it elsewhere;
et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	and the cautery for the horns should be finer than that used for the middle of the head, and this is the form:
dou cautere dou chief	for the fire cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie:	When there is sudden pain in a part of the head, and the disease extends to the eye, and the shoulder is cleansed with purgative medicines, and other treatments for the condition have been performed as I described in the division of diseases, and all this does not help:
adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	then he makes cauterizations according to two methods, that is to say from aqueous medicine and fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir;	The cauterization from aqueous medicine is that you take a decoction of aloes, and peel off the bark and rind just a little around two shoulders, and then apply the decoction underneath the skin in the area where the pain resides.
et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres;	and when it is applied, it should be pressed well and left thus for twelve hours.
et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III;	and then remove the bandage and apply a dressing of garlic decoction, and leave the wound for two or three days.
puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	then place on a cloth soaked in butter until it dries out.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	After the ointment treatment until he is healed;
et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	and if you see that he uses some of the burning medicines that I have written or in the twelfth treatise on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is done in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the iron cautery using coal; it has the form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance;	And it is called "clos" because the head is made in the shape of a clove or it has little curvature, and in the middle there is a small appearance.
et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse;	and place it on the painful area, and hold your hand and gently turn the flesh a bit until the halves of the core of the wound are burned.
et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	and lift your hand so that the artery does not burn, which is above, and allow an abundance of blood to flow.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors;	After apply cotton for the sake of the thread, put on the head for three days;
puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	then I put wet cotton in butter, and then treat the head with ointment until it is healed;
et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	and if you wish to cauterize this headache with the cautery called "cultellare," do it entirely around the edge, and be careful not to burn the artery in this headache which is not old.
de emigraine	of emigraine
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans;	When you treat the headache as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cauterization previously mentioned from medicine and of iron is not sufficient, then you must heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white-hot;
et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os;	and thus stretch over the bone a line of half a digit in length, and take your hand once, hold that so as not to compress the artery and not to come until the bone;
et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez;	and watch the mandible that moves when we eat, and the nerves so they look only at the move and that spasm does not arise in the patient, and watch for bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or bleeding has great fear and especially to those who do not know it, and are untrained.
et laisse l’uevre em mi voie;	and let the work proceed in its course;
mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	but I will tell you how to stop the blood when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it is in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And if you see that this cautery is not sufficient for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him on the head as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed;
et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz;	And if you see, administer the cautery as we have said or chapter on the extraction of the artery, with the cautery having two blades;
et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	and this cautery is better and more effective than that one.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	of the pain in the ears due to cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ear comes from cold, and you have applied medicinal solutions and other treatments as we have said in the division, and the pains do not change, then heat this cautery called "poins," of which here is the form:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche;	After puncturing all around the affected ear, or around both sides where the pain is felt, and then move a little bit upwards from the root of the ear after marking the area.
et ait X poins entor chescune oreille;	and have X points between each ear;
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the wound is cleaned until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie;	Torture that must be cured by fire cautery is not those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	and do not make any fire cautery for those that come from drying and fainting of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres:	When you cure this form of torture that moves from phlegm in the fluids and purgatives of bile and gargling, and if it is ineffective, then you must cauterize the patient with three fire cauteries.
l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres;	One at the root of the ear, and the other a little above the temple, and the third in the alignment of the two lips;
et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce;	and place the cautery on the healthy part that opens, and apply the cautery over a little above the tip of the ear, and another one on the temple as long as an inch;
et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse;	and leave the cautery there until the muscles of the heart are burned.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of the cautery:
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros;	And it is the shape of the cautery that we placed before, but it is a bit more subtle, and it should be that the knives are a bit larger.
aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the treatment of the wound as I have said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres:	When the apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and it does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then I apply four cauteries:
II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac;	On the two horns of the head, and one on the head, and one on the area called "vessels" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the opening of the stomach;
et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	and treat it as we have said before.
de litargie	For lithargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil;	For this disease, give the patient large and purgative pills for cleansing the brain;
aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres;	after resetting the patient's head, and placing it on the occiput, apply the mustard plaster described or treated in the section on plasters;
et c’est li maniere dou cautere:	and this is the way of the cautery:
si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	if you do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est;	If it is done thus, well done;
et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros;	and if it is not done thus, apply three cauteries down the back from the neck to the collarbone, with an inch of space between each cautery.
et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu;	and treat the wound as with others, and if you see fit to adjust it, and the patient is suffering, apply one cautery in the middle.
et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if the task is, two others on the two horns, and treat until it is healed;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	and let the cautery which is called "olivare," as I have said before, be present.
de la froidor dou chief	from the cold of the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit;	It is necessary that the head be cleansed of pus and what we have said before;
aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col;	after clean the head of the patient, then heat the head of the patient, and apply the cautery through the head and on each horn, and the fourth and third on the spine of the neck;
et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos;	and if you have more need of it, and the body is moist and the patient suffers, and the disease is severe, then apply four cautery marks on the spine of the back;
et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main;	and let them [the cautery] remain until the pain is less, and remove your hand;
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	after the treatment until it is healed, and use the cautery called "olivare" as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	The epileptics should not use fire cautery except those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to modify the brain with years and other treatments that we have said in the division when the patients are great and suffer from gentle medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes;	And if it is an infant who cannot bear the pain, have them perform gargling and chewing, frequently modifying the mixture with good meats.
aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne;	after placing the king in the middle, and apply the cautery as we have said before, and on the vessel, and on each horn.
et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and if the patient is strong and in great pain, apply the cautery as I have said for those with paralysis and muscle weakness, on the spine of the back and neck, and use the olive cautery as I described.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is injured, if he undergoes the fine cautery according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When the cause of melancholy is corrupt superfluities or thick phlegm, then the cautery with such cauteries as we have said for paralysis should be used.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by the cause of melancholy the superfluities are declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him to drink things by which his brain may be purified, according to those described earlier in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide;	After reduce the head of the patient;
aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief;	after make the ligature of linen well done, like a circle, and put it around the head;
et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars;	and the patient lies stretched out, and be well held from all sides;
aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien;	after present the ligature, and apply it with old goat's butter;
et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir;	and heat the iron well, so that the doze can be applied as long as it can be endured;
aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier;	after empty the circle from within through the head, and let it cool;
et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and do this to the patient once each week with another better regimen until he is healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you see to cauterize him, make pricks in several places throughout the cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument;	This method of cautery moistens the brain greatly;
et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	and then place soft cotton soaked in butter and gelatin fat on it.
de l’awe des eulz	from the fear of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When fear comes first to the eyes through the signs that I have said in the division, then begin and have the patient drink things that cleanse the head, and protect him from all moisture, and make him sweat or take baths several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I;	After this, instruct him to turn his head, and apply a cautery under the chin, and make two cauteries on the two temples if the downward movements of the jaw are together with the eyes, or in one if the movement is in one.
et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple;	and cover the entire area of the cautery with all the veins and arteries beneath the ear, and let the cauteries be long according to the width of the temple.
et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	and beware of excessive bleeding, and if you see too much blood come out, stop it with the same method you have.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras;	And I will teach you in the extraction of the arteries and in the incision how to handle it.
et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And once done, cauterize or treat the two hindmost bones.
dou cors des larmes	of the chest due to tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors;	When the tears from the eyes are old and accustomed to be on the veins, or drain the arteries that are visible at the back of the head.
et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz:	and when it is seen that they are cold phlegmatic excesses, then I do the cauterization that I said at the beginning of this work descending to the eyes.
I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os;	I cauterize at the back of the head, and two cauterizations above the two temples, and two cauterizations or treat the two hindmost bones.
et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	and if there is need for more, cauterize the bleeding from the sorcery with a small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	with the body of tears through the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies;	When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not benefit the patient, then give the patient three noxious pigs to drink;
aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire;	after you set the head, and do a cauterization or in the middle of the olive cauterization;
et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous;	and do two cauterizations of the cauterization called "clavilis" above the two pigs, a little below the eyebrows;
et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	and beware of the artery so you do not burn it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil is softened by illness and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	of which here is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont;	And if you see, make two fire cauteries above the two sinews as long as the sinews are;
et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	and leave your hand there until the third part of the paper be burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	the hair which points to the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres:	Sometimes the hairs of the eyes turn to white teeth, and prick the eye, and then one makes fire cauteries according to two manners:
c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	that is to say with fire, or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals;	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even;
et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain;	When they grow and are equal, then put the patient in a sound state;
aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz;	after marking on the paper the eyes, draw a figure that be as much like the leaf of the laurel, and be the beginning of the sign among the hairs;
puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then put moist cotton in egg white and myrtle wax on the eye, then heat the cautery as described by its form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit;	After cauterize on the figure you have marked, do so only a little bit many times, until the corners are scorched in place;
et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil;	and the signs of health of the work are that you see the paper withdrawn, and the hairs raised to the outline of the eye;
adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	then gently hold your hand, and let it be thus for three days, then put moistened cotton in butter until the burning is removed;
aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the application of ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers;	And if hairs come after this, and the paper is softened, then resume the fire cautery in that same place, as you have done first.
et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	and if the hairs are removed, then cauterize until the paper lifts to its natural place and remains even, and do not prick the hairs near the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte;	The fire cauterization in medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and even, then make parchment in the shape of the leaf of juniper.
puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien;	then take of French soap and strong heat, of each one .Z., and grind them together well;
et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz;	and do it quickly, so that it does not cool, then apply it to the form as you made it like the leaf of juniper, and place on the paper of eyes;
et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi;	and if the disease is only in the eye, one must open it, and if it is in both as well;
et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef;	and place moist cotton from an egg white over the eye;
et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	and the head of the patient be in a good position and place your hand showing over the medicine, and press it slightly and the egg each time the patient feels the medicine biting, for they feel the bite as from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, remove the medicine from your duty.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision;	And when the swelling has passed, lift the limb from rest, and reward if you see the paper lifted as if it were lifted by constraint of fire or by incision;
et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	and if it is so, it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point;	If not, apply the medicine to the limb again or until your treatment shows results, and keep your eyes focused.
puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then place soft cloth with butter on it until the wound is healed, after which dress the limb with ointment called "dyafenis" and others, until he is cured.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to watch your work well with great care so that it does not fail in the application of the medicine.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant;	And if the paper becomes soft after, and the hair pricks in the eye, resume the treatment on that limb which is softened by the paper, as you did before.
aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the treatment until he is healed;
et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	and it is the form of the leaf of the myrtle:
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens;	And know that men's eyes vary in size and smallness, and according to this, your constraints;
et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	and do not follow the right way for him who studies this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	For the treatment of fistula by fire cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then you must cauterize it according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain;	instruct the patient to place his head on your side;
et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief;	and hold the patient's head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move, nor his head;
aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil;	after, place woolen cloth in the white of an egg or in the juice of pomegranate on the eye;
aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz:	after heating the cautery which is divided:
et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere;	and it is placed on the shoulder in the shape of an arrow feather, ensuring that the cautery fits.
se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente;	if you see, it should be pointed from one shoulder to the other, and if you see, it should be like a tent.
mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	but in any case, what is placed should move for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche;	after press the fistula if it is open, and drain the pus, and dry it.
et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe;	and if it is closed, work on it, and drain from the bowel.
aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie;	after placing the hot cautery, hold your hand at the part above the neck next to the eye, so that your hand does not do foolish things;
et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	and place the cautery in the fat of the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be well.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors;	If not, repeat the application of the cautery once more, and do this if you need to, and leave it for three days;
aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers;	afterwards, place moist cotton soaked in butter on it, and continue the application of the drying ointment until it is healed. If forty days pass and it is not healed, apply a watery corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed.
et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	and follow the king's instruction according to what he has written in his chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a method of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu;	Hear about fistula, and set it right;
aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	after insert the fine wax thread of hemp into the opening to shape it:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc;	and make it with the quantity of a .3. drop;
et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil;	and hold your hand or the thread firmly, and do not let the patient move at all, so that the melted wax does not flow into their eye;
et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe:	and it is necessary to place over the eye a wet piece of cotton or from an egg:
li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	the wax seals the fistula, and the healthy part with marvelous healing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery that we have said, that is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if not, it is fitting to administer pertusin to the neck, and bring the fistula back to the body of the neck according to what is proper in itself.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, cracks occur in lips called "poil," especially in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When the cure for these cracks, as we said in divisions, does not help, then heat the small fire cautery knife according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font;	And place it quickly into those cracks until it comes to the surface;
aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	after dress the wound until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule;	When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or the eye socket, or the palate, or the roots of the teeth, after performing putrefaction and drilling and it has healed and becomes a fistula;
et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie:	and you treat it as we have said in the divisions, but it will not profit much:
adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule;	then you must have the fire cautery according to the quantity of the fistula;
aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu;	after the bottle or perforation of the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron comes to the bottom of it, and beyond it;
et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do so once or twice after the treatment as described in our treatments until he is healed;
et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin;	and if it is treated thus, that is good;
et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	and if not, you must expose the joint and remove the corrupt bone, according to what you find in its chapter.
dou movement des dens	by movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain;	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you treat it with medicines and it does not help, then place the patient's healthy side in the affected area.
aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent;	after heating the cautery as described later in such a manner that you place a cane on the tooth.
et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent;	and insert the hot cautery quickly inside, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat coming to the root of the tooth;
aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit;	after removing your hand, reapply the cautery as you see fit;
aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	after make the patient lick salt water, and for the scabies, one hour and thoroughly dry.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such a manner, the tooth that was moving is fixed, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupted moisture dries up.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres:	When pain in the teeth comes from cold or there is cold present, and medical treatments are ineffective, then it is necessary to use the cautery according to two methods:
et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	and the butter cautery and the fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain;	The butter cautery is such that you take butter from a cow, and the end of it in a iron or tin spoon;
aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez;	after take cotton and wrap on the tip of a tent, and the marrow in butter boiled, and put on the tooth hurting quickly and hold until it be cooled;
et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	and so do often until its virtue comes to the root of the tooth, and if you see soft wool and cotton in cold butter, and put on the aching tooth, and put on the iron hot until the fire comes to the healing of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide;	The fire cauterizes as such that you take a steel or iron needle, and let it be large so that the fire does not come to the mouth of the patient;
aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez;	after heat the cauterizer, of which the form will come next, and put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cauterizer be cooled;
fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	Do this often, for the pain will be removed on that same day or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer;	And the patient should fill his mouth with good butter in anticipation of that cautery, and then quickly apply it.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of the cautery:
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir;	And make the cautery where you wish, and according to what you have power to do.
et c’est li forme de la caine:	and this is the form of the cane:
des scrophules	of gland swellings
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie;	When the scrophules are of phlegm and cold moisture, and do not yield to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery as described below. Let it have two openings for the vapors to escape from the other side.
et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume;	and apply the hot cautery to the abscess once, or twice if necessary, until it reaches the center of the abscess;
et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors;	and if the abscess is small, apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days;
et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee;	and apply moist cotton soaked in butter until the burn is removed;
aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	afterwards apply ointments and bandages until it is healed.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cane:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives;	When the moist humors overcome the channels of the body, and especially when this comes from a cold temperament, then it is necessary to first evacuate the patient with soluble medicines.
aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	after you apply the cautery to the root of the throat, and make sure that you do not come too close to the throat, but do heat the heart a little bit, just a bit.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant;	After, apply the other cautery to the joint of the neck at the head of the spine, and let the cauteries which are called "clavile" be as we have shown their form before;
et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat the place as we have said before until it is healed.
de la toust	of the cauterization
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai .II cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis;	When all and the disease of the bowel is due to cold moisture, and the patient has no fever and does not dry up, and the disease is old, apply two cauteries on the flank in their armpits;
et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles;	and for another cautery place the point between the two mamels;
et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	and let the cautery that is called "clavile" be according to the form that is said before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles;	And if you see, make a cautery by pricking the entire area called "poins" whose form is described earlier in the disease of the ears.
et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	and let the "poins" be up to XXX, or nearby.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After the treatment of the shoulder as previously mentioned, let the cauteries be at three points according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because these cauteries are lighter, since you make three of them together.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	from the dislocation of the shoulder
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit;	Afterwards, anoint the patient's back and side.
aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre;	afterward, lift the heart that is within the titillite with your left hand.
et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	and if the joint is dislocated within, heat the cautery that has two nooses with which its form is made:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres;	and cauterize the heart until it perforates to the costeit, and bring together the figure of the cautery with four cauteries;
et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres;	and for this purpose the cautery is made with one that has three nooses, so that the figures of the cauterization are six cauteries;
et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and the nooses follow the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cautery that has three nooses:
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And once adjusted above this first nerve, because of which there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil;	After place the cautery with heated coals on salt;
aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	after making the patient rest, and let not the limbs be moved for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated upwards, little happens, then apply the fire cautery on the thick part of the joint, or several cauteries by pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joint is closed, and the moisture is removed, thus healing the patient.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach because it is contrary to his constitution, and the catarrh multiplies in him, and methods of treatment are accustomed but do not benefit him, then the patient should be treated on his back, and extend his legs and hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture;	After this, make three cautery marks above the heel according to the size of a coin, on each cautery use a needle-cautery, and two cautery marks below the two flanks such that the shape of the cautery marks forms three angles and there is space between each other so they do not join together when putrefaction occurs.
et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	and let the cautery marks be so complete that they penetrate the two parts of the thigh, and let the shape of the cautery marks follow this form without adjustment.
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme;	And if you see to cauterize with a large cautery on the stomach according to this form;
et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche;	and he who is afraid of this cautery, prick and bleed at the stomach i. point according to the quantity that you see fit.
puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	then cauterize with all the cautery which is called "poins".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the wound we had before, until he is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez;	When the liver comes to pain from cold and moisture and great wind, as long as it is forced from its natural complexion due to excess.
et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil;	and the patient is treated with what we have said in divisions, and if it does not profit him, then the patient must be treated on his liver.
et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient;	and mark three cauterizations according to this form and this figure and this quantity on the liver, over the hypochondria, where the gallbladder is located.
et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi;	and there should be space between each cautery the size of a thumb;
et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere;	and let the cauteries be as long as the torso, and do not press too much with your hand on the entire cautery;
et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez;	and let it be burned only halfway to the heart, and let the patient lie straight on his back.
et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais;	and if it cannot lie on its back, let it be supine and extend its legs, and elevate its arms.
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors;	and if you wish to burn these cauteries of the liver, be subtle and skilled in the art, and make sure you do not burn the entire heart, for you would dry up the whole body.
et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	and let it not come to a boil, for the veins are very delicate there, and one must be careful to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile:	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you want to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the capsule:
s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort;	if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain but not too severe;
et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	and if it is in the capsule, the pain is intense.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste;	And when this treatment reaches the membranes, it is necessary that the patient be anesthetized at its head.
et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	and then cut the vein or the abscess, and then heat the cautery which is similar to a ray of sun, as its form is:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers;	And apply the fire cautery until the scars are arid, and continue until syphilis comes, until the eruptions are completely gone;
aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez;	after the treatment according to the treatment of sores until they are healed;
et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	and it is not fitting to use this cautery except by those who have studied long in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have never been corrupted.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he can boldly operate, and always it seems to me that women value it.
dou cautere de pleuresin	for the cautery of pleuresin
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere:	The ancients said that one should make the fire cautery from roots of aristolochia, and in such manner:
pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois;	take one root of aristolochia, the longest you can find, and dry it, making it as thick and as long as you need;
et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe;	and the marrow in oil, and impress with fire, and cauterize with the fire between the shoulder blade and the neck, and two small fires a little descending in the part below the chin;
et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc;	and two cauterizations between the fifth and sixth ribs, inclining slightly backward;
et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules;	and one cauterization between the buttocks, and one above the stomach, and one between the shoulders, and two on the back below the cauterization between the shoulders;
et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	and do not press your hand much, but apply it openly as in anointing.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme;	And an ancient said that no man uses the fire cauterization in place of shaving, and heats it and places it between the ribs until it comes to that abscess.
et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	and when the pain is gone, as we have said for the abscess of the liver.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or fistula arises which cannot be cured.
de la mice	from the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not profit at all, then apply three methods of cautery that are all good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant;	Of which there is a manner such that you make three or four cauteries, aligning according to the length of the mouse, according to the shape of the liver cautery as we have said before.
et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos;	and do not press your hand too much on the cautery, and let the patient often lie on his back;
et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule;	and another manner of cautery is that you heat the cautery with two nerves, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder;
et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	and lift the heart which is near the mouse, or where the stitches of the patient come to the left side, and let the elevations on which you lift the heart be according to the shape of the heart, according to the length of the body, and the cautery be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII.	After pouring out the two flaming wicks until their cores are pierced from the other side, then remove the cautery, and thus it will be four.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	And if you see, cautery the entire cautery to three wicks.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has rotted for a long time, and this must be done differently from the previous wounds.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	The cautery is not suitable for dropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis;	When you cure it according to the methods we have said in divisions, and your cure does not help much, then you must make four cauteries around the wound, and one on the stomach, and one on the liver, and one on the spleen, and two behind the back on the spine, and one at the anus;
et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	and let the cauteries be close to the edge of the wick.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere;	After let the cautery open to drain putridity long enough, and do not delay the treatment of the patient after the cautery.
et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	and the healing would be hastened, and the two intentions would be combined with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit;	The shape of the cautery for the belly should be the claw-like one that we have shown before;
et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	and for the back, it should be olive-shaped, according to what was mentioned before.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire;	When the feet are swollen in those who are dropsical and are full of yellow bile, it is necessary to cauterize on the back of the foot between the auricular and the ring finger.
et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	and hold your hand with the fire cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, otherwise it would burn yellowish, and let the cauterizes be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire;	after make on each leg two cauteries at the tip of the cuticular;
et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe;	and let the cauteries be long, one above the knee in front and the other below, between the legs;
et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse;	and leave the cauteries on for a long time without curing, until the ache subsides;
aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	after the treatment of other wounds as we have said.
de la menoison	of the reduction
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures;	when the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, since the retaining and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are weakened, and cannot be treated by methods of wound care;
et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule;	and you see the patient suffering greatly and with much virtue, make the great cautery on the stomach according to what he has spoken about earlier or stomach cautery, in the cautery circle;
et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	and four small cauteries between the lips for each small cautery, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moistures and the patient suffering, make him undergo the fire cautery on the armpit, and two cauterizations on each leg, and two small cauterizations on the stomach below the large one, for the treatment is beneficial when there is good assistance.
de la cure des emorroydes	For the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres:	When the hemorrhoids are internal or external, and are old and are large cold and moist humors腐化, and are treated as we have said in the sections, and it does not improve, then make cauteries:
III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois;	Three on the spine of the back, that one just above the iliac crest a little bit at a time in a triangular manner, and one cautery below the lip two digits.
et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile;	and if you think that his stomach is cooled and the meat does not cook, and one sees the fat swelling, then heat the fat on the stomach as was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen for the entire cautery.
et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	and let the cautery remain long enough.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment, let the limb heal until it is sane.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the carbuncle which is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit;	When you cauterize the ulcer, heat the cautery until it seems red-hot, and then apply it completely burning over the ulcer being treated.
et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort;	and let your hand remain there until the cautery reaches the base of the vein, so that it heals.
fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit;	do this once or twice, and if there is much ulceration, cauterize each one as we have said.
aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez;	after the application of ointments until they are healed;
et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	and if you cauterize with a large cautery over the navel, it will have greater aid.
de plaie mal curee	of a wound poorly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure incision or opening, which we will describe in its place, comes a disease that cannot be healed except by fire cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is a fistula and it is infected with decayed pus and moisture, you should probe the entire length of the wound with a sharp probe, and ensure that you know the full length of the wound.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing;	heat the cautery until it seems red-hot, and apply it to the fistula according to the quantity that the pus has entered, and reapply the cautery until the corrupt flesh is burned, one time, or two or three times, according to the quantity needed.
et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	and beware of burning the nerves that are nearby, and large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans;	if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestine, beware of these areas, and do not perform this outside the fatty tissue, and think that it is not harmful.
aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement;	after the treatment of the eye until it is healed, and if the eyes are inflamed, and the materials have been removed for a long time, then know that the eyes are completely healed;
et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font;	and if the materials have not been removed, know that the eye is inflamed, and the bone is corrupted.
et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	and in the manner as one of those that we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit;	When pain from cold comes with strong winds, and does not take hold of a woman, then you must cauterize the sides of the ribs on both sides with the claw cautery as we have already mentioned.
et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauterizations in line, and they will do more great aid.
de la vessie	of the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce;	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, so that the patient retains urine, then make a fire cautery in the part below the bladder, where the hairs begin at the base of the penis, both on the right and on the left, and let each cautery be as long as one inch.
et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing;	and make the cautery below the spine, or where you may need it;
et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	and let the cauteries be of the shape as previously described.
de la marris	of the gallbladder
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde;	When the matrix is cold and moist, and does not allow conception as a result, and the flowers are corrupted and their termination delayed;
et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor:	and when they come, there is great pain:
adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos;	then it is necessary to make three cauteries on the cheek, as we have said for the bladder cautery, and two behind the back;
et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	and let the cauteries be on the arm, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble;	When slimy moistures descend to the socket of the hip, and for this reason it moves out of its place; the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together.
et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle;	and find the location from which the slimy moisture departs, and it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the socket of the hip with one cautery resembling a circle, and mark in front of the location within the socket as it turns, so that the socket lies within the circle.
et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	and if the cauteries are such as those from which one has cauterized the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs;	And if such cauteries are not present to you, make three cauteries of olive oil great, and let the cauteries be as perfect as all the quires.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and continue the treatment until he is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene:	When pain comes to the socket of the hip, and it is due to cold and moisture, and the patient has been treated as we said in the division, and the treatment is ineffective, and the disease is old:
adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	then it is necessary that you purge the patient of the large humors with foul pills or other good pills similar.
Aprés li fai cautere;	After you perform the fire cautery;
et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres:	and the manner of the cautery is according to two methods:
c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	that is to say, together with burning medicines, and the fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz:	The fire cautery is carried out in many ways, of which one is such:
que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire;	that you cauterize on the socket of the hip with three triangular cauteries in this form, and do them to good depth and large, with an space the width of a thumb between each cautery, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped;
aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	sometimes the cauterization is done in the middle on the head of the hip, for which there are four according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche;	And if you see, cauterize with the cautery of the circle that we have already mentioned before regarding the dislocation of the hip.
mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	but do it in such a manner that the circle contains the entire hip, and all the points of the knee be arsed.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way we treat sciatica, when the pain remains in the hip and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc;	And if it comes to the thigh and leg, make two cauterizations there or where the patient says the pain is, and one cauterization above the ankle on the left side slightly.
et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur;	and let the cauterizations be with a lancet, and sear the thickness of the knee.
et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	and if the patient feels that the pain extends to two points of the foot or near it, cauterize where he feels the pain with three or four cauterizations called "poins.
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus;	And if the task is, let him do more;
et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the pain is from below the knee to the thigh, then make a fire cautery with a cutellar or circular cautery, and take great care in all your cauteries that you do not leave the cautery on too long so as to burn the nerves and the large arteries, and that you do not cause the patient any greater harm or contraction.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who performed a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it on too long until the leg was completely swollen, and the foot as well, and all the feet were pierced and corrupted.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After a belly purge from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pains are in two parts together, perform a cautery in one and in the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce;	And the wise men said about the cautery for the hip, as follows: make the iron such that it is at the head as thick as a nail's head, or a bit less, and let it be jagged, and let it be between the fingers and be from one finger's breadth to another of the quantity of a nut's length;
et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait;	and let the splints be over two parts, and be also like nuts, and have one iron hand well made.
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit;	And let it be heated until it is completely red and emit sparks, and then place it on the socket of the injured hip, and turn it towards the healthy side.
et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors;	and let the cautery be applied once the heat is reduced and leave it for three days;
et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens;	and then apply a poultice of butter, and keep the wound open long enough.
aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	after the ointment treatment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent;	Albucasim says that we use this cautery little because of the fear of its sight, and we see few who use it.
et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	and wherever this is well cauterized, who can bear it, and let it be where it adheres.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi;	The cautery for burning medicine is made by preparing an instrument of tongs in which the margin of the mouthpiece descends, and it should be made of tin or iron on one side long, and at the height of two nails, and each should have the size of a thumb.
et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	and be open at the top and above, and join together according to this form.
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche;	After placing the hip box on the patient lying on their side with the healthy side up, and pressing your hand firmly on the hip box;
aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	after pouring between the two circles of the hot awe for a little while heated on fire, and let it remain one hour or so, and allow the patient to endure the heat and the burning.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu;	Because there is also a bite from a fire.
et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit;	and when the bite has passed, remove your hand with the instrument and lift the awed side gently, and leave it for three days, and apply butter until the blackness from the scalding is removed.
et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait;	and let it remain for three days that the putrefaction draws out;
et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	and this would be the last aid after the treatment with ointments until he is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument;	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, apply the tool that hurts awe according to what you did for the hip equally;
et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	and this is the way of the hot awe, and I have written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, as much of one as the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir;	or there be the small hole pierced such that the point of a razor may be able to enter;
et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main;	and place in it another that is well weighted, and put on alkali and wax and mild awe, as much as there are two on top of the powders as you will have well impressed with your hand;
et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	and leave it thus until the wax and lead descend in the awe. Then take all that awe, and throw it on wax and alkali as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres.	And then it will become very wet and is administered in degrees of medicinal works and other limb cauteries.
Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	For it makes great work like fire, and with other medicines where one cauterizes well the hip as with tinese and honey of anacard and chalk with soap, all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a treatment where a noble was cured of the pain in the hip and sciatic vein, and the loincache, and says that no other treatment was done, and he was cured at one time when this treatment was performed, and he bathed as he teaches hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie;	And it is said in such a manner that you take fresh and dry litharge green, and grind it much with a little grease, and apply it to the hip and thigh and leg where the pain resides, and mix it;
et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	and he leaves it for three hours and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the burning.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him enter the bath until his body is slightly warmed, and make him go to bed, and the pain will all go away and he will be cured.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such a cautery with these medicines if it is not after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout;	And Dioscorides said that when the sciatic vein is cauteryed with sheep's fat, it greatly helps;
et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	and the cautery must be made in such a manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take wool and grease it with old oil, and apply it to the depression between the big toe and the other toe called the fossicle.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains;	After taking dry sheep's fat, hold it over fire until it becomes hot coals, and place it on the wool, and let it remain until it is cool;
et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee;	and do this again, and continue in this manner until you think by sense that it has reached the hip, and the pain is ceased.
et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	and this manner of cautery is called "sheep cautery.
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain from the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back from falling or percussion or due to too great an evacuation or similar to matter expanded cold, none of these circumstances calls for cautery, though it may be necessary for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir;	It must be that the patient is free of foul pills or other similar things, and upon their back, where the pain resides, three lines marked with enche, in each line five cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can bear;
et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»;	and the cauteries should be done according to the cautery called "poins";
et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	and if you see, make three or four cauteries at the medium clavicle according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor;	Many times this illness comes upon small children, and the signs of the beginning are that their throat is narrow when they arise, and fear;
et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	and you find at the last spine of the back and in us the appearance that comes on the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and find it needs to be treated, cauterize it with the circular fire cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	That the cauterization for each part of the spine increases accordingly.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, cauterize between the spines with a painful fire cautery two or three lines wide, and let the points be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After the treatment of the limb until it is healed as we have said, and make sure you do not apply a fire cautery to swelling that is in the spasm of a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere:	And when joint pains are due to moistures spread throughout each limb of the body, and when pain comes in the feet, which they call "podagre" properly, and when it is from a cold cause and cannot be cured by applications of medicines, it is cured by cautery in such a manner:
fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	make many cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive oil according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need to prick the sole of the foot, let the cautery be as large as what we call "point.
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire;	And if the pains come as far as the knees and other joints, and this happens often, then make cauteries on each knee III or IV in each part, for the entire cautery with olive oil:
et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	and if you have need of more, do more, but not to keep your hand away for longer than until the coals of the fire are extinguished.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and the back, apply the cautery as we have said in our chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes;	And if the pains are in the hands, make pricks around the wrist two lines;
et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main;	and if there remains any pain in the fingers, make pricks at each joint and above the hair of the hand;
et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	and if the pains come as far as the elbows or as far as the shoulders, cautery each part, and give good governance to the patient and prudent medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give it good governance and purge the humor, it will be healed by the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the syphax
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor;	And when rupture comes in veins, and the bulges descend to the groin and this is newly occurring, then it is necessary that when you see them incised, he not eat at all that day;
et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre;	and when he uses things that alleviate the belly, so that the phlegm descends from his belly;
aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors;	after placing it on its back between your hands, and instruct him to stretch its belly until the boils are healed, then reduce them with your fingers and mark a line under the break in the bone of the arm, and make sure the mark is similar to half a circle above the body;
puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	then heat the cautery coal that has the form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	while it remains white and gives off scents.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu;	then reduce the boils to their place;
et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier;	and the minister stretches his hand so that the boils do not return;
et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains;	and tend well to the thighs of the patient, and place a cushion and a mat over the thighs, and another over the foot that gives pain to the hands;
puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os;	then place the cautery on the mark on your hand, and hold it straight and hold it until you reach the bone, and if you do not reach the bone the first time, repeat another time until you come to the bone;
et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere;	and carefully ensure that the boil does not burst when you apply the cautery;
que tu ne le brulasses;	and do not burn it;
et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	and that the patient does not die from this, or other harms.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not reach the bone with the fire cautery, your efforts amount to nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure;	And it must be that the cauteries for children are fine according to the measure of their size, and those for adults as large according to their measure.
aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee;	after three days, cure the skin around the butter cautery until the scalding is removed.
aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee;	after the initial treatment with other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on their back for forty days until the wound is well healed.
et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	and it must be that the poultices are applied for a long time, so that the boils do not come to a head when he goes into rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors;	And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, apply a well-made bandage, and keep it for another forty days.
et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire;	and have good rest, that he works little and guards against too great fullness from drinking and eating, and from too loud shouting;
et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	and when he follows this instruction, he is completely cured.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say after the treatment to shave in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur;	When ruptures occur in other organs and are known, and you see that they do not increase, then apply the fire cautery as many times as necessary according to their quantity, and let it burn for one-third of the time.
aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit;	after the treatment as we have said;
et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	and none of the ancients have said that it should be cauterized with a fire cautery at three angles in this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but mark the midpoint of the wound and draw a line along its width above the rupture, and another below it, and run your hand through all the cautery points.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterizations are lighter and more painful.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	from old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, due to falling or injury, and that pain lasts a long time, and the cure of medicine is not effective, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "poins," and the cauterizations should be according to the length of the limb and its smallness and weakness and its virtue and location of twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien;	if it is healed from the first cautery, it is well;
se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	if this name, recommence with another cautery on that one, because such custom is that it must change to the part nearest to it, so you must make the cauteries as long as the patient is healed.
de meselerie	by means of craftiness
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The diseases are sometimes aided once by the fire cautery with great help, and especially those diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief:	Cannot you see the patient needs cautery, take care that the disease is at the beginning, and it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and neither spreads nor remains, and if you doubt that the corruption may spread throughout the patient, then you make five cauteries on the head:
I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous;	I place the cautery on the neck, and the other towards the forehead at the end of the hairline;
et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel;	and on the two horns, and the rear one on the scapula;
et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir;	and let your hand remain until the cautery reaches the bone, and until the bark is removed so that the vapors of the excess humors can escape.
et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	and cauterize on the mouse according to what is said before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse;	And if the mixture is spread everywhere;
et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules;	and if it is clearly effective, then you must cauterize with the cautery as we have said or chief, and the third on the spine of the neck, and six on the spine of the back, and one large one on the shoulder blade and another on the side, and two on the two shoulders;
et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains;	and two over the shins, and two over the tendons of the foot, one over each joint of the hands and feet, and over the depressions of the hands;
et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler;	and take care of the nerves that are over the buttocks, so you do not burn them;
et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	and once the fire cautery is done on the bone of the thigh, one more on the bone of the abdomen, and one more on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite;	And know that the more fire cauteries you perform, the more aid you provide, and they profit from it;
et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the sick do not feel pain from the fire cautery as the healthy do, because their body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it must be that the cauteries are large and small according to the members and joints, according to those you will find in kinds of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After the cure, apply a paste of flour and honey with other treatments until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre;	When swelling comes to any limb and is treated with medicines and oils and poultices, and it is not yet healed, then I make cauterizations on the limb according to its size and smallness.
et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur;	and let the cauterization be a little deeper in the thickness of the knee.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure;	And sometimes the cauterization is done with a hot iron and on the back, at the end of the nerve that causes the limb to lose movement, and thus the swelling is removed.
et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	and in any case, no one should intervene unless they know the limbs and the exits of the moving nerves of the body.
de albaras	of scabs
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color;	When the disease called "albaras" is advanced, and medical remedies are of no use, then cauterize with a slightly hot cautery, according to the thickness of the keratin, until the whiteness is removed and its color changes.
puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie;	then treat with a cure of flour of vervain and lentils with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and blood from colen and blood from alondra, each in part;
et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	and mix all together, and wrap with a cloth, and apply to the place until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the cauterization of the chancre
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When the chancre begins and you see it stop, cauterize with a circle-shaped cautery around the entire circumference of the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre;	And the sage said that one should also cauterize at the center of the sore.
et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois;	and in all ways it seems to me not good, for I fear that it may be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have had it happen this way more than once.
et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	and more improper is that it be cauterized between, in the cautery called "circule," as we have said when discussing cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens;	When someone has an illness called "adubelati," and it delays death either due to its excess or because of the acidity of the patient when they are decrepit (that is, too old), and the patient has little blood, or due to the tension;
et tu la vues haster de meurer:	and you see it hasten its death:
adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant;	then the cauterization is done with many small cauteries pricking.
aprés le laisse ensi.	after he lets it be thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	Car she will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierce through the entire cautery, heat the cautery as described here:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of the disease called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced through the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it on the other side in this manner so that the course of putrefaction is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire cure with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another manner of disease is called "corrodens," and it is nothing other than a corrosion of the member, for it eats away at the members just as fire consumes dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est;	If you see this disease in a patient who can bear the entire fire cauterization, then heat the cautery claws very small and large, according to what is appropriate for the part or where the disease is.
aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	after the cauterization from all sides until you have eradicated all the corruption, and nothing of it remains, that everything which is corrupt be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then let it be for three days, and place on the cauterized parts a sufferable dressing with oil until the burn marks from the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the application of ointments producing flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin;	And if you see after three days that healthy flesh does not arise, it is good.
et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	and if not, resume the fire cautery on that which is delayed from the corrupted parts.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu;	And this mixture has been cured with medicinal water instead of the fire cautery once.
mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division:	but still, the fire cautery is of greater help. I have already mentioned the treatment with medicinal water in the division.
pren la quant tu en as mestier.	take the quantity you need.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of blisters that come to the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times, at the feet due to fires, a disease arises which is called "clos" according to our understanding, and it is a large lump that hardens the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterization for this disease is done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, the fire cauterization, and the hot aqueous cauterization.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges;	Fire cautery is when you heat the cautery tip as if it were the shaft of a cinder-tooth (a type of implement), and it should be made of good iron to the size that it can hold a nail from all sides, and it should have thin edges.
aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou;	after heating it up on the nail, turn your hand all around the nail until it comes to the end of the nail;
et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture;	and let it be thus for three days until it begins to rot with pus;
puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	then apply a plaster of crushed wild mallows with salt, and leave the plaster on all through the night, and the nail will fall off and be uprooted from its roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then anoint the limb with healing ointment until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude;	And if they have been converted by fire on the body, and this happens often in hands and feet, then you must apply a hot water cautery to it.
et est en teil maniere:	and it is in such a manner:
pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues;	take a needle of iron or a branch of willow, and place it on the nail and the althea, that is to say for warts;
et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine;	and place the needle so that it burns completely around, then put some hot awn on it, and hold your hand well, and press your hand turning it such that the edge of the needle comes to the base of the nail, and then find the hot awn deep path all the way to the base.
et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre;	and let the patient endure for a while the burning from the hot awn for an hour.
puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	then leave it like this, and it will fall off completely with all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Make one after another until you dry all that is in the body, then treat the wounds that are caused by burns.
li cure dou trembler	treat the shivering
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee;	When any person trembles from cold or nerves, or from quartan fever or other ailments, it is fitting that you make four or four cauteries on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra.
et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire;	and one cautery at the waist, and one on the stomach at the olive cautery.
si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	and let it trembling, and hasten the recovery of the health of the cold illness.
des pustules puans	pus-filled blisters
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	At times apparent through the body bathed, or pus-filled blisters, that come from large corrupted matters.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule:	then it is fitting at the first when they appear that you make a cautery on each head of the pustule.
un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	a subtle cautery of myrtle wood, the tip being set on fire, or of long aristole root, or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez;	And sometimes the cauterization one begins when they appear, according to this manner, and they do not permit growth of tumors in front, but the excesses from which they come are broken off, and they are healed.
mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut.
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses;	Many times there are great losses of blood from the artery which is cut by the wound or in the incision of the abscess, or in the cauterization of the member, and similar things.
et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	and it is most foul to smell.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus;	And in any case, when this happens to anyone, hasten to place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it tightly until the bleeding stops beneath your finger, and no more blood flows.
puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge;	then heat the olive cauteries, both small and large, until they are entirely red.
puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	then apply it, whether large or small according to the wound and the limb in which the artery runs, and place the cautery over that vein where you hold your hand, and keep the cautery there until the blood is coagulated.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it leaps out when you remove your finger from above the vein, and the cauteries are used, so take quickly another from the cauteries that are in the flame.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez;	And do not cease to do this one after another until the blood is coagulated;
et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide;	and beware that you do not burn the nerve nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient;
et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit:	and know that when blood flows from the artery, one cannot coagulate it well by itself when the artery is large, unless it is by one of the four methods that we have said:
ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc;	or by fire cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by strong tying with thread, or by medicines placed on which have the power to draw out blood;
et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	and may be tied and held at the onset.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will treat the stench from lime closely with cloths or put burning things there, or other similar things, if it does not help much, then it should be discontinued.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne;	And if this happens to anyone and they have neither mirror nor medicine present, they should place their index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and extend it well so that it is drawn out above the wound and above the vein;
et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez;	and do not move the thread, but moisten it often with cold dew that it may be very cold until the blood is frozen and collected and drawn out;
et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	and make incisions in front of the parts that require cauterization and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book on wound treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres;	We have told you in the first chapter where it is fitting to use the fire cautery or the cautery of burning medicines, and the blisters and their causes and the instruments and the forms of the cauteries;
et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	and I have set out this chapter from the hand to the foot, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same way as one finds it more easily.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And since I begin this, it is necessary, dear friend, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first on the cauteries, and for this reason it is necessary greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses;	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things;
ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	or there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I advise you that you undertake no folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many kinds of people come for treatment.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice;	if coming from those who are so affected by their illness that they die slightly due to the fear they find in their illness, and because of the severity of their malady;
et de ces doit on avoir paor.	and from these one must have fear.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit:	And of these, some give their sense and say:
«atendez, je sui garis»;	wait, I am healed";
et li maladie est despitouse.	and the illness is sudden.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los;	It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you and have this manner, but put more careful consideration in your honor than in your greed, and do not readily give of what you are uncertain, but only of what you can take and lose;
et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie;	and use pronouncement and indication in the treatment of your patients for their health to be converted;
et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	and he will help you to acquire good reputation, and glory, and lasting memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear friend, Our Lord gives you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to breathe in the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have instructed this chapter by discussing it section by section, as I did in the chapter on fire cauteries, where I spoke of the head down to the feet, because you will find it more easily comprehensible.
dou chief plein d’aigue	of the head full of fluid
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant;	Know that this disease comes very often to children at birth, and when the birthing hands hold too tightly the head of the child.
et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	and sometimes it comes from a cause that we do not know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors;	And I have never seen this disease occur in anyone other than children, and among those I have seen, many died quickly.
et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And because of this, it seems to me that I should leave the work in partial treatments.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir;	And I saw the child whose shoulder was full of fluid, and the head was growing larger each day to the point it could no longer support it.
et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os;	and the moisture was so great that it caused death, and this moisture is gathered around the bone above the scaphoid, between the heart and the bone.
et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large;	and the operations must be such that if the moisture is between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you make a wide incision through the head.
et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre;	and let it be as long as two of our fingers, so that the moisture can drain.
et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	and see the form of the spatumile:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is greater, and the abscess is larger, make two incisions in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs that you see at the corners of the shoulder for each part, and the sharp pain when you press it from within with your hand, this does not concern you:
si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	it is necessary that you make three cuts in the shoulder in this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract all the moisture out.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor;	After dressing the cuts with cloths and powders, and applying wine and oil, leave it thus for five days;
puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	then release it, and treat the wound with tents and ointments, and let the shoulder strengthen gradually. Then give the patient dry meat with a little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue;	And another method of incising is that you look for where the abscess is largest, and the collection of pus;
car aucune fois est elle devant;	for it never occurs before;
aucune fois derrier;	no time behind;
aucune fois en destre;	no time on the right;
et aucune fois en senestre.	and no time on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir;	Cut accordingly where the abscess is largest, and where the collection of pus is, making the incision according to your ability;
et warde que tu ne coper l’artere;	and be sure not to cut the artery;
et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	and let the blood flow freely, so that the patient heals through the discharge of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of rheumatism
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When someone has a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or the testicles, and the disease is ancient, and medical treatment does not help much, then the last remedy is the cautery with that of which one will cauterize the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief;	Therefore, when you are to see the patient, the sick person must turn their head;
aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel;	after rubbing the area with an abrasive cloth until the arteries are visible, then remove the sick person's collar completely;
puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues;	then look where the vein is located, and the ears are behind both sides, and they are slightly raised;
puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	then mark the edges with ink, then incise both sides with a sharp spatulum in two parts, until the vein is cut to the bone, and this should be done on the wide part of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, place the spatule over the artery and cut above it, cutting as much as twice through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, let the blood flow out continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os;	And if the artery does not open with pressure, then measure the quantity of three doux, mark with ink, and cut until the bone.
et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere;	and what must be let out of the blood is 6 quarts, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery;
puis regarde la plaie:	then examine the wound:
s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	if it remains on the bone point of syphilis, and the abscess does not come to a head, then incise the wound and apply a dressing, and treat with ointment until it heals.
de emigrainne	Of emigrainne
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When ancient emigrainne comes, and acute cataract, due to the moistures of tears and the heats in the temples and old, ancient fever and similar things, and it is treated with methods of medicinal treatments and all such means do not benefit it, then extract the arteries in the temples and use cautery, as we have recounted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit;	And the method for extracting them is that the patient should pull from the hairs of his temples, and feel for the artery that appears in the temple, for it appears well by its pulsation, and is little displaced in some people who are too cold.
et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement;	and if it is bound, draw the patient's neck with some cloths, then rub the back with a rough cloth, and wash the back with hot water until the arteries appear clearly.
puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	then take the spatula of copper that is in the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie;	then cauterize the skin lightly until you see the artery, then draw it up with forceps, and pull away all the threads that are beneath each part;
et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	and if the artery is thin, turn it with the point of the bisturi, then cut that part according to the size of the two shoulders.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, neither will the stone pass completely through.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III;	and draw blood from six parts, until three;
et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc;	and if the artery is large, you must tie it with two strong threads of silk, that putrefaction not arise before the suddenness of the wound, and prevent hemorrhage.
puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez;	then cut the excess skin between the two threads in that same hour, and then, if you see fit, apply the cautery of the surgical cautery to the bone until the shoulder is severed.
et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	and this is the main work, if the patient has no fever and he is of warm complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors:	For the cauteries are help to finish the moistures:
por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	for it is of greater help in finishing the moistures.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites;	Or it is necessary for the extraction of arteries to fill the cavity with old cotton and place something well-made over it;
et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and when they are removed, it should be treated with dry medicinal substances that promote healing, and with bandages until it is healed;
et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez;	and if there is no cord from the artery as much as you work, then hasten to cauterize with fire, or fill the cavity with vitriol and squeeze it with your hand so that it dries up;
et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient;	and if you do not have this at hand, place on the cavity your finger so that it dries, and remove the cotton with cold water until it is saturated, and hold it steady as it should be;
et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	and he who is more weakened and lighter in the extraction of the artery, you should cauterize the vein of this cutting cautery in two parts, but the cutting edges be well thick to hold longer their heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too cold, they hold less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus;	And it should have between the two knives a thickness of good space, and when you have joined the two ends, then place the hot iron on it until it comes just to the bone, and cut the vein in two parts.
et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout;	and let them be spaced apart between the two heads because they are not joined together by this cautery from end to end.
et c’est li forme dou cautere:	and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis;	When the tears from the eyes are flowing down the veins that are on the side of the head, and medical treatment does not help, and you see the patient's face turn red, and feel tremors on the forehead as if from shivering.
et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	and when they are held and moist so that the hairs of the papers fall out, and the papers become heated, and scalded by the heat of the tears, it needs this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front;	And the ancients called it "bruised wound treatment," and you should do this for a patient who has this illness: have them lie on their back and mark the hairs they have or on their forehead, then make three equal divisions or grooves on the forehead according to its length.
et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres;	and let one of the grooves be just like the other two all along the forehead downward to the neck, and the others on both sides above the papers, and take care not to incise the arteries that are above the papers on both sides.
et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins;	and move your hand away from the continuity of the two mandibles, and let each wound be the size of three doyles through joined.
et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	and have prepared a piece of sponge and a bit of cloth to wipe the blood, then apply the sharp end of the spatula from both sides where it is formed.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision;	from the incision which is down to the second incision;
et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	and cauterize the entire heart that is between the two grooves until the subcutaneous tissue above the bone, then do the same from the middle incision to the other second one, and then remove firmly this spatula.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you insert into the first cut the instrument called "cultellaire", and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side is a scoop, not sharp, and this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the blade cutting towards the buttock at the core, and the scoop blade towards the bone, and keep it in place until it reaches the middle cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer;	and cauterize all the vessels that descend to the eyes until the incision is continuous down to those that appear on the heart, then do the same from the middle groove to the other opening.
et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris;	and then extract the blood evenly, and press out the limb for the blood taken;
puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne;	then place a tent of old cotton in each fissure, and cover with moistened cloths in wine and oil and grease, and keep the abscesses from forming.
et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and on the third day release the bandage, and apply great plantain in hot water, then treat with basilicon ointment and rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	of eye pain
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees;	When someone frequently gets acute catarrh, and you see the eyes swollen and small, and weakening of vision, and burned papers;
et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue;	and the hair itches, and when they scratch at the pain, the patients sneeze;
adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	then know from these accidents that those materials and the catharrhe do not come forth only from many veins, and the more they are cured, so it is.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you should instruct the patient to look behind their forehead, then make a large incision through the forehead, and another one of lesser width.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os;	And start from the incision of the left temple to the right temple, and let it be an incision up to the bone;
et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier;	and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when eating;
et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin;	and when the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, then dry between the two edges of the incision and put old cotton, and line it with linen;
puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut;	then bind above with moist cloths in wine and oil, and guard against a hot abscess.
quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	when it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat with excipients that promote flesh growth.
En teil maniere:	In a similar manner:
pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre;	take 2 parts of flour of wheat, and 4 parts of colocynth, and make a plaster;
et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	and administer this in the wounds to promote flesh growth throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the blocking of the ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses:	All that falls into the ears is one of the four things:
ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer;	or grains, or beast, or mine stone or similar thing like iron;
ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois;	or seed, like grain, beans, peas;
ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	or fluid-like substances like water and oils and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it falls into the ear a stone or some other kind of thing that does not stick to the ear and does not grow in the ear, put the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction;	If you see the stone, and it exudes any drop of violet oil or silk worm oil, then proceed with its extraction.
et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine;	and cause the patient to sneeze by condisi, and stop the nose with a plug when the sneezing begins, and place in the ear pieces of cloth or wool.
et estent l’oreille au desus.	and put the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure;	Many times a fistula comes about from this treatment;
et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come about, the patient undergoes the extraction with subtle forceps, of which its form is this:
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin;	If it bursts with the forceps, that is good;
se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure;	and if not, the patient undergoes the extraction with the fine hook of small curvature;
et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne;	and if it does not burst with that, make a spider's thread and insert the end of the thread or a hole in the ear firmly, and plug around the thread with soft wax so that the fistula cannot enter with the thread;
puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit;	then let the treatment continue, for often it comes to force as we have said;
et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor;	and if it does not come to force in any way, take glue of gum and take the awls, and put in some instrument which is sharp for this purpose, and put a little cotton between;
puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	then press the glue on the stone or whatever it is, and force the treatment.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme;	and if it does not come to force from all these things that we have said, hasten to incise the ear as one would an abscess filled with pus and decayed tissue.
et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant;	and the manner of the incision is that you first anesthetize the patient with the shoulder treatment, and draw out the blood according to the measure of its virtue, then place the patient's head between your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small incision at the root of the ear where the fat or bone depends.
et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche;	and let the incision be as wide as a moon, until you reach the stone, then remove it according to your power, and suck it hastily with your mouth;
et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and continue the treatment until he is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction;	And if it is a grain that is embedded and inflamed, administer the extraction;
et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	and if it cannot come out, administer the spatule with a fine blade according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces;	But do not do this if you think the grain is moist from ear moisture, until you have made many pieces.
puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	then extract it with fine tongs and in suction, as we have said, so that the extraction is gentle.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the water that falls into the ear, then the patient should use nose blowing with initial conditions, and plug the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let them lie on that same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it drains forcefully through that, that is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu;	if not, take several stones according to the length of your strong and light hand, and heat them slightly on fire;
et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille;	and place one or two of his ear stones on it. Strike from another side with another stone on the stone that is in the ear;
et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer;	and continue to strike the stone on the stone until the fluid runs out completely, and then it will run out completely;
et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars;	and if you see, take a rush, and place one of the heads in the ear, and the other head over fire until the rush is well heated;
puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	then repeat with other rushes until the fluid runs out completely, as we have said in the case of the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division;	In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small size, like a flea or similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division.
mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures;	but if it is of large size that can be felt, apply the extraction with forceps;
et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	and it is the thing easiest to remove that is in the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil:	In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and for distillations, and the cure does not help much, then you should look at the ear with the sun.
s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	if there are no worms apparent, draw them out with fine forceps, and if they do not appear, use the wire of the form.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it is narrow inside and wide outside.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine;	And insert the finest needle into the ear according to the quantity of the patient's suffering, then proceed gradually to the entire canal;
fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	Do this often enough that all the worms come out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere;	And if they do not obey to come out, stuff the canal with cotton as I have said in the case of the stone.
et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations;	And if they do not come out forcefully as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven effective in removing worms, and you will find them discussed in treatises on distillations.
et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, of which the form is as you see:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller;	And let it be of thin silver or tin, below the small hole, and above the spout for distillation.
et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton;	And for pressing within the distillation to the well-made instrument of tin, and if you wish take the rasp and envelop around the tip akin to cotton.
puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille;	Then throw in your oil or juice, and what you wish from your medicines into the wick, and the wick be in the ear.
puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille;	Then pour the rasp into all the cotton, and press your hand firmly until the oil is distilled or movement of the ear.
et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille;	And let the patient feel it inside, and let the distillations be slightly heated on the fire as if one were distilling in the ear.
et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	and keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the blocking of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles;	No child is born who has no perforations in the ears;
et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir;	and the same thing happens to adults due to a wound clot or flesh grown inside the ear, and these clots sometimes do not allow them to be seen in the ear.
et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	and sometimes the perforation is only partially blocked, and one can see through it well.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil;	That which is blocked and one cannot see through it, often requires careful treatment, and in such cases, you should place the ear of the patient in the sun.
et regarde dedens:	and look within:
se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	if you see the operation apparent, if the work has all this spatumile of which this is formed:
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille;	And be sharp and cutting both in front and behind, so that it does not damage the ear;
se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	if the operation is on cartilage or tissue of the ear, use fine forceps, and gently scrape it until all the cartilage is removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the excision is performed in the ear, take the fine razor gently and heat it a little on fire, then place it over the ear wax.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille;	If you sense the operation where the patient feels pain in the ear, gently puncture it, and make sure not to damage the nerves of the ear.
puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	then place in the ear a tent according to the size of the puncture, and fill it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet;	Make this for any day while the wound is healing, or take a tent and marrow in rosewater, and powder on ground glass.
et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	and if you see the ear swollen, it is necessary to treat the tent and move another wet tent made of rose oil and wax until the swelling is removed.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then cure it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, soak a sponge and cloth in cold water, place it on the ear, and use other treatments that remove the bleeding which are or involve distillation.
de la char des papieres	from the juice of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines;	This is the herb that comes from papers of eyes when they are moist and are dried. It is necessary to spread them with tongs and forceps, and the decoction of a spathillum from its roots.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	then put on the glass ground.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues;	And if without scraping, cauterize with the thin lens cautery, and the cauterizer after incision moves.
et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines;	and often return, since nothing remains of their roots;
et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	and when they are cauterized with fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	Of the hailstone.
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz;	Many times on the eyelids come papers that appear like hail in their shape and hardness, and because of this, this illness is called "hail," and it is an assembly of moisture large within the paper above and below.
li ovraiges est telz:	The operations are such:
pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir;	take heed of the one who is mute on both sides, and this is a light matter to know;
fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	then cut it open wide, then brandish each part lightly, then take it with the tongs, and clamp it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide;	if you cannot clamp it without piercing a bit the paper, then do not harm the patient;
et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	and if the cut is large, suture it up, and treat it until it heals;
et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	and if it is small, do not apply much force, for the ointments will restore it quickly and generate flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre;	and if the shoulder is dislocated inside the ear towards the upper part, turn the paper, and expose the shoulder with tongs, and clamp and press it from both sides.
et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien;	and if the paper is removed by the incision, it matters not;
et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	and when the boil is cut, rinse the eye with salt water, and treat the wound with what flows from it until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	from the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz;	Exinach is a grease that is extracted from the rags of paper bags, and this happens more to children than to adults, and greatly harms their eyes, causing catarrh in the mornings, and they cannot look at the light of the sun because tears rush to their eyes.
et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	and because of this, they lie on their faces down, and sleep thereon, and have their papers beneath them that are moist with exinach which inflames and conceals the appearance in their eyes.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press on the shoulder between your fingers and feel the exinach within.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain;	And the manner of the work is such that the patient places their head on your side;
et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li;	and then take a linen cloth, and set up a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity that contains outside each part, then put it on;
et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle;	and press with your fingers on both sides, so that the outside parts are gathered within the circle;
puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne;	and make in the middle of the moisture a slit with a sharp spoon, and let it not be any wider than the incision we make in the healthy vein;
et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach;	and open the skin thoroughly until you see the outside parts;
et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	and in many positions there comes out from the wound exudate according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars;	Draw out then entirely one piece of cloth between thy two fingers at the wound, and turn thy hand to right and left until it is dispersed;
et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	and keep that thou dost not adder in the wound, that thou come not to all the space until the eye, that thou bleach it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere;	And if the exudate does not open at the beginning of the wound, so enlarge a bit the wound lightly until it opens.
puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	then draw out as we have said, then weten with a cloth and in water, and put upon the wound, and drain of lint.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if such men who grind grain and put it there to腐化 those remaining moistures.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat until he is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if there is an abscess hot in the wound, treat with soothing poultices until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	of the hairs of paper
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz;	When in papers grow hairs different from the natural ones, and are established, they harm the eyes, and bring about diseases such as accustomed tears, softening of the papers, and albugine, until it is a cause of destruction of the eyes;
et est li cure selonc IIII manieres:	and it is the treatment according to four methods:
ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	or by fire cautery altogether with heat, or by aqueous medicine as in the chapter on cautery, and it is done or by incision and suturing or by cantharides, according to what I shall say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre;	It is necessary that you place the head of the patient on your healthy side, then turn the paper of the eye to your left hand;
s’elle est convertie, c’est boin;	if it is converted, it is good;
se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus;	if not, prick with a needle along the entire thread;
et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur;	and let the thread be on the edge of the paper where the hair grows from these hairs, and pull the thread up across the entire paper, and shave it with a razor;
puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit;	then cut in the part beneath the paper, beneath the adjusted hairs, all the way to the sputum hole from the large hair down to the small one;
puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	then extract the thread, and place a small tent of cotton and cloth under the paper, then sprinkle on the paper an amount like the leaf of juniper, as you see fit for the quantity removed from the paper which is divided for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie;	And if there is someone who needs it, one should use a great quantity of the paper according to how much the paper has been softened.
puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit;	then fill the spatula up to two lines that you have marked, and begin with the large spoon until small.
et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute;	and let one be a groove near the natural hairs in the size of a root, then pour an ounce into one of the two corners of the ear, then cauterize it completely.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce;	then缝合两个唇部用一根细羊毛线穿过针眼，然后擦去血迹，并在两条丝线上刮除多余的线头，如果你打算这样做。
et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII;	and if you do not, then do not worry about it, simply leave the stitch and the threads for three or four days.
puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor;	then treat the wound without a stitch with drying and binding substances, for the paper remoistens suddenly from the wound and its assembling, but the stitch is moved (as the ancients say), and these are works without fear;
et si a une autre maniere:	and if in another manner:
et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	and if you moisten the paper with a shape that is as large as the leaf of myrtle, as we have recounted, sew it on three sides according to the form which is described:
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then apply those that surpass the small forces evenly according to the form which is given here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure;	And if you do not have the strength to hold the forceps, and the thing is not equal, take an needle with one thread, and sew through the shape;
et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment;	and pull out one thread from the large wick, and the second thread from the small one, and join the two threads evenly;
puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then lift your hand evenly, and lift all the skin above where you have marked, as we have recounted, then join the two edges of the wound by suturing, and treat until it is healed;
et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans;	and if an abscess comes to your incision, soothe it with a plaster and similar soothing ointment;
et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit:	and sometimes the hair of the paper is converted:
si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision;	then you must use what we have said about the incision:
mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	but the stitch on one side and the other is more artificialized.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme:	The treatment for canine teeth is according to this form:
et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est;	and you must convert the paper and cut it inside according to what I have said, and then make two canine teeth by art, and two ligaments also long as the paper and as wide as the spacing is.
et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz;	and hold the threads at the head of the part where you have the fibers.
puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment;	then assemble the one and the other delicately on what surmounts from the paper of the oil, and hold the two canine teeth from the two parts firmly.
et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	and let it thus for some days, and the skin which is constrained will die, wither, and rot, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	If it delays, and the wound has strength, then treat it until it heals.
et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil;	and when the wound is healed, and the paper is lifted, the hairs will not grow anymore.
et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	and this is the form of the two cauterizations that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width:
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil;	the operation is such that you take a sharp needle, and thread through it thin and subtle.
puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc;	then join the heads and tie both subtly, and let the length of the threads be one palm long;
puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil;	then arrange in the chase another thin silk thread briefly, and tie the heads of the threads together;
puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain;	then place the patient's head on your side;
et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil;	and keep away from the sun so that the work be clear, for it is a delicate and small operation. Then place the needle throughout the chase at the root of the added hair, and pierce the paper quickly as you pull it over the natural hair.
puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors;	then extract the hair until it reaches the chase, and place that hair in the chase if there is one or two or three or more.
puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	then draw out your hand when the hairs have grown outside completely through the paper with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil;	And if the paper is treated and the hairs do not come through with it, draw out the paper from around all the threads that you have ordered, until the paper comes through completely above and you see it with the eye's sight;
adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus;	Then draw out the paper and the threads, and close the eye and leave it closed for 2 days or 3, until the hair grows in its place and flesh appears above.
et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the hair is small, accompany it with a long natural hair, and lift it along with that one or leave it, until it stretches, then release it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the putrefaction of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres:	When this illness which is called "aleacrait" or corruption comes to the eye, there are two ways of it:
l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly due to a wound, or surgery, or the fire cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee;	And the manner of the work in it is that you cut the seam, and separate the edges of it, and put within sutures of linen, and bind it tightly until it is healed;
et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	and it is not fitting that you use in the treatment of such things that dry and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere;	For if you do this, the disease will return worse than the first.
mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic;	but use things that soften, such as fenugreek.
et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	and let the application of water or vinegar and linseed that have been cooked, and unguents melted in any oil, be applied, and wrap it in a cloth.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant;	And the dressing of your wound is that you take care that it does not heal improperly according to the form it had before.
et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	and these works that we have said must be applied such that the illness does not return according to the form it had before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes into the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans;	The accident comes from wounds and cuts and cauterizations and similar things.
et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char;	and the method of the work is that you take a needle, in which there is double thread, and sew into the flesh, and make the thread pierce from left to right so that the threads pass through two heads of the flesh.
puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	then the flesh is drawn above to all the needle, and the skin to the broad surface.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin;	And if the shape of the paper figure returns as it should, that is good;
se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere;	and if not, take the scissors and place them in the裂口，然后转动纸张，在纸内侧形成两个裂口；
et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»;	and let the heads of the two cuts be at the two angles of the incision you have made, and make angles such that when they are assembled, the shape is as in the shape of a letter which has an "I" or "griesche".
puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne;	then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that your fingers are able to grasp from beneath, then join the two severed parts, and stitch them with a linen thread.
puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then apply the treatment of what we have said regarding softening medicines and bandages until he is cured.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant;	And if the illness comes from a wound or suture or fire cautery, it is necessary that you make a full incision under the hairs of the papers, and according to what is said before.
puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit;	then separate between the two flaps of a dressing, as I have said;
et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil;	and one must perform the work according to the form of the illness, for it is very diverse in form, and the masters prepare means of all their power to make the body return to its natural form.
et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	and the patient himself, according to what needs to be done and instruments in various preparations.
dou soudement de la papiere	suddenly from the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut;	When this seam happens to men in such a manner that the paper above is hardened with the white of an egg and cannot move nor perform its natural works, then you must therefore put the point of a razor beneath the paper and lift it up.
et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil;	and remove with forceps, until you take out what is attached to the thin membrane, which should not be too sharp nor too cutting, so that the patient cannot suffer from the thin membrane being too sharp and blistering the eye.
et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil;	and make your incision, which you burn together gently, so that the paper returns according to its natural form.
et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere;	and the entire assembly is healthy, and do this not once in the eye that is sore and salty, and rinse it with sweet water, and from anger.
puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef;	then place between the paper and the eye a linen tent, and put over the eye moistened wool from an egg.
et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	and after the third day use a colander and dark things until he is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres:	Know that the nail is according to two manners:
elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om;	it is nervous and resembles hard syphilis, and another which is not nervous but resembles frozen white moisture, such that when touched with iron and treated with tweezers, it cannot be removed.
et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	and both resemble starting from the large lid and gradually increasing a little by little until they cover the entire field of vision and all light and movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz;	And the manner of incising is such that the patient places their head on your lap, then open their eyes;
et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus;	and hold the paper with your hand, then place the nail against the forceps of small size, and extend it above;
puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort;	then take a needle, and insert the hair of a horse, or a cow, or a bull, and a strong thread;
et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement;	and double the point of the needle slightly and stitch through the nail, piercing it completely with the needle. Hold the nail steady above and burn along the side of the nail that has the groove and the thread to the hair until reaching the root, then cut off the remaining part with fine forceps and small strength, leaving the natural skin or horn at the root, so that the body does not weep tears through this incision as it is accustomed to doing.
et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit;	and sometimes the nail grows on its own, and on the thread, as we have said;
puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	then the scorching affects all the spatumile_soup of which this is the form:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie;	And ensure that the spatumile does not touch the fleshy membrane and tear it, and that the prunelle remains intact;
et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	and after the incision, pour some burned salt into the eye, and from a necklet made of litharge, and leave it until the next day;
puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat with what is necessary until it heals.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines;	And if the nail is not nervous and you cannot pierce it with a needle, and the pins cannot enter it, often this resemblance of a nail is treated with medicines.
et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	and grow as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it copulate, work the eye of the patient gently with a sharp but light spatule according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor;	And gently scrape the nail upwards, and if you see that it thins at all and the root presses on it, distill from your mouth into the eye of the mixture made of litharge and red colchicum and salt, and plug the eye until the next day;
puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	then resume the other operation according to this same method until it is all removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary in the eye, such as an abscess, then let it alone, and first treat the warm abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne;	And if the appearance of the flesh around the eyelid is harmful to the eye by great injury, suspend it with a needle, and copulate one part and not too much, so that no tears arise.
puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	then distill colriere rouge into the eye, which is made of litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that arises around the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste;	Some people's eyes are born with a scar red, and it covers the pupil and is held on papers and turned to decay, seeming like a water-lily rose.
et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force;	and the procedure is that the patient places their head on your shoulder, then closes their eyes, and you draw all that scar tissue with suitable needles to this place, and hold it in place with force.
puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige;	then remove the first scar, and continue cutting down to the skin until the end, and be sure not to injure the eye in the procedure.
et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre;	and the incision for the spot (or speck) should be made as we have said in the incision of the nail and with small force by which one removes the scab, as the form after this chapter demonstrates.
et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut;	and when the incision is completed and all the flesh removed, fill the eye with brimstone or you may distill red cologne or similar corrosive medicines, and place over the eye a swab of egg white to keep it secure from an abscess.
et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut;	and if nothing remains, and the stone surmounts it, and you fear an abscess, leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with things that alleviate a hot abscess.
puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do with the arrows inserted in the eye by this method.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil;	But always it must be that you moderate the treatment of each weak eye according to its natural course.
et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer;	and of the accidental way, in the work with iron;
et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	and do not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this limb is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	If the veins around the eyes are red and cover the eye, they allow the work to be seen and weaken the eye all day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel;	Therefore, for the first thing you look to see if the eye, in which bel is situated, is out of place, and there is no other disease besides the bel;
adonques le coil en teil maniere:	then adjust it in such a manner:
comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	instruct the patient to place their head on your side, then suspend those veins at every ounce according to your wisdom, and let the ounces be subtle and doubled according to this form:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let them be two ounces by degrees in one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil;	then, when one has to make those veins subtle and wipe the blood an hour after another, until you see remove those veins from the eye;
et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes;	and keep from injuring the eye with the points of the speatmiles, and do this work at noon in front of the sun, and be very hot in your work so that you do not harm only those veins.
et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	and when you have done this, distill green and red bile into the eye to corrupt what remains of the scab.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez;	And if you do not have the power to collect all of this in that hour, apply a plaster to the eye with things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pains are soothed and you are assured of the warm abscess, then resume according to this method which is before mentioned until it is healed.
et c’est li forme des forces:	and these are the forms of the forces:
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule:	They call such things "arissati" fistula:
quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	When you cure it with cautery and medicine of burning water as I have said before, and it is not yet healed, indeed there will be in what you cut over the abscess, sore or place where it must die, and draw out all the moisture that is in it, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme;	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and the blackness, then remove all the instrument of which this is the form;
et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	and it is called "aspre chief", and it should be made of iron sharp as a saw, and pointed like a rasp as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese;	And place on the head of the rotten bone, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little so that you know that the corruption is removed;
et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	and do this once, then restore the head with medicinal desiccants.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez;	if the joints are set and flesh begins to grow, and the core of the bone is set, and remains thus for 40 days, and it does not swell again and is not at all abscessed, and no bad accident happens, know that it is healed.
se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme:	if not, there is no other means than to bring the fistula back to the perforation of the neck according to this form:
et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	and it is that you uncover the bone the second time with iron and with cold medicines, and when it has been uncovered, take the saw according to this form, and let the iron head of the saw have three angles, and the blade be thin down to the teeth as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif;	then place it on the bone beside the tear, and move your hand away from the eye slightly, then turn the saw entirely until it pierces the bone, and let the patient feel it through what comes from it if you keep your hand near your nose;
et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif;	and then restore the bone with dry medicines as I have instructed you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the bones, the matter will go to your nose;
si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	if it is a lighter matter for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the discharge of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide;	When the eyes open completely, and there is no obstruction or diminishment, you must tie the patient.
puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz;	then the healthy one, then apply suction cups or plaster without injuring to draw out the fluid, then place on the eye a salve made of acacia and aloes and incense and sarcocolla, and then apply bandages and cloths around it.
et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier;	and the method of cloths is that you take soft cloths, and double each one into four layers, then place them one on top of the other according to the quantity the eyes need.
puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir;	then draw it out from above with a hard bandage, and restart the cups to suck without piercing.
puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout;	then remove the cups and let the eye remain held steady day and night, and if the ligaments soften, you must then draw it out much.
puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin;	then remove the ligature after day and night, and if you see the eye healing, that is good.
se ce non;	if not;
si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	then apply the plaster and bandages and the ligature and cups until it is healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	for the tearing of a vein
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir;	When disruptions come in the retinal tissue, then open and come forth through the papers as if from resin grains, and is fearful to see.
adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier;	then if you see it cover, the operations are such that you insert a needle from below the part up to that above, then insert another needle or have a double thread from the eye of the needle;
et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition;	and make it pierce, and leave the first needle in place according to the disposition;
puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef;	then withdraw the thread and tie a part of the uve around it, and hold it tightly, then remove the needle and place wetted wool from an egg yolk on the eye.
et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee;	and leave it until the thread is tied around the uve, then treat the eye with comforting things until the wound heals.
et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and sometimes the wound is compressed by the cloth at each part of a circular piece, until it heals.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost;	And if the eyes appear swollen, puncture them with a fine needle that comes from the depth of the eye, and drain the moist, whitish fluid, and let them recover soon.
puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	then extract it until it heals.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the socket of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue;	This disease called "alcunnati" is not caused by water that gathers in the eye, resembling descending fluid, and it is not actual water.
et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz;	and the manner of its appearance is such that you make the patient sit on the prepared chair and upright, then hold the head with your hands from both sides, and move the jaw until you see the water rise to above your eyes.
puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit;	then it should be pierced, and not descended and let the light out, and show the patient the things as he is accustomed to;
et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	and if it does not descend out, know that it is acute, and if the descensions of the bowe are not prepared as we have said.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse;	seat the patient between your hands, then take the fine spatula and make a cut on the corneal membrane just along the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal membrane and the crown, so that the bowe comes out;
et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and when it has come out, instill into the eye warm acrid liquid mixed with honey, or boiled acrid liquid and honey, then continue to treat with other remedies until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the eye's waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier;	We have experienced the appearances of fevers in the division, and what needs to be pierced;
si en oevre selonc la santeit.	if during work according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort;	It is necessary that you place the patient between your crossed hands, away from sunlight, and tie the healthy eye tightly.
puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres;	then place the cloth soaked in oil in your left hand if the eyes are on the left, or in your right hand if the eyes are on the right.
puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre;	then take in your right hand, if the eyes are on the left, the instrument called "almagda", or in your left hand, if the eyes are on the right.
puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide;	then place the tip of the instrument along the edge of the cornea by the thickness of a hair in that part beneath the minor lacrimal gland, then push the instrument, which is called "almagda," virtuously, and twist your hand until it pierces into the pulp of the eye, and feel that almagda enters the hollow part.
et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour;	and the size of the almagda should be precisely that of the space from the pupil to the end of the iris.
et c’est li corone de l’oil;	and this is the cornea of the eye.
si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	if you see the bone through that membrane due to the clarity of the cornea, and can place the instrument there or where the pain is, then press it out along one path after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	if the liquid flows out now, the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc;	After resting a little, and if the fluid rises again by the second way, apply force with the instrument, and when it is firmly placed and does not rise, extract slightly with a gentle turn of your hand little by little.
et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	and then put a bit of the gemstone thread in water, and remove the eye from it.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then place something to plug the eye, such as a moistened piece of wool in rose oil and abundant egg, and secure it with healthy eye tissue.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Now, and those of our time, we place on with a cloth soaked in abundant egg.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if it hardens to the extent that it cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are people whose eyes are too hard, then you must use the instrument called "alberit", of which its form is as follows:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit;	And pierce only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deep, but make it a fine incision, then extract slightly with a gemstone, as we have said.
et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous;	and for the completion of the work, arrange for the patient to sleep on his back in a dark place.
et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor;	and be subject to all movements, and take light foods, and do not move his head to the right or left, and bind him according to his position until the third day;
puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor;	then release him in that same dark house, and test his vision, and show him some things, and then bind him again until the seventh day;
et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	and it is not fitting that you do this during the hour of treatment or after incision now, but you must anesthetize him, because the fluid rises rapidly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme;	if abscesses appear, you should release the eye before the seventh day, and apply the treatment that alleviates the abscess.
et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	and when it is pacified, release the eye and place on its face a cover to protect any day, and let it be in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas;	And then leave the house little by little, and adapt to its condition;
et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	and know that no decoctions should be given in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens;	And some came to us who were from the Yrach, who told us that in their country they made almagda pears, which they applied with water, but altogether I never saw any such thing in our land, nor did I ever read about it in the books of the ancients.
et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie;	And these are the signs of the forms of almagda, because he who does not know them will be deceived;
et soient d’arain proprement:	and may they be properly of arsenic:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the head of aus be of this same subtlety, and the last in three acute angles.
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh on the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez;	Sometimes there arise or do not arise new sores of various kinds, some of which seem like scorpions' bites.
et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	and if there are such sores and he has a sore with a deep color from a burn, and if the sore is filled with good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil;	In the case of these sores that are filled and not deepened, you must place the patient's sore part in your hands against the sun.
et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers;	and open his nostrils, and cast the pinch of powder to those sores, and draw them out;
pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	put hold of that which you can sustain at the subtle sharp edge on one side, as long as you know that that sore is completely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien;	And if there remains anything that you cannot hold, open it with all the subtle instruments gently, so that nothing remains.
et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient;	and if without surmounting it, or abscess covered, apply the aid as it should.
et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	and if it is malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize until the pus is drained and all the sores are removed, then apply or sprinkle ash or dry and sharp vinegar or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez;	If the work is done and moisture comes as far as the palate, know that it is healed;
et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier:	and if moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is new flesh grown on the bone above, to which the instruments cannot come to cut:
adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins;	then you must insert a bit of thick linen thread, and tie it with our hands, leaving a little space between each knot.
et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche;	and place the patient's head under the thread so that it is comfortable, and pull gently until the thread comes out through the neck into the mouth.
et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire;	and many times children do this at school, and it is a light matter for those who know how to do it.
puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	then hold the head that comes by the nose with one hand, and the other head that comes by the mouth with the other hand, and feel them one after another where we are or fit.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant;	do this until you know that the nose has spoiled that part of the flesh, then pull the thread, wipe the blood, soften the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back again as before.
fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char;	do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrupts all that remains of the flesh;
et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use;	and then put a piece of linen over the nose for several days until it is healed, and if it needs drying medications, use them.
et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	and this is the form of the instrument for cleansing the head, to which one administers drops of oils and medicines or urine:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi;	And it should be made of silver or tin, resembling an open lamp, like a wick, and leads to;
et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief;	and if you want to see, make a wick closed, and let the instrument be full for cleansing the head;
et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	and have the handle at the head to hold it when one heats the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh on the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder;	Many times, a disease called "telul" arises at the head from urine, grows and becomes large, so that it can be seen when examined.
et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant;	and because of this, you must cool it at the beginning, and let the bone completely dry, then place a fire cautery or burning medicine over it;
et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens:	and if you delay cooling it until it is large, then watch to see if it is hard, pale in color, and lacking sensation:
si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide;	if it does not touch with iron at all, for this is an embedded abscess, for when it is cooled even once, great harm comes to the patient;
et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	and if the abscess is due to a soot touchment, not pale in color, and you can completely cool it, then empty the patient and cool it with things drying and constricting.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	When solutions of continuation come to one of these cartilages in the work, it profits little, for in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc;	Therefore, when this occurs to anyone, see if the wound is fresh throughout its bleeding;
et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then adjust the two edges with suturing, and continue to treat until it is healed;
et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet;	and if the edges are already separated on one side and the other, it is necessary to cauterize all parts of their roots until they heal, then adjust the two edges with suturing, and bind them, and sprinkle with powder of dragon's blood, and powdered incense;
et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	and place over the powders a piece of plaster of strong or another healing plaster, and leave it until it scabs on its own, then treat with ointment until it heals.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution:	The manner of suturing is that you assemble the solution:
ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre;	or with needles, as we have said in the suturing of the belly;
ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	or with thread, as I have told you before.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant;	In the lips, an abscess hardens, resembling grains of wheat, and smaller and larger;
adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie;	then you must turn the lips, incise along each fold, and take it with forceps and divide it into each part;
puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	then apply the ligature after the incision with the vitreous stone, until the blood is stanched;
et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	and then take the ileasis leaf, and treat the wound with dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»;	many times a carious tooth arises on the gums, which the ancients called "albulus";
si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc;	then you must hold it with the tongs, and pull it to its root, and let the tooth or blood run out.
puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives;	then apply vitriol powder, or other drying and收敛性粉末，于伤口上。
et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize:	and if the tooth returns after incision, and this happens many times, then pull it a second time, and cauterize it:
si ne revient mie aprés le cautere;	and if it does not return after the cauterization;
et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	and these are the forms of the instruments to use.
des sordens	of sorts
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres;	Sometimes there are gathered at the head of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and harsh.
et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant;	and sometimes the teeth become black, yellowish, and worm-eaten, as corruption comes to the gums, and the teeth smell foul.
si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien;	and it is necessary that you seat the patient between your hands, and his head in your lap, and inspect the teeth or scabs that are visible, until there remains nothing.
et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees;	and thus treat the blackness and greenness, and jaundice and other stains until they are removed.
et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin;	and if one removes what is at the first reason, it is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis;	if not, restart from the second day and the third, until you have done it all;
et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens;	and know that teeth require various forms of instruments to be treated, according to what the operation demonstrates, for the raspers used on exposed teeth have other shapes than those used between the teeth.
et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	and these forms and others be prepared for you.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire;	It is necessary when you treat the tooth of its pain that you delay the treatment as long as you can, for it should not be done immediately.
car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	because this is a very high substance such that one cannot have any excuse for not cutting it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is constrained to extraction, it must be certain which tooth aches.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent;	Many times the pain afflicts the patient, and he believes it is from Saint Dent; and causes a good tooth to be pulled.
et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors;	and in any case, the pain does not cease from this until the bad tooth is extracted, for we have already often done this to these saints.
et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars;	and when you are certain of the aching tooth, it is necessary to cauterize around the tooth with a strong spatillum to protect the gum from all sides.
puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles;	then pull it out with your tweezers or fine forceps at the first twitch and twitch, until it is well loosened, then firmly set the forceps.
et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	and let the patient's shoulder be on thy holy lap between thy knees, and hold it well so that it does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After drawing the tooth rightly without breaking it, and if it does not come out, take any of these instruments and insert it gently from each side, and move it as you have done before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont;	and if the wound is pierced and ragged, it must be filled with cloths, lint, or the like;
et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre;	and if you clamp it gently with forceps, do not break it in clamping;
et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	and it must be deeply cut between the gum to extract the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And take great care that you do not break it and leave a part behind, as this will cause the patient greater pain than the first.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit;	and take care that you do not do so as the ignorant surgeon does, who, through their haste and boldness, break the bone sometimes, and do not provide them with what we have recounted;
mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut;	but they bring about sometimes through the incision of that great illness due to the roots remaining, or to the decay that they break, as we have often willed.
et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil;	and when the tooth is drawn, wash the area with wine or ale and salt;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet;	and if the bleeding continues, which often happens, apply the area with ground vitriol;
et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	and if that does not work, then cauterize.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent;	The shapes of the instruments for extracting teeth should be with long points and large handles, so that they do not bend when you are drawing the tooth.
et ce sont les formes:	and these are the forms:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them have thick handles so that they do not bend when extracting, and let them be made of well-forged iron, and let them have teeth to hold tightly.
de la racine des dens	from the roots of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou II, tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne;	and when the root remains during drawing, it must be that you place wetted cloth in butter on the area for one or two days until the flesh is softened, then remove the pliers called "algefri" with which the head seems to be grasped like a cup.
et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	and may also be made inside like a file and that is the form:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not wish to come out with all these tongs, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh completely around the root, and place the instrument called "althali," which is known as pliers, of which here is the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin;	And it should be hollow and large so that it does not break, and if the root passes through it, that is good.
se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	if not, then use all the instruments, of which the forms are given hereafter:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you need to use an instrument that has two prongs, of which here is the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are in front according to the reason of the teeth, and of this instrument that seems like large tongs, of which here is the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont;	And let this instrument not be breakable, and know that most dental instruments are;
et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez;	and also other instruments, which are not described;
et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	and the master arrows find their own instrument by themselves, according to what their work and the disease show them, for there are diseases where the old ones did not teach any instruments because of the diversity of bones, or they rot, so they seek the appropriate instruments, as I have said, and help with gestures, of which the form is:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster;	And let them be large and well-designed to hold the bone, so it does not escape but can be held and removed.
et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	and then restore the head of the bone with suitable medicine, and if there is corruption in the bone and it is small, remove it with this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer:	When the tooth appears not at all according to its natural course, and the form is ugly, especially in maiden women, you must know whether the tooth has grown after its place and is not in the right position, and cannot be corrected or smoothed.
adonques lou raie;	then use the point.
et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	and if it is placed with the tooth, take this instrument of which the form is described, and it resembles a small beak, and let it be made of sharp iron.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And file the teeth little by little in your hand for the hardness of the tooth, and because you do not move the others, and if it is apparent that they can be smoothed, then smooth them with a piece of fine sandpaper as described.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles;	and it is also like the file with which we make needles.
et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece;	and file the tooth little by little with my hands gently, so that it does not move until it heals;
puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	then the plain in the end for any razor, and if the edges are too sharp and it blackens the tongue, then file the harshness until it is equal, so that it does not blacken the tongue nor corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the teeth chatter
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut;	When the front teeth decay, or through impact or falling, and the patient cannot grasp what they eat without dropping it, and you have treated them with medicine that constricts, yet this is not effective;
si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques;	then you must restrain them with a gold thread, for the silver threads turn green and rot, but gold never changes.
et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens;	and let the threads be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, according to the quantity of space between the teeth;
et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part;	and if you wish to treat the teeth, take the thread and the needle double between two healthy teeth, then place the heads between the affected teeth, whether there is one or more, as long as you can clearly reach the healthy tooth on the other side;
puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point;	then continue the bandaging until you reach the part where you started, and withdraw your hand gently and steadily, ensuring it does not move.
et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	and tie your thread at the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue;	then cut the heads of the thread with tweezers, and join them, and rethread them between the healthy tooth, and place them such that they do not choke the tongue.
et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil;	and then let it remain so tight as it can stay, and if it loosens, or the threads break, you must tighten it with another thread;
si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	if it remains and serves so for its entire duration, and this is the form of the teeth and the alignment of the two healthy teeth, as well as the two molar teeth, as you see:
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit;	And when the tooth falls out, you place it back in its place, frequently as we have said;
et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	and let no one who is not wise and suffers do it in any case. And once, the form of a tooth of a bovine bone was made, and this tooth was placed in the place where the tooth is missing, and it was tightened as we have said, and remained and served for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cover up the wound of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi;	Sometimes this comes from the tongue or natural causes, that one is born thus.
ou par accident de plaie soudee;	or by accident of a healed wound;
et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue;	and the operations are such that you open the mouth of the patient, and place his head on your lap, and tie his tongue;
puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement;	then cut the nerve ligament wide open, until the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or a knot, and it is due to a sudden wound, then use a lancet and cut that ligament wide.
et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz;	and be sure that the cut is not too deep, for the artery is beneath it.
et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin;	and when you have done, lift the shoulder from the basin of rose water and almond, or cold water, then place under the tongue a linen tent;
et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	and let the patient apply it every night, so that the swelling cannot subside.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet;	And if bleeding occurs, place quickened vitriol over the swelling.
et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu;	and if the bleeding continues, cauterize with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for this.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	and continue to treat until they are healed.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre;	and if you see it is of a rusted color or black or hard, such that the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is a sore.
et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre;	and if it is declining to blackworm, and there is moisture, he should give the ounce, and make a small hole with a lancet, and deliver from both sides;
et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer;	and if the wound turns against your work, he should place vitriol powder until it is effused, then return to your work as long as you drain all pus;
puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then lift the dressing of flax and silk, and treat other wounds until they are healed.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the abscesses in the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde:	Sometimes blisters appear in the throat called "godath," and they are properly known as two almonds. When you treat them, as we have said in the division, and if they are not healed, take care:
se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	if it is abscesses hard with small sensation and flesh colored, do not let them touch with iron at all.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc;	And if they are red and the root is swollen, do not let them be touched with iron at all, nor for the discharge of blood;
mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi;	but let them be until they are dead, and then you shall cut them out, or they would break on their own;
et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	and if they are white in color and the root is fine, prepare the instrument to cauterize, but first see if the abscess has cooled and is calm.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme;	Then seat the patient in front of the sun, and their head be towards you, and let them close their mouth and have the servant hold their head between their hands, pressing the tongue underneath the entire instrument, which is its form;
et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	and may it be of fine silver or tin as thin as knives:
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues;	And press the tongue with all this instrument, and if you see the abscess, take an ounce and prick it like an almond, and draw out more than you can.
et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces;	and draw out nothing from the threads with it, then cover the instrument, of which its form seems like force.
et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	and always the head is curved, and one against the other, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument at hand, use tongs, of which the form is:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom;	And may it be sharp on one side, and on the other called;
et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and when you have cut one of the almonds, cut the other in the same manner, and after incising, gargle the patient with hot sharp water, or with hot and easy water, and if there is a flow of blood, gargle the patient with water, or with cooked pomegranate peelings, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is expelled.
puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then continue the treatment until he is healed;
et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	and if other abscesses appear in the throat besides the two almonds, then cut them in the same manner as the two almonds.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens;	And I treated a woman with an abscess that had appeared in her throat, namely the small abscess.
et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	and had almost completely closed off the entire throat, so that the woman could not expire due to the constricted passage which was obstructed, and could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained in such a condition for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so large that it had to be lanced through both openings of the neck.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe;	I hastened quickly, and pierced one inch, then pulled out the needle, and drew out a large portion of blood;
puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue;	then pierced the other side at another hole in the nose, and opened his mouth and pressed his tongue;
aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc;	after piercing the inch into these abscesses, and drained a part of them, and only a little blood came out.
et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens;	and thus the passage of the throat was opened for the woman, and she began to drink water and then wine, and I continued to lance this abscess for a long time.
et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros;	and the abscesses repeatedly formed again, and filled the wound that I had emptied, until it became very large.
adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge:	then I set it and cauterized inside the throat:
ensi demora sens croistre;	then the swelling ceased to grow.
et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	and I left those parts, and let God decide what would happen to them thereafter.
de l’uve	from the eye socket
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»;	When rheumatism affects the eye, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular".
et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	and if it is large and round, it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes;	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the abscesses are healed and are fine, then it is necessary that you lance them.
et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe;	and that which is round gathered and is not long;
et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	and if it is bloody or of reddish color or black, then it is necessary that you incise it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant;	Therefore, when you see it in the manner I have said, of its hardness and length, you should place the patient facing the sun, and press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned earlier.
puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	then insert the oncine into the eye, and draw it out, and lance with the second instrument as I said in the incision of the almond.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil;	And you must not apply force that is beyond the natural limit.
car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle;	and if you apply more force, you may harm the voice and speech;
et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and after the incision, use what we have said about the incision of the two almonds, and treat it until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient is afraid of cutting, you must use an instrument for the cautery to alleviate their fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is very sharp.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere;	And let the patient place their head on your lap, and then press their tongue with the instrument we have mentioned or the fire cautery, using a sharp tool, so that it is not too thick nor too clear.
et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	and apply the edge of this instrument, whose form is as follows:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve;	And let there be one hair or where one places the medicine, as with the hairs of a spoon, and place the instrument above all the medicine on the eye;
et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece;	and the patient lie on his side, so that the saliva and mucus flow from his mouth over the medicine, without descending to the throat, and the cloth.
puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie;	then hold your hand over the medicine and press it on the eye, for half an hour, until you see it nerveless and the bites of the medicine are alleviated.
et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve;	and if you see, take cotton and wrap it around an instrument, and moisten the cotton with the medicine, and insert the instrument into the cotton in the tube above, until the cotton is saturated on the eye.
et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V.	and do this often, until the cauterizations are perfect, then let it dry, and fall after four days or five.
Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine;	And if you need to re-start the cauterization for the medicine, do so, and after the cauterization, wipe it around the wound with a cotton swab dipped in butter, and clean what is around the medicine.
et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let it be rinsed with cold water, and be washed with gargles until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere;	This treatment is safer than incision or cauterization.
s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir;	If it is washed with fumigation in this manner, take calamus, yarrow, origanum, rue, chamomile, and valerian, and gather all of these or any of them in one pot, and put asbestos in it, and boil it.
et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	and the poultice should be well mixed with strong earth, and within the pot have the instrument cover according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie;	And may be of silver or lead, and let one of the heads be placed in the patient's mouth until the vapor rises to the eye through the tube, until the eye is numbed;
aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent;	after the rekindling often, until the eye dries, and keep that you do not perform this at the beginning of the onset of the hot abscess, for many things happen;
et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	and do not perform this when the hot abscess is subsiding.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut;	And if this instrument is not present, take a tube and put a chicken feather inside it, so that the patient's mouth does not get too hot.
car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	because the fear of an egg does not allow vapor to weigh down the mouth, and this is a good treatment overall for health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose;	Many times it is applied to the throat, bone or spiny fish, or any other thing;
si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose;	so you must treat what you can see, and press the tongue to the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing move;
et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac;	and what does not become clear and is lodged in the throat, you must make the patient vomit as if the meat were cooked in the stomach;
par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement;	by chance, if the thing is expelled by vomiting;
ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec;	or the patient swallows a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a piece of dry bread;
et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse;	and ties it to the sponge with a thread, and then swallows it;
et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer;	and when it comes to the place, it will expand, and then you will draw out the force.
et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	and if it does not come to force as we have said, take the probing instrument according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit;	And let the instrument be inserted at the throat such that it can enter more easily into the throat, and keep the head lifted upwards.
et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens;	and be careful that you do not touch the epiglottis, for if you do, it may close and block the airway, nor should you push the bone in.
et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse;	and when moved, it is fitting for the patient to stop using the instrument, because it has been moved or the thing is raw.
si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	if it has been drawn back, or he pulls it out forcefully with the entire instrument equally.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the blood from the throat
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines;	Never is the sinew medicated, as I have said in the division, through the treatment of medicines;
et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	and when this does not profit at all, then look at the throat of the patient in the sunlight, and press his tongue with the instrument that I have told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the pus, draw it out with a very small lancet, or with fine forceps that are suitable for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if it does not work, take a live cane, insert it into the throat of the patient, then blow or shake the cane with hot air, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient is thirsty all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent;	then take a full glass of cold water, pour it into the mouth, and let it go down, and move it often with his hand.
et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	and as soon as the blood feels cold, it falls.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve;	And if it does not fall as we have said, then fumigate the patient with arsenic sulfide using the instrument I mentioned in the fumigation of the uvea.
fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	Do this many times, for it will fall without difficulty.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument;	And the method of fumigation is that you take a pot in which there are burning charcoal, and place the head of the patient covered with a perforated lid in the middle, and through those holes place the heads of the instrument;
puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue;	then throw in the fumigating substance, and the patient put the head of the cane in their mouth, and close the mouth, so that the smoke does not escape but goes to the blood;
et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois;	and the pus will now flow out, and if it does not flow, resume the fumigation multiple times.
et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue;	and the patient feels thirst, eats salty and stale food, and does not drink water.
et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	and then it is necessary for her to be forced out by this treatment.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge;	And the shape of the instrument used to treat the pus is such that when one can see it, it resembles curved forceps meant to enter the throat.
et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier;	and it resembles a surgeon's claw, and it has a rough surface like that of a file, such that once it touches something, it cannot be released.
et vez ci la forme:	and see here the form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapters of abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille;	Many appearances of abscesses are, according to what memory brings after in this book, and they differ in puncture and incision;
et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	and it is in two ways, of which one is in its own appearance and of what it holds, being moist.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for the sores or where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	for abscesses of the head are different from those of the solid part, and abscesses of flesh are different from those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement;	And if for abscesses one should not pierce, until the boil is dead according to its completion;
et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	and if for such cases one should pierce when they are ripe, and do not die according to their completion, as abscesses that are deep in joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come from joints, and one lets them remain until they are rotten within, by chance the ligaments and nerve of the joint may be corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil;	When the abscess is close to the main member, and if you delay the puncture until it is ripe, it will harm the principal member;
ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs;	or it is close to the foundation, if you puncture it thus when it is ripe;
et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule;	and it is not fitting that you puncture an abscess that is firm before digestion is completed, even if it is close to the foundation, so that it does not rot completely and becomes extended within, and may become a fistula;
et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	and cannot heal in a great while.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes;	And you must know the time of puncturing the abscess when it is ripe according to completion, and this is when the pain is relieved, and the departure of fever, and the lessening of pain and redness, and the softening and ripening of the head of the abscess, and other signs.
et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues;	and you must place the perforation or more dependent part of the abscess, and where it opens and moves;
et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	and let the perforation be long along the body, and if the abscess is in the hands or feet, or at joints and nerves and arteries, and everywhere equal where there is no pleura.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those that bend, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the living flesh, it is better to let the perforation remain until digestion is completed, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure;	For if you perforate before it, the venom of the abscess will spread along the body, and be filled with much filth.
et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	and by chance harden the edges and the deeper parts of it.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if to any abscess that is perforated according to the size of the body, as the limb requires.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus;	and you must apply to small abscesses, small punctures;
et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme;	and in large abscesses, large wounds, and many fissures according to the size of the abscess;
et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper;	and if such large abscesses require making a hole in the heart, and applying;
quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes:	and when it has become as soft as wool, and is softened, then you must do so as one does for boils:
et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres;	and if there are such ones that are split into three angles, and if there are such ones that one applies salve to like the leaf of laurel, as for abscesses of the insane.
et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	and if there are such ones where one makes a round incision, and other incisions and similar applications.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement;	Those who have no head, as with a superficial abscess sore, it must be pierced completely.
et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie;	And it must be done when the abscess is large, and it has collected much pus, if you pierce it, do not draw all the pus at once in that hour, but draw a part of it.
puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief;	then dress the abscess until the next day, then draw no more pus again.
fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute;	do this many times gradually, until all the pus has drained out.
meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	the same is done if the patient has weak constitution, or is a woman pregnant, or small children, or old and infirm.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	Because the patient trembles several times with the discharge of the pus, that by chance kills the patient, and you will not know this.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite;	Therefore avoid this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, clean the wound, and look to see if the wound from the abscess is small;
et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton;	and if it is a clean incision, apply tents of linen or old cotton;
et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre;	and if it is a large abscess, and there are many perforations, then you must apply a tent in each so that they come together;
et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor;	and if you have incised part of the skin over the abscess and closed it with a stitch, then you must fill it with old cotton or shreds of dry linen cloth, and bind it until the third day;
puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then the bone, and the treatment with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if there is an evacuation of blood in your work, you apply cold water and ease the pain, and cover with soft linen, and place over the area where the blood flows repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut;	And if the bleeding continues, apply a government and treatment, and the powders that I have said in my hand book, and if it is or tends to be cold, and the wounds or abscesses are very nervous, you must place wet cloths and woolen drapes soaked in wine and hot oil on them.
et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if it is in summer, and the wound is fleshly, you must place wet cloths in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, for three days, as we have said.
et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then drain the abscess, clean it, and treat it as needed until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes:	And this must be known universally in the treatment of abscesses:
or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	Or I have told you how one should proceed before the treatment of abscesses, and see here the chapter.
des soros	of the sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Or come from the head small abscesses, and they are like those in fabrics, as with the fibers of a flax plant, and there are many that resemble them.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz;	There are fat ones and such, which have moisture as well as boils;
et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	and there are such ones that are hard and stony to the knife, and there is no doubt if the artery does not cause harm.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the operations of the flank are such that you test with any instrument called "intromissory," from which the form follows, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, he lets it drain from above downward.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien;	And when the moisture is evacuated, burn it without leaving any of the skin that contains that moisture, because it will reaccumulate if nothing is left.
puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens;	then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment, if it is present.
se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor;	if not, with water and thread, and dress the wound, leaving it until the next day;
et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	and let those who have been delayed overnight continue.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit;	And then continue with the cotton, as before, on the second day, and the third, until you know well that it does not delay overnight;
puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then dress the wound with ointment as appropriate, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc;	And if the abscess holds onto fat, then apply the compress according to this form, of long duration.
et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist;	and pourge your veins, and scorch it from all sides, and apply all your treatment to draw the poison where it lies.
et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	and if the artery gives you contrary results, do as I said after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And do the same for the abscess if it is stony, and cut and treat as I have said.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And the cut for the stony abscess and its moisture is lighter, because they contain little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme;	And if in any of these abscesses or head injuries there is no moisture, and these are the abscesses that I treated or head injury of an old woman;
et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier;	and found the abscess as hard as a dull stone, rough and white, and could not be broken;
et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	and if any had been made of it, it would have also been as well injured as a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe;	In other abscesses coming or affecting the head, it must be that the opening remain always at the lowest part of the head, so as to allow the bowels to escape.
et les cure si com il covient.	and treat the wounds as they should.
des scrophules	of gland swellings
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times such abscesses occur in the neck, under the armpits, and in angles, and sometimes appear elsewhere on the body, they are hard, and are joined together with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit;	And each scrofula is properly within its groove, just as the knot and abscess of the head, as we have said.
et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	and the similarities of these scrofula are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are those that contain moisture, and there are malignant ones that do not wish to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde;	in which you see good placement upon touch, and resembles the color of the body, mute in each part and not inverted near the neck nor near the artery nor the vein, and is not deep.
si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief;	then you should cut it open from above, and scorch each part, and place the two lips of the wound with the stitches, if you have need to do so, just as we have said for abscesses of the head.
et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	and draw a little bit by little bit, and be sure that you do not hit the nerve nor the vein, and neither the spatumileagus nor the trenchers, that your hand does not escape, and do not go too far, so as not to hit what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie;	And if you hit the vein or the artery, and it does not allow you to continue, apply vitriol powder or any other powders that staunch blood, and compress the wound;
et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	and leave it until the abscess is relieved, and the wound softens and begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses;	And when the blood is staunched, return to your work until you complete it;
puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	then you should examine if there are any small scrofulous swellings left, and cut them out and clean them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement;	And if there is a large vein in the root of the scrofulous swelling, it is not advisable to cut that swelling at its root, but rather tie it with a strong double thread, and let it fall off without harm.
puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	then dress the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and proceed to the treatment.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you remove the entire scrofula, it is necessary that you bring together the two lips of the wound, and suture them now, since there is no longer any excess due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	it is necessary that you cut the root of it, and draw out the force, and suture it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure;	Those scrofulous swellings due to excess, puncture them where they appear to drain.
et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption;	and puncture them in the same way as previously mentioned, then apply tents with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption.
et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and when the wound is well cleaned, then apply the ointment cure until it is healed.
de squinance	of scrophula
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge;	The ancients spoke and wrote about the surgery of the throat;
mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	but I have never seen anyone in our land who performed it, and this is the writing of their words.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee;	For those with scrophula, it is necessary to incise the slit in the throat which is called "epiglote";
et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	and do not seek help from them, for their veins and the nearby parts of the patient are hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the tonsils.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the tonsil, it is necessary to cut the epiglote to avoid the loss that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige;	It must therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglote, be cut over three or four small cuts across, between the two circles or by the size of the cut through the skin, and not in the cartilage;
et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	and if the veins are suitable for cutting the epiglote so that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long in that area.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil;	And if the master is fearful, it must be stretched from the entire length of the throat to the tip, then cut the skin until it reaches the muscle.
et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit;	and cut the blood vessels if you see any, then sew up the skin as we have said.
et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix;	and it is demonstrated by the section of the vein from the elbow which jumps out because the bone is broken, and by the loss of voice due to fault.
et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	and leave the wound open for a day.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige;	And when the hour has passed since there is doubt about strangulation, bring together the two lips of the wound in the heart, and stitch it well without the cartilage;
puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then administer medicines that produce flesh, until he is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasis said that this should not be done until the throat is completely numb, and the patient is judged to be dying, and then proceed.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort;	Then treat the epiglottis for those who cannot breathe, and they breathe through the wound, and thus are guarded from death.
et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee;	and because of this, the ancients instructed to leave the wound open until the mischief of the disease has passed, and it passes in three days or four. Then they commanded to sew up the wound and treat it until it is healed;
et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon;	I saw that a maiden took the knife, and stabbed it into her throat, and cut part of the veins there.
et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	and I was called to treat her, and found her already dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound, and found the blood issuing from it. I knew that she had not pierced a vein nor any great artery, but the blood was coming from the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee;	I hastened there, dressed the wound, and treated it until it was healed.
et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition;	and there was no change in the lady's voice, and she returned to her usual state;
por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	for I say that in the operation of the epiglottis there should be no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large throat
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes;	This abscess is called "goiter," and it is a large abscess in the color of a liver, and it is very common in women.
et est selonc II manieres:	and it is according to two methods:
naturez, et accidens;	nature, and accident;
ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	or naturally there is no mechanism.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere;	And the accident is according to two methods, of which one resembles a fatty lump, and the other method resembles an abscess that comes from within the artery.
et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire:	and if there is fear, it should not be operated on except in what is small, and the proof and search are made of all that interferes:
se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point;	if you find it as we find fat, and cannot be drawn to any vein, pinch it, as one pinches fat, and draw it with its skin, if there is any.
et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	and search well around it, and treat it as it should be treated, until it is completely healed.
des nous	from us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances;	Many methods for dealing with fats exist, of which I will describe all the similarities.
et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	and now it is necessary for me to say all the difference that exists between fat and dislocation.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture;	I say that heat and fever arise until the boiling is passed and the putrefaction is completed.
adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	Then the fever and heat subside.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros;	With the new one having no heat, fever, or pain, and containing pus, which is its own secretion and according to the color of the body, and begins like a jelly, and becomes large.
et sont selonc II semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	and they vary according to their appearance, or grease, or moisture, and not much in color as I said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It must be, when you come to the treatment of the new wound, that you first examine and inquire about all the instrument called "intermissive," according to what its form will come or chapter which follows.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme;	And the method of inquiring into abscesses for us is that you prick more moist parts of the lump you find in the abscess, and turn your needle little by little, until you know that the instrument has pierced the core. Then it must be according to the size of the abscess.
puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	then extract the interposer, and take care that it not jump.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes;	If the moisture flows out, regardless of its color, treat it as I have said for other abscesses;
et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout;	and if after the interposer no moisture comes out, know that it is fatty, then incise it in a cross shape, and remove it with forceps, and gently cauterize each part. Take care where it lies and treat the surrounding tissue with hot oil to ensure it heals properly.
et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	and if you cannot treat it properly, remove it in pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois;	For if anything remains, it will cause us trouble many times.
et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if one remains a little, and the wound grieves, fill the wound with certain corrosive powders moistened, hold the wound, and apply hot abscess-sothing things until it is healed;
et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	and if the wound is large, suture the two edges of the wound, and treat it with what nourishes flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc;	and if the pulsing vein is contrary or another that requires haste, apply the juice of ground vitriol, and let it remain for two or three days, until the wound rots, and rest the boiling of the blood;
puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	then return to the copper that has remained from new.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres:	See here the forms of the intervening instruments, and they are of three kinds:
grans et moien et petit;	great, medium, and small;
et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres:	and there are three square ones which are called "albaret", and one which is called "breb", and there are of three kinds:
grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule;	great, medium, and small, to surround the abscesses of fistula;
et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule;	and they are also like the needles with which one sews ligatures, and they are made of yellow brass or iron or silver, and it is said that those that are yellow are more effective for surrounding the cords of fistula;
et sont de III manieres:	and there are three ways:
grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	large, medium, and small, according to the width of the perforations.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci:	The shapes of the oncin are like wool in resemblance, as you see here:
grans, moiens, et petis;	large, medium, and small;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi;	and if oncin have two corbeures of three ways also;
et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres;	and if oncin have three corbeures, and are also of three ways;
et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres;	and if oncin have two corbeures, and oncin with only one corbeure, and are of three ways;
et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	and all this is necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf;	The head of these for which one makes them is sharp, and among such one cuts with force only from one side, by which one sears the nostrils, because one does not cut the vein nor the nerve.
et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes;	and of these inserters are the wicks placed in the thumbs, so that the patient does not perceive them during the incision of abscesses.
et sont de III manieres:	and they are of three kinds:
grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois;	large, small, and medium, as you see.
et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus;	and one uses force only in flabby areas, such as legs, arms, mammary glands, and angles, and in similar places.
et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	and sometimes another instrument is made small, resembling the shells of nuts, according to this form, with which one stops the bleeding:
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is placed once in its place where it heals by degrees from the veins, and in the arteries, and once more according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme;	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to rot, to the point where they resemble women's breasts.
et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	and remain ugly and swollen. Whoever needs to treat them should do so according to this form from line .b. to .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then burn the fat, and fill the wound with flesh-inducing medicine. Then suture the two edges of the wound together and treat it until it heals.
et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures;	and if the breast sags down and becomes soft due to its size, as happens in women, cut it open at two ribs above, using similar incisions.
de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.;	of which one should be held to the other at the end of one and the other, so that the larger line contain the smaller according to this form, from this line .b. to the line .g.;
puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then cauterize the skin between the two lips, and remove the fat, and apply what we have said about suturing and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment until he is cured;
et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif;	and if he is not cured, or the incision is not fully made, because the patient does not wish to rest, or due to the bleeding, it is necessary that you fill the wound with moist cotton soaked in a腐蚀性药膏;
et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	and leave it until the patient drinks the remedy and the fat are removed, then treat the wound until he is cured.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of arrow wounds
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from arrow wounds are similar to hard scrofula glands, and some contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line b. to the line g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bowe that is in the abscess is evacuated, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment appropriate for this until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles scrofula glands, incise it as we have said for incisions in scrofula, and if the wound contains bowe, apply a fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme;	When the artery is cut, and the skin above is sewn up, there often arise abscesses; likewise, it happens with an inflamed vein and abscess.
et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont;	and if one knows thus when it is due to the artery, let the abscesses remain long to form.
et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement;	and when you feel it with your hands, feel the constriction;
et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans;	and when it is due to the vein, let it be relieved by evident swelling;
et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	and it is folly to treat this abscess, especially when it is near the armpits and angles and under the arm and many other parts, and it is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc;	Therefore, one should avoid the iron cure, and he who is in pain should also avoid it, and in that which is swollen from an artery, cut through the skin above the long hair;
puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte;	then cut the incision at the inch marks, and cleanly separate the artery from the tissues until it is exposed.
puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples;	then insert a needle and pierce it until the other side, and hold the artery with a doubled thread at two ends, as I taught you in the extraction of the two arteries that are in the temples.
puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme;	then pull the intervening limb between the two threads until the fluid comes out, and then release the abscess.
puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient;	then administer the treatment that follows, until the ligaments heal;
puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat it with ointment appropriate for this, until it is healed;
et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit;	and if the abscess is as large as the vein, it must be that you draw out as much of the abscess as you can from the entire area, then insert the needle under the skin you hold in your hand, and pierce it, and use a double thread, so that you pull from the other side.
puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil;	then bind the abscess as I have told you, or with a ligament from one part to the shoulder.
et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus;	and if you doubt that the thread is strong enough, then insert another needle through the entire abscess at the incision of the first needle, and tie the threads in four knots.
puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez;	then incise the abscess until the excess flows out, then incise the kidney and leave what is tied.
puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then place on the wound a cloth soaked in wine and oil, then give him treatments and applications until he is cured.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As abscesses come to the artery and vein, abscesses of the nerves when they are injured, or through too great labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor;	And this happens more often in joints and bones, and in all places where there are joints, and it is the cause of abscesses, and its color seems like the color of the body, and is in many dispositions with pain;
et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur;	and when one extracts it forcefully, the patient feels pain, and it is not entirely due to the body, but beneath the heart;
et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer:	and must move well from all sides, and not go forward or backward, nor down or up, and that which is in joints should not be treated with iron:
par aventure i vanroit contraction;	by chance it might contract;
et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	and that which is on the head or forehead, open the skin with a spatula.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine;	If the abscess is small, take it with forceps, and treat it at its root;
et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if it is large, suspend it with a needle, and cauterize it, then extract it and suture the wound, and continue to treat until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	of large boils hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros;	Sometimes it occurs in bellies and nowhere else, and is a disease called "fungus" by its similarity to mushrooms, and the head is small, and the shoulder large;
et en i a de petis et de mout grans;	and there are both small and very large;
et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	and I saw a home which had two or more bellies that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference between them, and they were white, and had fine roots, and were slightly split, and within corroded thus with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine;	I cut them and found in one eighteen ounces weighing, and in the other six ounces. The work in incision is such that you should examine if the patient is moist, and the color of the artelul is white and moist and has fine roots;
si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	if you cut them with the spoon broad, and let the cautery on fire be in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer;	For in the tailor often comes too great hemorrhages, and if he dies, then you must hasten to cauterize;
et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors;	and if you see the patient afraid and fearful of the incision with the iron, then take a well-madeawl thread, and place it on the artery as we have said, and let it hang for two days;
et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail;	and then secure it, and do not cease to hold the awl thread until it grasps the artery, and continue to monitor the work;
et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne;	and if the roots are large, do not fear to grasp them immediately for the abdomen, but you may well grasp half of them, then cauterize so that they do not return;
puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	then treat the wound, and ensure you do not touch the nipple which is of fleeing color and of poor sensation and has regard.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an abscess embedded, and I will come to the treatment of the chancre after this.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil is hot
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit;	If the appearance of the bubo comes from a fire cautery or a cut by a needle, and is on the abdomen and there are some in the groins, as happens in other ruptures, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries as was mentioned before, or from wind.
et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	and if it is from the rupture of the bowel and the discharge of the bubo, then its color resembles that of an abscess, similar to the body's color, and it is a slight thing with little pain, and shows various discharges.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the issue of the intestine, then it is more varied. When pressed at its roots, it rises and then returns. Sometimes it swells significantly upon entering the bath and due to great strain.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie;	And if it is due to moisture, it is a slight thing, and clearly shows when you press it with your hand; it does not constrain much.
et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit;	and if it is for blood, open by these signs the abscesses large and hard, and puncture according to a quantity;
et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	and if it is for windiness, it is sore to the touch, and the work is that you look whether the appearance is due to blood of the artery, or vein, or windiness.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	You must let the treatment continue.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude;	And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bladder, you must instruct the patient to stretch his abdomen, and be extended entirely straight, then draw the belt around the entire waist;
puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine;	then command him to lie very still in your hands, then go around the limb where you have drawn the belt completely around the entire circumference, then place half of the abscess above at the level of the great inch;
puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz;	then bind it tightly with a strong thread or a firm cord of strong silk, and let it be tied firmly in place.
puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine;	then work the midpoint of the abscess extended over the thread, and place your index finger inside, and hold the intestine steady.
se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre;	if you find it caught on the thread, release it, and place the intestine at the rear of the abdomen;
et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit;	and if you find the boil, take it with forceps, and drain the excess.
et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier;	and if the artery makes it difficult, or the vein, go gently inside, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two threads through, and place the needles where you made the puncture.
puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi;	then extract the abscess in four places over the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the wound until it rots, and cut out the dead flesh.
ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit;	or you let it come when it is subtle and rotten, then treat the wound as needed, and cut out the abscess as we have said.
et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the wound as needed, and close the wound with sutures.
dou chancre	of the sore
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer;	We have spoken of the symptoms of chancre and how one should treat it with medicines, and how one must avoid treating it with iron.
et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement;	and we say that the chancre occurs in the groin, and great caution is needed in its treatment. The ancients said that when a chancre can be scraped away, like one found on the sameles or in the thigh, and similar areas, it should be entirely removed when it is in the early stages.
et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner;	and when it is large and old, it does not suit you to approach it, for I have never cured any of them.
ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	no one has ever cured any of them before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire;	And the procedures, when it is set or can be removed, as we have said, are that you purge the patient once of black bile;
puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige;	then make him healthy if he has evident fullness, then prepare the patient well set so that the work can be done.
puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier;	then throw out the warts or scabs, and the hair from all parts, and remove it from all parts leaving nothing behind.
et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	and let the blood flow freely, and hold the limb well in your hand or with some object, and if the bleeding contradicts the incision of the artery or vein, then cauterize it until the blood is stanched.
puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat it with other remedies until it is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer:	We have already described the symptoms of dropsy, and how the gathering of the fluid is made, and the signs for each symptom, and the treatment with medicines, and that which is treated with a iron.
si est eclites soulement;	if it is only swollen.
et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances:	and one should not apply iron in these two symptoms:
c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose;	this is to know, otitis and hyperpyrexia, because it is a deadly thing;
donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses;	therefore when you medicate this similarity of dropsy which is called "eclites" by medicines, and the cure does not help, then see if the patient is weak, or if he has another illness besides dropsy, such as an attack of wind or similar things;
si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance;	if you do not apply iron, because there is doubt;
et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer:	and if you see the patient is of strong vitality, and he has no other illness except dropsy alone, and he is neither too weak nor too old, then proceed in this manner to treat:
lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	lay the patient on his side on your hands, and the attendants press the abdomen by directing water to the lowest part of the sore, then take the thorn spatillum according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let it be cut from two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier;	With a point, and in any case should not be inserted so deep that it could come as far as the intestines when one drives it in, and he cannot bend it;
puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines:	then see if the hydrocele is directed towards the intestines:
si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil;	if it is necessary that you incise upwards from the groove III down along the blade of the knife;
et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois;	and if the hydrocele is due to the disease of the liver, let your incision be on the left side of the groove III down.
et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu;	and if it is due to the spleen, let it be on the right side, and it is not appropriate that the patient lies on the incision so that the excess fluids do not flow to that weak side.
puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor;	pierce all the skin with the instrument, and cut out, and lift your hand from all the spatumile between the skin and the subcutaneous tissue as in cauterizing to the quantity of a nail or about that.
puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	pierce the subcutaneous tissue until the spatumile comes to its proper place, and this is the seat of the fluid, then draw out, and remove this instrument whose form it has.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus;	And it is similar to a thin silver needle, made of fine or light metal, and has on the part below the small puncture.
et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus;	and on one side, three punctures;
et II d’autre part, et I d’autre;	and two on the other part, and one on the other;
et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	and the head of the shoulder is cut like a quill, and this is the form of the incision that writers cut the quill:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument;	above the head is the alemele, so that when the instruments come to the edge, they now lie above the instrument;
vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort;	draw out then the half or the third part, for if you draw out more than is appropriate in that hour, by chance the patient may die from the release of his spirit from the weapon, or he may fall senseless, or he comes near to death;
mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz;	but draw out according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulse;
puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere;	then draw the instrument and hold the fluid, and it is now held to prevent the perforation which is on the syphax, of which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner.
puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit;	then repeat the procedure on the other side, if you see the patient suffering, and draw a small quantity of fluid.
fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	do this every day, and be careful not to follow it too much so as to leave any significant amount of fluid.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre;	And if you doubt about the patient, and leave much fluid, let the wound of the sepulture or sand warm up, and by much sweating or bath and in the sun, and let him drink.
et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	and the application of medicinal remedies until he is cured, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the arrow, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping up of the urethra
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born who does not have pores in the urethra, or where the pores are small, or are not in their proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it suits him to do so quickly before he passes much very subtle mucus according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet;	then insert or perforate the thin cloth of linen, and secure it in place for three days or four. When he begins to urinate, remove the cloth, allow urination, and then replace it.
et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	and by chance it may not be necessary, for the urine that comes forth does not allow it to remain closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the wound from which the lead is pierced is small, it should be medicated with a lead clove, as we have said, and it will enlarge.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut;	Those who do not have the perforation in their place will be unable to urinate, for none are born with the perforation at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they lift their penis upwards.
et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	and they cannot heal because the matter cannot come to the surface, and this is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient;	And the manner of the work is that the patient lies often on their back, then the head of the vein and the cord are also made as thick as a pen, so that the punctures are each in the middle, as it should be.
et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and beware of the bleeding that comes often, and if it happens, stop the bleeding with what stops blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the pustules of the verge
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide;	Many times comes this abscess in the vein, and it is an appearance of ugly flesh.
et en i a malignes et non malignes;	and among them there are harmful and non-harmful;
si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien;	and it is necessary that you pierce them with a sharp needle, and cut and clean them all, then place on cotton moistened with Egyptian ointment;
puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	then apply the ointment diafinicon until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ulcer is malignant, of putrid color and emitting pus, then you must apply a cauterization to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier;	When you have cut it, and if the boil is such that it has part inside the skin and part outside, then you must remove the boil that is inside first.
et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	and when it is healed, treat the part outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion;	For when you treat it all together, the head of the boil may not be secured properly, leading to infection and corruption in the boil and around it.
si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary to shave all that is black and corrupted, then tie over the plaster of honey and flour which is made from the bark of pomegranate peels and tares, and cure with other plasters until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding occurs, apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble:	The cautery aids in both dispositions together:
c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption;	it is to say, for the bleeding and the corruption;
et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi;	and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary to insert a probe into the head of the penis, and let the patient urinate with it inside.
et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars;	and when the hair is shaved from the head of the penis which affects those who have not been circumcised, or it happens due to a wound or an abscess, then it is necessary to scrape the head of the penis with a hooked instrument until the threads are loosened, and release the head of the penis from all sides.
et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil;	and if this is a matter to be discussed, you should cauterize it with a spatule for a short while on the head of the penis and the skin.
puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	then separate the parts between two, and place a fine linen cloth moistened in cold water over it, so that it does not dry again.
de la circoncision	of the circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies;	Circumcision is not a separation of continuity as are other wounds;
toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	whenever we perform this work of our own will, and properly on children, it is necessary that we do the best work, and the most gentle for their welfare.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not mention circumcision of their children, for they did not use it in their law, and we have it only what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule;	For I have seen the majority of masters and surgeons who performed circumcisions with forceps, and on an infant, and with a new knife.
si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	if the cords slip because there are two layers, and by chance one of them is cut and the other remains below.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre;	Or if it retracts the cord, and the pain is doubled, and in the healing where it is from the arm, the extremity of the limb is not assured.
et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	and in the healing of the nail, by chance the iron escapes, and the work runs amok, and often they grow thus without needing healing, and I have seen this.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the dressing which is done with force on all the thread of hair I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the force cuts just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens;	For when you press your hand, cut it equally in one whole thickness;
mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir;	but that the threads be well thin between the skin;
et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	and the manner of the first work is such that you make the child think, if it hears, that you only make him wet the thread between the shaft and then dry it in all ways that you can.
puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens;	and you make it stretch completely straight, and arrange the forces in your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments.
puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens;	and place your hand on the shaft and blow or kiss it, and pull it up until the head of the shaft is tight.
puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien;	and clean it well of the filth that is gathered there, then tie the upper part with a double thread, and tie it by one link to another.
et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge;	and hold it at two points by the second hour at the pocket and the right index, and place between the two joints, then lift the key above quickly and draw the head of the penis;
puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres;	then let the blood drip slowly and slowly, for it is painful.
et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and apply powder on top and on top of the powder place a cloth glued with one half of a boiled egg soaked in rose water, preserved with good fresh rose oil. Leave it on until the next day, and continue to treat until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste:	The form of the forces in generation is this:
li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	let the shoulders be held and be sharp, and let the shoulder bones also be as large as the hand equally:
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision;	the error of the mundification is when the bowels within are incised;
donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme;	then you must extend it to your nail, as the leeches do for an abscess;
et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	and apply it evenly, and if you cannot hold it with your nail, hold it with forceps, and then apply it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement;	And if they last for three days, and that which is below the scrotum is swollen, let it be until the abscesses are pacified, and then gently scorch it.
si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	and apply it as you can move it, and be careful not to burn the part of the scrotum, for it will not harm anything.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point;	Cure then the limb of sudden wounds from powder, as we have said in treating powders, and if one copes too much of the heart, it goes above, and will not harm.
cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure then, as we have said, so that it be healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	retain the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division;	The retention of urine is due to stone passage, or frozen blood, or a bow, or flesh born, or similar things, as we have said in the division.
et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz;	and if the urine is not relieved, and you see that the retention is due to a stone in the bladder neck, then it must be treated by raising his knees.
et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet;	and let the feet be placed on the back, and extend his belly from the part above the back, and restrain the patient as much as he can;
et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e;	and then the neck of the bladder is constrained for the passage of the stone above, so that the urine is relieved;
et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme:	and if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you must administer extraction with all the instrument called "syringue," of which its form is described here:
et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil;	and it should be made of fine silver, light and feather-like, like the feathers of an eyelash;
et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	and let its length be one and a half palm lengths, and let it be fine at the tip.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue;	And the manner of expelling urine is that you take a double thread, tie at the end a little wool or cotton, and insert the end of the thread into the syringe;
et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede;	and remove the excess of wool and insert it just to the end of the syringe, then grease the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and seat the patient on the chair, and anoint the bladder and penis with moist oil and olive oil and warm water.
puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude;	then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it reaches the root of the penis, then lift the penis upward toward the opening.
puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors;	then insert the syringe forward until it reaches the bladder, and feel the patient's urine come from the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order because the way it goes is twisted.
puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine;	then the threads are tied little by little, and the urine follows the wool, then it is extracted and the urine flows;
et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	and continue the suction until the bladder is emptied, and loosen the patient's bowels.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When burns or blood come into the bladder, or putrefaction is gathered there, and you see it discharge acidic fluids and medicines, then make all the instrument called "clepsydra," and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus:	It is closed, and if at three perforations:
II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois;	two on one side, and one on the other, as you can see;
et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est;	and the flax is cut so that the medicines are thick enough to anesthetize well, and if we can remove the moisture and apply when needed.
et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens;	and when you see your medicines enter the bladder, place the cuspidor in the moisture, and apply what is needed.
si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens;	if you draw out the moisture from there, and then set it firmly.
si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira;	if the moisture enters there and comes to the bladder now, so that the patient will feel it;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie:	and this is the form of the subtle enema with which we enema the bladder:
si est ci:	and it is as follows:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut;	And it is made of silver or copper, and the head is higher;
et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet;	and over the heart or the hanging ligaments;
puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu;	then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture with which you will enema the bladder into it, then tie it between the two breasts forming a single double thread, and heat that part of the moisture over the fire;
puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie;	pour le chef du clivert en la verge, puis tienne ta main sur la vessie pour toute la moiteur amenante, tant que le malaide sente que celle moiteur est justement venue à la vessie;
et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor;	and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle and pierce it roundly through;
puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument;	then insert the strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a joint, and place within it what you see of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument;
et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	and do so as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder;
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines;	We have already described in the division the methods of stone, and their extraction together with medicines;
et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille;	and we have described the difference between a stone incarcerated by rain, and all the signs, and which stone one should open and treat.
et en la vessie, et en la verge;	and in the bladder, and in the penis;
et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit;	I say that the stone which is incarcerated in the bladder often occurs in children, and this is a sign that the urine has become acidic due to its subtlety.
et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist;	and it passes through the bladder, and greatly afflicts the patient's penis, and it pains him many times, and then diminishes.
et a mout de ces saut li fondemens;	and from these jumps the foundations;
et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece;	and healing is light for children until they are four years old, and very difficult in the elderly, and is moderate for those in between.
et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	and the treatment is lighter for those who have large stones than for those who have small ones.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it must first cleanse the patient with a clyster to remove all the filth from the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it obstructs at times when seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut;	Then take the patient by the feet, and lift and move them into a sitting position, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder and passes out through the urethra.
puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval;	then make the patient sit between your hands, and their hands be below their thighs, so that the bladder hangs entirely downward.
puis la quier et la touche dedens;	then he should probe and touch within;
se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	if you feel the stone in the space, hasten now to incise into the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis;	And if it does not yield to touching with the index finger of your left hand, soften your middle finger if the patient is pregnant, or your ring finger if the patient is young and fully developed.
et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie;	and place the stone in its foundation, probe the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, apply pressure at the neck of the bladder.
puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	then press with your finger, and place the stone at the site where you wish to incise.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille;	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to stretch the fingers of his right hand upwards, and remove the skin which is beneath the fingers in the part where the incision is made.
puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	then he pours the spatumile copant, which is in the form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre;	And he makes the incision between what is between the fingers and the fundament, not in the middle but on the side of the left thigh.
et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans;	and let it be straight on the stone, and his two hands be close to the fundament, and make the incision through so that it is wide on the outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large;
par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail;	by chance the press so the dought which is or foundation, she jumps forth without work;
et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges:	and know that there is bone where it has angles and margins:
si est griés a issir;	it is cracked to issue;
et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	and if it has a part that is below, resembling a groove, and round, of which the issue is light.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant;	for those where it has angles and margins, make the incision larger;
et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe;	and if it does not jump, then you must hold it with tongs that are also like a file at the head, to move and extract the bone so that it does not escape.
ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief;	or you pour out from beneath the curved subtle instrument at the head;
et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole;	and if you cannot arrange it thus, widen the little hole a bit, and if the wound is without pus, cleanse it with vitriol;
et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	and if there are more than one stone, pour out the largest first at the neck of the bladder, then incise above, then draw it out, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, you must sew it up, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide:	For two things happen to the patient:
ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder;	or he dies, or the urine comes down there where the loins cannot close it up;
mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces;	but in any case strive to treat, or to dilate with forceps, until you treat it piece by piece;
et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut;	and when you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloes and dragon's blood, bind it, and place over it a moist cloth in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to soothe the hot abscess.
puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	then place the patient's head on their neck, and do not remove the bandage for three days.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you dislocate it, raise the head of the bone very well with oil and water, then treat with an ointment of defluxicon and basilicon until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine:	And if hot abscesses or corruptions and clots of blood in the bladder occur in the wound, and are thereby retained by the urine, which is known to be in such a manner that it does not flow with the urine:
boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit;	then thrust your thumb into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will rot the bladder and cause corruption.
puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then cleanse the wound of water and oil and salt, and assist the patient in all ways that you see, until he is healed;
et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	and it is necessary that for all the wounds you treat, you bind his two thighs and apply the medicines to the limb.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir;	And if the stone is small, and it is pierced from the genital area, and urine cannot pass;
si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	if the treatment of that which I have said so far involves cutting him many times, you are excused from this cutting due to this treatment.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have already proven this in such a manner.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take I iron fork according to this form and fix it in the fire with three angles.
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie;	then take a thread and tie it around the genital area below the stone, so that it cannot move back into the bladder.
puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere;	then push the probe gently into the vein until it reaches the stone;
et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part;	and turn the probe in your hand at the stone little by little, until you can pierce the stone from another side;
si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	if the urine comes soon, then press your hand on that which is stuck from the stone that is within the vein.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides;	if it is broken soon, and jumps out with the urine, then the patient is cured.
et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie;	and if you cannot do this for any reason that prevents it, so tie a thread under the stone and another above it, then place the vein against the stone between the two ties, and extract the stone, untie one of the threads, and clean the congealed blood from the wound.
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let the treatment continue until he is healed.
de la piere des femmes	from the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses:	And often there is a need to remove a stone from women, and if it happens even once, the treatment is serious, and it is forbidden for three reasons:
l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge;	it is one that the woman may be a virgin;
et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	and the second is that it is impossible to find a woman skilled enough who will reveal herself to the mirrors, especially if she is chaste.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains;	and the third way is that it may happen that no skilled woman can be found for this art with her hands;
et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil;	and the fourth way is that the stone in the woman may be more embedded than the stone in the man, which is why a deeper incision is necessary and there is great fear involved. And if such necessity arises for this, you must find a skilled midwife, and at points like these, one must use subtle chaste mirrors.
et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere;	and it presents a wise dance in the life of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and commands her to do what you command about the investigation of the stone;
et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge:	and carefully observe whether the woman is a virgin:
adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere;	then she must seek the stone;
et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	and if she finds it, she must hold to her duty, and advises her to perform her duty or examination on the patient, and place and press her left hand on the bladder firmly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse;	If she finds it, she must move it gradually from the entrance of the bladder down to below, until it reaches the root of the thigh;
puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie;	then incise on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the groin, and let it be such that the stone appears in that part;
et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite;	and do not move his hand over the stone or under it, and cut it at first with small incisions;
puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont:	then apply the reed to the incision, if you feel the stone, enlarge the wound until the stone can exit with force, and know that many kinds of stones exist.
c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	this is to know, small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and those with points.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know the signs to know the outcome.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez;	And if the stone fails to come out, put vinegar in it and hold it for an hour until the stone is dissolved.
puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre;	then return to your work, until the stone is removed, and have with you the tools I told you about in the extraction of the stone from those who assist you in your work;
et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide;	and if it flows out, and it is from the artery that has been cut, put the powder on the wound and the bandage of linen and wool, and do not re-open this, and leave the stone untreated, lest by chance the patient die.
puis cure la plaie.	then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is relieved, and the swelling subsides, then return to your work until the stone is removed.
de hernie carnouse	of fatty hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef;	Aqua vitae is nothing other than a collection of moisture or white spirits, which come from the heart of the juniper, that contains the essence.
et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef;	and it is called "syphac", and sometimes properly in the membrane of the egg, if one thinks that it is another egg.
et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit;	and it is the skin of the yolk between the white syphac that we have said;
et ceu n’avient se poc non.	and this happens not often.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this rheum is due to weakness that comes to the embryos, and this material is spread.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors:	And sometimes it comes from striking the shoulders, and this moisture has many colors:
ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus;	or it is a yellowish color similar to jaundice, or without red, or black, or watery white, and this happens more.
et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	and these are the signs to recognize this condition, because if it is white syphac as we have said, it is an abscess, and its size is long like that of an egg, but it does not strike the shoulders, for it has moisture throughout.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef;	And if there is moisture in the proper cloth, the abscesses are incised with a part of the egg, and because of this it is thought that it is another kind of egg.
et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien;	And if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the white yolk, one feels it well;
donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	Therefore, when you wish to know the color of the moisture, you must probe with the entire intervening square, as its form is described above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the intervening square, judge of what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors;	And when we treat it with iron, the patient must be bled according to our power and the condition of their body;
puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz;	then place the sponge on their back, above something a bit high, and put dust of cloth over him;
puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions;	sit on his left side, and instruct the minister to sit on the right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs of the patient's heart.
puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir;	then take the leit spatium and cut the skin of the patient's heart lengthwise from above the knife until below the ribs, and make the incision entirely straight by dividing the skin of the patient's heart down to the white line, and gently cauterize it according to your ability.
puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont;	then puncture the white line fully with an awl, and抽取出所有液体，然后插入你的指甲，将白线上方的皮肤撑开。
et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement;	and do not touch the patient's heart, but only the white line.
cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue;	cut out the whole or in pieces by itself the substance of it thoroughly, for if you do not cut it properly, the pus will return.
et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac;	and if the egg jumps during your work, you must reset it in its place when you have completed the work on the surface.
puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then join the two flaps of the heart incision with one suture, then treat it as other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc;	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it is necessary to tie the vessels that are suspensive, fearing the hemorrhage.
puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	then cut the heart entirely from the suspensive vessels, extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices;	And if an ailment is collected in two parts together, know that these are two branches;
si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset;	if you treat the other part as you did the first equally, then wipe away the blood, and put on the wound moistened wool in rose oil;
et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	and put on another layer of moistened wool in wine and oil, and place over the two joints, and put on top doubled cloth bandages, and bind it all with the ligature according to this form:
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil;	then take two cloth bandages, and fold them in the shape of strips of wool according to this likeness, and assemble them by stitching at the waistband of the trousers, one head of the shoulder above the fundament down to the back, and the other at the part of the arm.
et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier;	and the other two heads above the two angles, and let all the restriction gather in the loop of the arm.
et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers;	and sometimes this branch of the fire cautery is medicated instead of iron branding, and you should use a sharp cautery blade, peel off the skin from the scales, and heat it as we have said, so that the white syface containing the water is exposed.
si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	and take the cautery in this form, and prick that syface with the pins, and brand it with this sharp hot cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout;	And dip the cautery in all ways that you can, until you moisten it thoroughly.
et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef;	and make sure that the fire does not touch the eye.
et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve;	and know that this work is more valuable;
et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille;	and during the stopping of bleeding, and instructing that the operations of cutting be performed;
et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	and if anything else prevents you, or an abscess, or bleeding, or other things, then treat what prevents you according to what was previously said.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit;	And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to wait for this operation because of its horror, then perform perforation as I have instructed. And when you are certain by the signs that we have said indicate a watery abscess, then make the patient sit on the raised seat;
pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors;	 pierced the abscess at the part opposite to the entire spinal column, and make the perforation along the length of the body;
et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer;	and let the wounds be wide so that all the blood may flow freely;
puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee;	then place cotton on the vein, and bind it, and let the remaining blood flow out, then treat the wound until it is healed;
et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant;	and if the white cloth does not allow the blood to flow out through the mouth of the wound, then you must insert a quill or the instrument used to treat blood in hydroptic conditions, as its form is described earlier.
et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	and widen the wound, and know that the blood will return, and gather after six months or so. And when it has gathered as described before, then the patient's days will pass without issue.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess from the groin
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse;	Know that in this branch of the section there is much to fear in various positions, which is why it seems to me that one should beware.
et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	and I will tell you the procedure and similar characteristics of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions;	Therefore, I say that many abscesses come from flesh, and especially from wounds;
et c’est par mout de cas.	and it is by chance.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion;	This means that it comes from bitter and acrid superfluity, which is spread in wounds, or by percussion.
et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors;	and the color of the abscess depends on the color of the flesh.
et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief;	and if he does not find any pain, and there is an abscess;
et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	and by chance it is an abscess with green and yellowish color, and sometimes comes from a vein, or swell due to a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois;	When it is from a vein, it is known by the arrangement of the hot abscess; when you press it with your fingers.
et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	and it is not fitting that you touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars;	The one that is caused by swelling of the vein is known by its arrangement in the expression when touched with your fingers, and can well be incised based on this appearance, and on other symptoms.
et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	and it is that you take the heart of the joints, then place the egg on top, and stretch the white evenly, and release the suspender from all sides of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope;	If the egg is already hardened with these cords, then you must stretch the egg, and take it out;
et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	and if it is air in the white, or within the vessels, then you must release all that tension, and take it out completely.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birthplace of the flesh is open behind, it must be cut out completely, and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is completed, dress the wound with moistened wool in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other remedies until it heals.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess from the groin
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait;	This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping resembling a bourjoon, with the joints being softened, and the patient suddenly experiences great pain when it moves.
et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	and the treatment for this disease is well prepared like the one mentioned before, and we will tell you the work of it, according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment;	It must be that you seat the patient on an elevated chair, then put the suspensory ligament of the testicles above your two thighs, at all the vessels near the penis, and carefully stretch them forth.
puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples;	then incise the sharp-bladed spatula wide across the vessels, until they are exposed, and then brand from each side, as we have said in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief;	then insert a needle with double thread, and tie it at the first place where the vein has come out, and tie it again at the other end.
puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues;	then incise them straight in the middle, according to the length of the body, and remove the corrupt fluids.
puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions;	then treat the wound as with others or with honey, so that no vein becomes inflamed that nourishes either of the joints;
car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz;	for if this happens, there is no harm, and since all the veins become inflamed, it must be treated in all the veins;
si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	so that the eyes do not lose their nourishment due to incising the veins, and dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the syphax
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions;	The occurrences of this branch are due to the section that comes from syphilis, or extension on the abdomen in the region of the inguinal area, for which the intestines descend from that rupture to one of the joints;
et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes:	and this rupture is either from syphilis, or from the extension of it, and come from these two types of cause:
ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses;	or by percussion, or by jumping, or by lifting a heavy burden, or by similar things;
et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement;	and the signs when it is due to the extension of the syphilis, are that they occur little by little, over a long period of time, and do not come suddenly;
et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	and the abscesses are equal until near the fundament, because syphilis presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is from the section of the ileum, that it causes a sudden onset of pain, and various abscesses appear beneath the skin, for the discharge of the intestine and the body below the ileum.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the cicatrices with the intestine are retained inquisitively, and cause great pain to the patient, especially when they are pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments with iron causing fear, for which it is advisable to avoid them.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir;	And the manner of the work is that you instruct the patient to warm the intestines with his hand from within through the wound, if it can enter.
puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes;	then bind it around his neck. Between your hands, lift the thighs.
puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc;	then the heart is above, and scrape all the skin from the roots long;
puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir;	then insert into the flaps of the side inches as you need to open the wound, and let them be such that the intestines may freely protrude.
puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars;	then cauterize the buttock beneath the skin, until the white fat is completely exposed from all sides.
puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac;	then insert your index finger where the buttock follows, between the white fat beneath the skin of the egg, and between the second layer of fat, and separate what is behind the egg and between the second layer of fat.
et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille;	and then move your right hand inside the buttock, and place the white fat on top with your left hand, and lift the egg towards all the fat towards the side.
et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement;	and instruct the minister to extend the egg upward, and untie those that are behind the ligament;
et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz;	and if there is any part of the intestine exposed or white fat, and if you find any such thing, put it back into the abdomen;
puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions;	then take a needle with a thick thread made of several strands, and sew it in the rear part of the fat, which is after the skin of the hips;
aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz;	after suturing, then clip the head of the shoulder that appears with threads, until there are only four threads remaining;
puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars;	then arrange them one over the other in the shape of a cross, and bind the fat, which we have said is below the skin of the hips, with a strong bandage of two parts;
puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne;	then envelop the head of the shoulder with cloth, and bind it tightly in two places, so that no fluid that nourishes it can enter into it, and an abscess does not arise;
et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi;	and again put the bandage according to the first long bandage around it, and after these two bandages leave a space under the heart of the shoulder blade as large as one hand;
et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte;	and afterwards the rest according to the roundness that the egg carried;
puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant;	then place in the part that is under the skin of the shoulder blade, as much as the wound requires, and the bow, as we have said above;
puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	then apply moistened wool in oil, and place it on the wounds, and put the bandage as we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the whites of the eyes are cauterized to prevent bleeding after incision due to doubt.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui;	For this often happens, and leave the ligature until it falls off by itself;
et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece;	and if it delays in falling off, then dissolve it with hot water, and apply what we have said until it falls off.
puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	then treat the wound with other dressings until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of fatty hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, I have never known anyone to dare treat it with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz;	And the ancients said that it is made like the branches intertwined around a vine, in such a manner that you bind the vessels, after cutting them lightly during dislocation.
puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient;	then take some of it, and treat the abscess of those who work until the vessels clot.
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and the treatment as we have said, until he is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus;	No occasion comes of rupture in veins, as we have said, and open the eyes;
et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres;	and feel no parts of the intestines at the incisions, and if any are felt, it is little, and change all hours.
et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent;	and in any case, if it remains too long in this spot, the wound or syphilis will develop, as parts of the intestines are felt.
et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert;	and this happens due to the extension of syphilis which is in the veins, as we have said, because it extends, then softens and swells the eyes and opens.
et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit;	and the treatment involves fire cautery, as we have already said before;
et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere:	and sometimes it is treated with a iron in this manner:
et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois;	and it is that the patient lies sovin on his back between your hands, then cover the part of the rupture swollen in width according to the size of three doix.
et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac;	and then extract the syface that is under the skin where it protrudes, then take the rag and place it over the apparent part of the syface.
et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre;	and press it well on the abdomen, then suture the two apparent parts of the syface over the rag, and suture them both.
puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines;	then extract the head of the wart, and do not cut or extend the egg nor anything else, as I have told you in the treatment of the branch of the intestines;
puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	then treat it as you would treat wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, cleanse and treat the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The seam is constrained, and shows no sign in the rupture, and the cauteries are healed in this place, and closer to safety.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin of the cheeks
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir;	Many times the soles of the feet become softened in some people because the flesh within is softened, and it must be seen.
et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil;	and it is necessary, when one wishes to treat it, to make the patient lie on their back, and cut away the softened skin above the natural skin.
puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement;	then join the two edges with a缝合线，如果你愿意，可以将多余的软化皮肤用三针或四针牢固地缝合。请注意，这里的"costure"在古法语中意为缝合线或缝合针。
puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	then stitch between the seams, and treat the wound like other wounds until it heals, and change the bandage.
dou chastrement	by just punishment
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre;	Castrations are forbidden in our law, and because of this, I shall not speak of them in this book;
et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres:	and it is necessary to use force only for two manners:
dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure;	of which one is that the eyes should be able to answer when asked and know how to treat the wound;
et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	and the other, because we often need to castrate some animals to help us, such as goats, sheep, and dogs, and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres:	I therefore say that castration is performed in two ways:
ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	or by attraction, or by splitting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant;	In the one we perform by attraction, place the animal in hot water until the cords are softened and remain;
puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	then take them with your hand, until they are relaxed and you no longer feel them.
Du chastrement de taille:	On castration of the tail:
covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez;	It is necessary to hold the animal, and press the skin of the cords with your left hand, then tie the suspender, and cut each testicle cleanly when you have well scalded them.
et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz;	and he lets any little pus and thin pus which is under the vessels remain.
et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure;	and this method of castration is better than that done by attraction, for in attraction, by chance, some of the testicles remain, causing the beast to desire lust.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	then treat the wound until it is healed.
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites.
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes:	Herms and Hermaphrodites are according to two methods in men:
l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	one is that between the two testicles, it is open as if it were the shape of a woman's figure, or it has hair, and sometimes in the course of urination.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other method is for women, placed above the knife as a rod and two coins.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies;	And the treatment for men and women is that you clean all the wounds thoroughly, and treat them as other wounds.
en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	in the second manner, of men whose urine jumps through the skin of the scrotum, it has no treatment.
de la tentigene	of the beard
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir;	Tentingene is an adjointed char on the natural part, as it is too ugly to see;
et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	and some women have it as large as a hand, and this is its treatment.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement;	It is necessary that you dye the excess of the tentingene with your hand or fingers, and apply it lightly.
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do not use too strong a fomentation, lest blood flow occur, and continue the treatment until it is healed.
et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	and for another char that arises at the opening of the arm, apply it, and sometimes jump out forcefully, and resembles a cow, and because of this they called it in ancient times "cow disease.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If you must cut it, as we have said regarding the tumor and its treatment until it is healed.
de erratique	of erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis;	Erratic if it is when the nature of the woman is not perceived, or the wound is small;
et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est;	and is natured at birth, or accident by disease that has come.
ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit;	or it is by sharp injury, or through a fine or thick thread, and is made in the flesh, or in the sides, or beneath, or that be.
et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir;	and defend conception, childbirth, and by accident the flowers to have.
et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	and the knowledge of this is through the gaze of the midwife.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the swellings are near and apparent, seek with your fingers or touch them.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi:	If it is through a fine thread, and it is near the two lips, hasten, and remove it thus.
met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes;	Place your two index fingers together, and have the woman on her back, spreading her legs;
puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens;	then spread the two lips until the underlying flesh is round and over the stoppers;
puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	then take wool, and fat in oil, and place it over the wound, and let the woman lie on her back each day so that it does not heal too quickly.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the syphilis is hard and thick, it is necessary to scrape with a spatula resembling a bay leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope;	If the stoppers are of born flesh, suspend them at the inch and the gill;
et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef;	and use the blood-stanching medicines, such as ice, dragon's blood, incense, and abundant egg white;
puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder;	then administer a broad pledget of wick, so that the wound cannot heal;
et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec;	and thus be long, and administer a tent of dry linen;
puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then continue to treat with other remedies until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when a carbuncle brings forth pus, it should be treated according to this method, unless it is an encrusted abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For an encrusted abscess in the carbuncle, one should not touch it to incise.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul;	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that without cause commonly occur, and when hemorrhoids are old they become tumors.
et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	and we have already described the symptoms of aus, and the signs, and I will now say those that can be cured.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and thrombosed ones, when they are fully ripe in the carbuncle, do not appear by touch; except those cured with iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the sore, which one can feel, are those one can treat.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses;	Therefore, you should place the woman in a cold room, then warm the altar with tongs, and put the copa in its roots, then sprinkle with medicines that constrict blood, such as açaí, dragon's blood, and incense, and similar things.
puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide;	then let his feet rest against the wall for an hour, then place them in cold water;
et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	and if the bleeding continues, have him sit in a decoction of sumac and bark of pomegranate peels and galls and similar things, then take barley flour, mix it with honey and garlic, and apply it as a poultice to his back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops bleeding, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir;	If not, apply suction cups to the back and breasts without causing injury;
puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	then take wool, and mix it with the juice of plantain or agrimony with old wine, and apply it to the place.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when the abscess has come to a head, treat the place with ointment until it heals.
et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul;	and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a rough head, so it should be treated as I have said for the thumb.
et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and continue the treatment until he is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses of the arm
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscesses occur in the arm, such as chancre, porous abscess, herpes, estiomenes, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscess, and many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe;	Therefore, I must speak in this treatise of the hot abscess that comes from the arsis, which is not one of the abscesses that boil over.
et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	and if you wish to know the iron work, observe whether the abscess is hard at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and if it becomes red when you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie;	Therefore, do not hasten to pierce it; let it continue to mature until the pain is alleviated.
et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe;	and then place the patient on a seat, and have two small seats where he can recline, and support him on his back and align his feet with the lower part of the leg;
et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien;	and spread his thighs apart, and place his arms over his knees, and bind them well with a firm band.
puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme;	then apply the cautery to the right side, and bring the instrument used for opening the mouth of the blister hereafter described.
et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide;	and you must ensure that when you see the instrument administered to this blister, you insert the first needle to know the depth of the blister, so that what enters from the instrument does not go deeper than it should, and does not burn the patient.
et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve;	and if the instruments are larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the wound with strips of cloth, so that the instruments do not cause pain.
et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	and it is necessary that he place the horn of the instrument above, and hold the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit;	And when the abscess is open, and it is made soft by hand, it is necessary to cover it with a cloth, or a sponge soaked in liquid.
et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec;	and when the boil is evacuated, it is necessary that you place wet cloths in oil of rosemary, or in oil of turpentine.
et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites;	and place the cloth over the depth of the wound, and put above the wound and on the blade clean wet cloths in water or cooked oil.
puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then apply the treatment after two days of ointment application until it is healed;
et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites;	and occasionally lift the wound and the sore with a clyster of water and honey, and then with water or roots of lily and wormwood that have been cooked.
puis reveigne a l’oignement.	then resume the ointment application.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is placed on the margin, you must take care to avoid cauterizing with iron, but cure it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar:	It is necessary first for the midwife to know the natural birth figures, and the signs are when you see the woman press her abdomen, and desire to smell the air:
adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir;	then hasten for the child to be born quickly.
adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui;	then know that this birth is according to the natural figure, and the child comes out with its head, and the next one follows with it.
et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost;	and when you see these signs, it is necessary to gently press his abdomen, so that the child comes out quickly;
car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification;	for when it descends on its head, she follows with him, and the mature ones are cleansed of their superfluities by good cleansing;
et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	and he who comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises;	for he comes sometimes on his feet, and comes forth into the body or the shoulder, and the hands, or where he comes on the abdomen, or side, and is turned by accident over the neck, and in other evil shapes.
si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	it is necessary that the midwife be wise and subtle in these matters, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the shapes how one should assist her.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent;	If a child comes to his head through natural birth, and the mother gives birth easily, and the virtue of her is weak, then I make her sit on a saddle, or the women hold her.
et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	and arise her nature of oil or fenugreek that is cooked, and then pour the bile between her two small spatulas as their form is.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers;	and cut the second one, and scrape with her nail until the moisture that is contained comes out;
et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament;	and press the abdomen of the woman until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must cleanse the woman with fenugreek seed oil and olive oil.
puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre:	and then make her breathe deeply and expel air forcefully, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour.
si istra maintenant l’enfes.	if now treat the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc;	And if the two hands swell, you must reset them gently little by little;
et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut;	and if they cannot enter, you place the woman on the seat and lift her feet up high;
puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement;	then place the seat on the ground, and hold the woman so she does not move during the procedure;
et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	and if the hand cannot enter and the child has died, you cut the hand with the knife that was placed before, and extract the child, resetting it equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	from the issue of the child at his feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut;	and if the child comes to its feet, you must lift them up;
et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz;	and then file little by little, until they are equal;
puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	then pinch the flesh and stretch it little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi;	Can it jump up to the knees if commanded, and make it sneeze by pressing.
si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	if it jumps, if God wills it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not feverish as we have said, turn it little by little, until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is lightly.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier;	And if it does not come to pass as we have, say take a piece of flax thread, and silk oil, and melted gum, and grind them all in the mortar;
et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz;	and apply the nature of the woman inside and over this ointment, then make her sit in warm water until below the ribs.
et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre;	and when it is softened underneath, he makes a collar of myrrh, puts it there, and lets it remain one hour;
puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	then he makes it sit on the seat, then he makes it sneeze and holds its mouth and nose, and he gently rubs its belly, for the child jumps now.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the issue from the child above his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc;	When the child comes into this form, place his hands little by little;
puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit;	then it is suspended around its neck, and its feet hang down, and it lies on the bed;
et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval;	and fold its hands little by little, and then place its hands on the belly, and remove the cushions underneath, until it is ready to hang down.
et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains;	and if the child does not come out, take its feet and twist them, then twist its head upward, and push with your hands;
et ewe l’enfant poc et poc;	and slowly the child comes out;
et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	and instruct the woman to strain herself until the child comes out.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the issue of the child which comes with one hand wide open
I covient engignier a ramener la main:	it is necessary to devise ways to bring back the hand:
s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler;	if it cannot be brought back, lift the woman and go;
s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment;	if she cannot walk, make her lie on the bed, and twist her legs;
puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit;	then administer the muscillaige as I have described;
et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main;	and if she does not give birth, place her on the seat, then try to bring back the hand;
et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	and if the child is in its natural position, make her sneeze, and instruct her to bear with it until the child passes.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the birth of the child at its neck, and have spread its hands, and its face turned towards the back of its mother.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement;	It is necessary that the bail hold her hand, then turn it little by little, and she gently;
et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc;	and when it is equal, place the natural muscular texture of flax and oil on it, as we have said, then instruct her to move it little by little;
et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne;	and when you have done this, place her on the seat, and instruct her to bear with it;
et la fai esternuer.	and make them sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in this same manner for all the secondine
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie;	When it comes to force in this manner on the second joint, empty the second joint with your finger, until all the moisture is removed;
et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes;	and if the injury can be made on its face and on its neck, then empty it from the mouth, do not hold it back, and suffocate the injury;
puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois:	then put the child back in, until you have placed it as it should be, and instruct the woman to push once.
adonques si istra legierement.	then gently insert it.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the issue of the twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII;	Know that twins are born often, and sometimes three or four are born.
et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	and this is not a strange thing, and rarely happens.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom;	These are strange things, and do not live, if at all;
je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude;	I know these, that they are multiplied, and are severed by the syphilitic who devises them, who is attached to the mouth;
et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	and sometimes they issue naturally like ten under one, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait;	And if they issue smoothly, the treatment as we have said, and let the fine cloth do quickly and easily what it does;
et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	and do so as it is worth to bring about healing.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient;	Sometimes they are formed in the liver I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, and are all formed in the shape of a child by the measurement of the glorious sage, and it is fitting that the bailiff know all this, for by accident such things happen.
si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	it should be done according to what is fitting.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains;	When you treat the woman who has died with a stillborn child or is pregnant, as I have said in the division, and there is no discharge, and you are forced to perform manual procedures;
si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort;	it is fitting that you know whether the woman is in good health, and has no complications or fear of death;
si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees;	if it is necessary to treat the woman on her back, and let her shoulders inclined downward, and the legs raised;
et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant;	and let the minister place her in two parts, or bind her to the bed so that she is not treated when the child descends;
puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges;	then rub the mouth of the patient with moist oils mixed with myrtle and fenugreek and flaxseed, then anoint her hands with these oils and spices.
puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief;	then gently place them on the patient, then choose a location where she will lie that is suitable for this, and ensure that the child is prepared to descend onto her head.
si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes;	If the lancet is inserted into his eyes or neck or in his mouth or under the palate or below the beard or in the temple or near the ribs, and if the descent is on a vein, then the lancet or knife and middle ribs are pierced;
et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide;	And it is necessary that you hold the lancet in your right hand, and place the clamp between the fingers of your left hand, and gently press with all your hand, and insert the lancet into any of these places that we have mentioned, until it comes to the thing empty.
et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	And this is the form of the lancet:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz;	Then insert it against the other lancet, or the third if you need it, so that the extractions be equal.
et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	and then let it be equal in moving from one side to the other, to allow it to come out, and may the teeth be used to hold it, as is shown here:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie;	And if a part of it remains, instruct the patient to move any of his eye muscles, and direct them to that part, and cut the other part;
et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if there remains none of it, place this tooth or something higher on the area, and do so until all of it is out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote;	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back due to contraction, then you must wrap it with a cloth, until all of it comes out.
puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	then on the joint of the sole or with the knife, and so you must do in the other hand, and with both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue;	And if the head of the child is large and the birth canal is narrow, or there is an acute swelling gathered, you must insert the pointed spatule between your hands, cut the swelling, and extract the acute swelling;
ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui;	or you may do it with the instrument called "almidach", whose form comes with the instruments or chapter that follows this.
et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment;	and do the same if the infant has a large head naturally.
et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer;	and then cut the bones with the tongs, and if the head has come out and is held by the forceps, split it until the moisture that is more inside comes out.
et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues;	and if it cannot come out, cut it out in pieces as you can.
et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	and if it is swollen in the abdomen or beneath the ribs, you must puncture it until the fluids flow.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the child is under its feet, the traction is light, and the direction to the mouth of the birth canal is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main;	And if it is swollen in the abdomen or the testicles, you must extract it with a knife wrapped in a cloth.
et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre;	and cut open the abdomen or the testicles until the fluids that are inside flow out.
et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris;	and if the other limb is amputated and the head remains, pour hot oil on its hand to burn it, and cut it down to the opening of the wound.
puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer;	then one to two drops of wine or vinegar;
et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses;	and if the opening of the boil is narrowed due to a hot abscess that has come about, it should not be worked on, but rather moist and greasy substances should be applied.
et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	and apply plasters, and soak a cloth in moistening and softening water.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif;	And if the injury is on his side, and you can set it equal, apply what we have said for a living child.
et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	and if we do not have the ability, apply wine in small amounts, and do not leave any of the vinegar behind.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris;	And when you have done this, administer to them what we have said for abscesses that come in the liver;
et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	and if bleeding occurs, it should be treated with cold water, and other dressings should be administered.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly an infant had died, then I sutured the other [one] over it, and prevented the death of the other.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, an abscess formed in the mouth, and swelled so much that it opened, and began to cause great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called for the treatment, and I thought long about it, and could not staunch the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a plaster with strong吸引力，从中取出了一块骨头，之后几天又取出了其他一些。
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marvelled much, for the belly has no bone.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought it was the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point;	I wish the wound clean, and in my hands bones, until the woman was in better condition;
et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu;	and I kept the woman long thus, and it was indeed a little bone from the shoulder.
et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	and I have recorded this chapter only because when the master finds an unusual thing, he should know how to provide aid.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to reset the dislocation to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres;	After this comes the form of the presser, to which one applies the books;
et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	and at two turns of the head of the two shoulders.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux;	All in all, the horns should be more delicate of the retractor, and made of ebony or boxwood;
et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi;	and let the mouth be twice as wide, and the margin of the branches one palm and a half long.
et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus;	and between the two limbs there should be two adjustments of the same wood, which should be firmly fixed in both, half a palm long or a bit more.
et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	and these two adjustments are inserted in the mouth of the clamp to open when one turns the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles;	Another form, resembling it more subtle and lighter, be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the likeness of tongs;
et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large;	and let it have two shoulder joints, as you see, of long width, and two bones of breadth;
et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes;	and when you see the vein open for the entire instrument, place the woman on the bed, with her feet hanging and legs spread, then insert the two shoulder joints of the instrument together into the vein, and hold the head of the instrument between her thighs;
puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	then manipulate the instrument with your hand as you would with tongs, equally on both sides, according to the quantity that you see needs to open the mouth of the vein, so that it does what it should.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances;	This instrument is entirely above ground, and its images are multiplied.
et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	And when the mirrors have been prepared, they are more haste in their work, and appear taller to them by virtue of their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not use the instrument properly unless it is prepared, for its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis;	When the secondine is retained in childbirth, you must instruct the patient to hold her hips, and then make her sneeze by sniffing condisi, and hold her hands at her mouth and nose.
et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	and if she jumps because of this, well done.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire;	And if she does not jump, take a pot, and make a perforation or coverleap, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the mare, such as caraway, rue, fennel, chamomile, cassia, and centaury.
toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu;	all these herbs, or any of them, be cooked or boiled in water on the fire;
puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris;	then put a cane or pertus in the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the maris, until the vapors enter the maris;
puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	then make him sneeze, as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second joint moves quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine;	And if it remains after this treatment, and is not cured, command the bailiff to moisten his left hand in sesame oil or in tallow grease, and then apply it to the affected area, and seek a second opinion.
et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction;	and when she has found it, take it out and extend it little by little straight, so that the maris does not cry at the extraction.
mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie;	but it must be moved lightly to the right and to the left, and then treat;
si venra et se desaerdra.	if it comes and is reduced.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes;	And if the opening of the nostril is narrowed, we have said the treatment for sneezing and fumigating herbs.
et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire;	and if it is not of all that we have said, take care that you do not err in treating.
mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon;	but it must be that which is at the opening of the nostril, that you bind it to the thigh of the woman, then cleanse with an ointment enema.
si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer;	if it heals and returns, and will come forth.
mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	but nonetheless, when she [it] produces such a bad smell in the stomach and head, and causes the patient discomfort.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu:	Then one must therefore perform appropriate fumigations for it:
aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	none of the ancients have proven the fumigation with cress and dried figs effective.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman for the retention of flowers and the secondine is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu;	And it appears similar to a cane, and one places the head subtlety in its nature, and the shoulders wide over the fire;
et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	and let the fumigations be above the coals, and the scab until it is weakened, and begin another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac:	Many children are born who do not have the fundament pierced, but instead have it stopped by some subtle means.
si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche;	If it is necessary for the lady to pierce this side according to her duty, and she does not pierce it with a sharp spatillum, and be careful that the insertion does not touch it;
puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	then place on moistened wool in wine and oil, and apply the ointment treatment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not close, put or hold a plug of lint, and let it remain in place, and be removed when the child seems ready to go into chambers.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme;	And sometimes this塞封 comes suddenly from a wound or abscess;
si covient coper celui soudement:	then it is necessary to cauterize it suddenly:
si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	if it needs to be treated, as we have said for the lead plunger.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the fistula of the fundament
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors;	Fistulas that come from the fundament are nodations, and grow larger as they leave the fundament, or in the space between two parts, for one fistula or many.
et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans;	and when that node is old, you operate, and cure moist white or fine warts, and sometimes these Persian fistulas.
et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	and they are known by those who experience excretion or windiness when the patient has an excretion, and by accident due to a sudden movement.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge;	And if the fistulas extend as far as the bladder, and as far as the midpoint of the penis;
et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	and they reach as far as the hip joint, and as far as the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant:	And thus one knows the Persian fistula in the anus, and not elsewhere:
et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	and it is that you place your index finger or foundation, and insert a thin needle of brass or iron into the fistula when there is tortuosity.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit;	and if there is tortuosity, insert a thin catheter of linen, or horsehair, as long as you feel the catheter or hair with your finger;
et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit:	and if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge or wind or pus, as we have said:
saiches qu’elle ne perce mie;	you know that it does not perforate;
si te haste dou curer.	if you hasten to treat.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is pierced to the bladder or to the urethra, it will discharge urine, and cannot be healed by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu;	if it perforates to the hip joint, the catheter comes from that place.
s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement;	if there is no torsion and the source of the pain is within, it is set in place by itself, and neither medicine nor sudden application of ointment helps.
et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	and in Persian fistulas there is no cure other than labor and the vain effort of foolish people who undertake it.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos;	For those that are neither Persian nor ancient, there is hope of healing with iron, as I have experienced, and it is that the patient lies on his back.
et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre;	and the patient stretches his legs up to his thighs, and bends his knees toward his abdomen.
puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	then apply a bandage of linen or wool if there is torsion, as long as you know where the bandage should be applied.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet;	If the patient feels pain deep within the pelvis, you must place your index finger there; if then you sense that the nerves have been punctured;
et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans;	and if you discover that it is the sac or flesh between your finger and thumb, then you know it is perforated;
si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	if there is no travail there, it cannot be cured.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc;	One can cure well some, but this happens rarely.
et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit;	And the aid that one makes, it is that one heats the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as was said before.
et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement;	and he heats it thoroughly in the fistula until it comes from the pelvis.
et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil;	and do this two or three times, until you know that these charred cinders have been burned, which resemble the feathers of a bird;
et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	and then dress the wet wounds with butter until the cinders are out, then dress with ointment to heal the flesh and join it.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is thus set, it is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez;	If this, cannot be cured otherwise;
et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur;	and if the tent is inserted, and does not pierce to the depth which is the foundation, and between your finger and the tent place a thick covering of flesh or grease, and you will see the fistula where the covering is removed.
si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente;	if the pus from the beginning of the fistula, and apply it before the tent, and cauterize after, until it reaches the head of the tent.
et sera delivré li tente, et cherra;	and the tent will be released, and fall;
puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	and remove those charred marks that seem like a bird's feather, and let none remain.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the seton fails and cuts between you and the wound, cauterize with fire or medicinal water.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses:	For the fire cautery combines two good things:
c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor;	that is to say, the burning of these charred areas, and the stopping of blood and the drying of moisture;
puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe;	and the treatment of wet tents with butter or ground cheese, until the wounds emit pus, and then let the charred areas burn in the pus;
puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	and treat the wound with tight ointments containing hard charcoal, and these are the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is sound and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes just to the point of the fundament and is distant from the body, touch or place your finger at the fundament, and inquire it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres:	If you feel the tent and between them is linen or silk or flesh, or it is about to pierce, do not have any outlets unless there is a way of faith and hope, through the administration of one of the three methods:
ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier;	or you cautery it as we have said, or you cauterize it through and through, or if you can, put in tents and dressings as before;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit;	and do not apply too much powder, so that you do not cauterize the tissue that holds the foundation, and let the excretions come through it without willing it;
puis le cure, si com nos avons dit;	then dress the wound as we have said;
par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé;	by chance it will be healed, or you remove that covering and cleanse it since it is cauterized from the foundation, or with a tent or another pointed instrument;
puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues;	then cleanse the wounded flesh which is in the wound, as much as you can;
puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement:	then study to restore the wound, and to stop the fistula below the fundament:
si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	if it is a lighter matter for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere:	And sometimes fistulas occur in this manner:
et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	and it is when you insert a probe into the fistula, and it is situated near the fundament beneath the skin, take a probe pierced at the end according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And you poke the thread into two turns, and push the tent onto all the thread in the fistula until it reaches the tip.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement;	and if it is deep within the margin of the fundament, then extract the thread of that puncture, as you would insert your finger or probe.
et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II;	and pull the head of the thread, and join the two heads together, hold them against each other, and let them one day or two.
et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent;	and hold them together once, until the thread covers the spaces between the two, and sews.
puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	then treat the wound until it is stitched and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not perforate, make it perforate in all ways that you can, provided it is not too close to the surface.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not fitting to cauterize for the ligature if too close to the surface, and then treat, as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans;	The form of the spinous spur from which we make the fistula is very acute and sharp.
et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	and on the other hand, no, because what should not be covered is not to be sewn, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres:	Abscesses are according to two methods:
ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement;	or they are within the foundation, as grains of resin, and there are small and large ones, and inside it is blood, and there are one or more, and they protrude from the foundation and at the head of the foundation;
mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors;	but those that protrude have little moisture, and inside are a bit of yellow water or a bit of blood, and have the color of the flesh;
et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz;	and the treatment for those who have them within the foundation, is that you instruct the patient to sweat in order to release into rooms, until the foundation comes forth, and the threads appear;
si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines;	if you are in a hurry, and it can be held with tongs, or you hold it with your fingernail, then pull it by its roots.
et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot;	and if the censer cannot hold them due to moisture, they take it by the cord, or with cotton, or a piece of camlet;
et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere;	and extract them with both hands, then copes them, and sprinkle over them some warm powders that are used for the fire cautery;
ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez;	or you cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauterization, and treat them with other dressings until they are healed;
et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement;	and if the foundation cannot come out, you cauterize the patient with a caustic cloth to wash away what is at the foundation, so that it may come out clearly;
cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere;	and if the patient presents symptoms, and if the threads are broken at the foundation, then the treatment is light;
et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	and you should grasp them with your finger or tongs, cut them off, then treat and clean them as we have said, until they are healed and fear the incision with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere:	It is necessary that you administer the suturing according to this manner:
pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large;	take a thread of cloth, and put it through a needle, and then draw the thread over and make the needle pierce from the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, and so be wide;
et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc;	and hold the thread tight, then tie the thread, and withdraw the needle, and do so with all the others, leaving one to drain the excess blood.
puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose;	then place a pad of woolen cloth in oil of rose or ointment, and place it on the foundation, and instruct the patient to rest.
et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let it be until it heals, and when they have healed, give them ointment and other treatment until he is cured.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	of dry the wound or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times, there is a sudden drying up of bile in the intestines, and by constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir;	Then you must reset at the end of a splinter or under your nail the bark above, which you leave to dry.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient;	and cure it until it is healed as it should be.
et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez;	and if it cannot heal, then resume the scraping more forcefully than before, until it heals and is scorched.
puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat until he is healed.
dou fremit	of trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont;	A formice is a small deceitful appearance on the body, and goes very quickly.
et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	and sometimes the truth is found when it is touched, and one feels it like a death tremor, spreading throughout the body, more in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor;	And the treatment is that you take a quill from an ostrich feather, or a very strong eagle feather, and place the quill on the tremor, so that the red circle completely encircles the tremor.
puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	then turn your hand around the quill so that you cover the tremor completely, and apply it well, rooting out the tremor from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, do it with a needle of spider silk or iron according to this form, and make it thin underneath and drawing on top:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser.	ne mie perciet, pour mieux tenir au doigt, et mouvoir presser.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	And if you see, cauterize the fremit, as it is described in the chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the shape of the shoulder
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet;	Sometimes one makes a blister with silver or mercury, or melted lead or mesh;
et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	and sometimes one makes these instruments small and large, according to those to whom they are applied.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those that are used in the treatment of children and who are weak and in pain, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the shoulder, whether small or large, is such that the breasts are tied in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez;	and there be a deviation or the stomach be tied, as you see, and the head be pierced within;
et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I;	and have two perforations on one side, and one on the other.
et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre;	and let the wounds where one places the medicines from an animal bladder or parchment be pierced entirely with small perforations, and there should be a thumb's breadth between each perforation, then pour in these perforations strong thread twisted into ten or more parts, and join the wound as one would a sheep.
et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize;	and when the medicine is inside, seal it with a strong thread at the opening of the instrument, then cauterize;
et c’est li forme dou cercle:	and this is the form of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement;	and let the medicine neither be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the clyster with oil or yolk of egg, or something similar, then insert it gently.
puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet;	then the minister draws it with both hands until it is completely full, then removes the clyster, and lifts the patient's legs against the wall, and if the medicine seems to come out, he lets the patient urinate as much as he can.
et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	and if it sleeps all night, it is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you clysterize for a disease of bowel discharge, and the medicine hastens to come out, then repeat it as much as he is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant;	and if the hemorrhoid is external or internal, or abscess, let the clyster be as subtle as for a child;
et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	and this is the form of the subtle clyster with which the skin is compressed:
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies;	We have already said in the division of treating wounds:
or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	Or we will say of the treatments of hands and medicine, according to the accomplishment.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the joints or parts where they are made, and of what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses;	The things by which wounds are made are by the impact of a stone, and cutting with a sword or knife, or a lance or staff or arrow, or similar things;
ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres;	or by those made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or the head, or the thigh, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs;
et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, and will begin with simple head wounds, because the memory will come in its chapter.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut:	I say that when a simple wound comes to the head, and the bone is not broken, take care if it is by the impact of a stone or similar things, and the skin is always torn and the wound large, and you slightly suspect an abscess.
si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree;	if you find the head of the shoulder soonest in need of healing when little blood comes from the wound, and let it be healed on the contrary side of the broken part;
et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	and choose the patient who is full of wine and large meats.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char;	and if he does not wish to be healed, let his flesh be reduced, and do not let him drink wine or eat meat.
et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice;	and place on the wound, if abscesses form and come to a head, only moistened cotton in rose oil, or in styptic wine.
et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés;	and if there is no warm abscess, place on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and has not dried by the air, powder, which I will say a little later.
et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if the physician has bled it, he should apply some ointments until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like a sword cut and similar ones, and the edges cannot be brought together by stretching, sew them together, as I will say for wounds of the belly, concerning stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope;	If the wound is exposed to bone and is unstable, holding only by a little, then bind it;
puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	then treat the wound with medicine, and restore firm flesh instead of skin, and instruct the patient to eat solid meats, such as heads and cooked wheat, like poultry, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure;	And if you find rotten skin and it does not affect the bone, then cover the rot entirely, apply powder, and then treat it.
et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil;	and if it has an artery in the wound or vein, which bleeds profusely, and cannot be stopped by medicines, then ligature the artery, and if you find it dislocated, tie it with a thread.
et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	and if this does not help, then cauterize.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere:	And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is light:
et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	and it is that you apply this powder which seals as if the arsenic has melted.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est:	And the manner of the powder is:
pren encens une partie;	take frankincense in part;
sanc de dragon II parties;	dragon's blood 2 parts;
chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc;	live charcoal 3 parts, and make the powder fine. Apply it to the wound and bind it tightly so that it dries well and joins with all its blood;
et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle;	and then drain well, and leave it undisturbed if it does not swell;
car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	for one does not remove the medicine until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one does this with wax alone, when one does not have incense nor the dragon's blood, but lets the arsenic act upon the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre;	And if the herb has already healed the wound, even while it was healing, one does not apply this powder.
mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe;	but apply some digested salves, or pulses of wheat flour made with water and honey, until it exudes pus.
puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	then continue the treatment with other salves until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz;	And if the bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, extract it with fine forceps.
et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	and I will tell you later about the fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	from the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between this and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire;	If it is the nerves, there is no other way but to let the cure proceed, and not apply anything restrictive, for it harms the nerves and causes them to wither;
et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres;	and do not apply anything cold to the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuity lies with the brain, which is the highest part of the body;
mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	but use medicines warm, such as boiled oil in sweet water, mixed with rose oil, and cooked in sweet water, and other mined stones in this manner, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, suture and bind it with bandages, then let the wound heal.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu;	And if the wounds are deep and filled with blood, pierce them or lower down a vein.
et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est;	And if the artery is cut and bleeding results, then evacuate it, ligate it, and cauterize as the occasion demands;
et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel;	And if the spinal cord of the throat is cut or the nerves are damaged, and the conduit through which the flesh passes is preserved, sew the nerve on the tongue of the throat, and do not touch the throat but place it according to its natural form.
et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez;	And then hold it in place properly, and leave it for some days, then treat it with good ointments until it is healed.
et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier;	and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, then treat it;
et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue;	and if there are bone fragments, if you can extract them all, do so. For those you cannot remove, let the wound rot and drain the pus out;
et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	and if the wound is fresh, powder it with the powder that I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is a fistula, treat it as I have said in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a spear or刀伤
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne:	If it is a wound from a lance or a knife, and the wound is deep, look to see if from the wound air reaches where the patient feels pain:
saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz;	then you know that the wound is fatal.
et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide;	and if it is not deep, and it is fresh with all its blood, do not put the powder on it or let it dry for the blood that may clot properly and return to the heart, and kill the patient.
mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor;	but I apply an attractive ointment, and bind it twice a day;
et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors;	and if you do not have ointment, put old cotton in the wound to absorb the moisture, and let the patient sleep on the wound for three days, or four, or more.
si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne;	if no spasm comes, nor bad trembling of the heart or any strain from the soul;
et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	and when you see good signs, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez;	Tend to it and apply other treatments until he is healed;
et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule;	and if it cannot heal, operate, and then know that there is a fistula;
si la cure si com on doit.	if the treatment as we must.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant;	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple, or worse, on the back, then the treatment for what is in front;
s’elle est grans, de cousture;	if it is large, to suture;
et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez;	and if it is small, with powder; and if it is deep into the bone, and has cut pieces, clean the wound, and the foreign objects if they are loose;
et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions;	and if they are not loose, leave the wound to drain, and lighten the extractions;
et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	and for other wounds on other limbs, the judgment is as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	for the rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis;	The dislocations of the belly are large and medium and small;
de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus;	From the large wound if any of the intestines, or the nerves of the intestines, due to their protrusion;
et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut;	and the suturing is more difficult, and sometimes the small wound is worse than the large one, because we cannot easily return the intestines to their place without warming them first;
por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II.	because the intestines swell quickly when they feel cold, and cannot be returned to place, and for this reason, the medium wound is more painful, because we must properly position the intestines in their place rather than leaving them displaced.
Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres:	And know that the rupture of the belly is according to four manners:
les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies;	the two common stitches occur in the belly stitch, and the other two stitches are common to other wounds.
et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	and in all ways they are more suitable with the belly stitch, and I will say each one and explain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres:	I say that when the wound is small, and no internal organ is injured, and nothing needs to be replaced, it can be done in one of the two manners.
ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	or because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestines are swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere:	And when it is cold, heat it with a fire in such a manner:
moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee;	wet a sponge or a cloth in cold water only, or heat it in water with cinnamon and cypress and spike, and wring out the excess until it is fragrant.
et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	and after doing this with the cooling wine, let it sit to infuse in order to reduce swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose;	And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water or cooked almond milk, for this makes the entrance easier to pass.
et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes;	and if it cannot enter, make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used to remove hemorrhoids.
et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait;	and the first dressing is to be moistened that the cut, we must not cut unless there is great necessity for it.
et c’est li estrumens por le fendre:	and these are the instruments to cut:
si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	if you cut inward in the curve and outward not, and see to the form:
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine has protruded, replace it rearward according to its natural form in its proper place if you have the ability, for this requires movement.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief;	When the wound is wide, and it is in the part below the stomach, it is fitting that you make the patient lie on their back, and place their legs higher than their head;
et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre;	and if it is in the part below the stomach, place the head and buttocks higher than the parts below, and also if the rupture of the stomach is in one of the two parts, set things so that the severed part is higher than the other.
et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	and thus it must be applied to those I speak of concerning great and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres;	For small wounds, apply what is prepared for you, then have at hand the herb that covers the entire wound with its leaf, and stitch the edges;
et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort;	and this is the common method of suturing, and it is that you take one needle or several, according to the width of the wound. Leave at the beginning of the wound a space, and insert a needle with a good strong thread;
et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble;	and pierce the two ends of the skin with the two ends of the needle, which is beneath the skin inside, so that you make it pierce from that part, and stitch the two ends of the needle together.
puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille;	then draw out with a double thread between two parts of the needle, then join the two heads of the wound properly, and then leave two fingers' space, and put in another needle;
puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte;	then draw out the thread as you did with the first needle, and continue doing this as needed for the needles until the entire wound is closed;
et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer:	and use medium-sized needles, between fine and large ones, for fine needles cut all the flesh, and too large needles do not enter well.
por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes;	for they should be medium-sized;
et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure;	and it is not appropriate to insert the needles too deep into the flesh and skin, as they might cut and enlarge the wound before suturing.
et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee;	and then take the heads of the needles, for they may discolor the patient during sleep, and place tents or cloths over the heads of the needles to keep them in place, and leave them until the wound heals;
et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II.	and this needle sewing method is more suitable for small wounds, because it uses one needle or two.
Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien;	The second sewing method is common, and it involves assembling the two heads of the leather and the two sides of the flesh together using one needle with a strong middle thread.
et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras;	and when you have pierced these heads together completely, draw the needle back to the part where you started, in the manner we sew cloth.
et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi;	and place an interval between each stitch the size of a small pea;
ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	this stitch suits the wound, and I sutured a wound on one man's thigh, which was cut by a knife, and the wound was more than a palm's width great, and contained two palms' width of intestines, and it was in the abdomen.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I returned the intestine to its place after twenty-four hours, and the wound healed in fifteen days, and I cured it, and he was healed.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle;	And the master had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle;
et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines;	and I did not treat it with ointment, for I was in the place where none could be found, and no medicine was available.
et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	and applied old cotton twice a day to the wound, and washed it with honey water until it healed.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture:	Or I will tell you of the two proper methods of suturing:
pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens;	take the needle, and fill it from the outside until the inside;
quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer;	when it has pierced the core straight through, leave the head of the needle at the abscess or costit or where you have filled the needle, and make it pierce from inside until the outside.
et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	and the understanding of this suturing is that you stitch as a leatherworker makes leather, and that you leave the abscess on one side and close it on the other until the suturing is entirely completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere:	The second method of suturing, as Galen properly describes, is such that no one does it, where they bring the two parts together naturally, and apply one end of the needle from the abscess to the other end, in this manner:
fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac;	prick with a needle or a point of the knife close by, and pierce only that side, and let the two head bones be intact.
puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac;	then turn the needle, and pierce from the outer part to the inner, through the two head bones.
puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit;	then pierce both from the outer part to the inner, through the other two head bones that are on the opposite sides.
et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	and this is the main way and the most common method of suturing.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune;	Galien said this word, and none testify, that one must stitch the belly with two needles, each having thread.
et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies;	and one must prick with a needle from one side, and the other from the other side, in the manner of those who sew corrodied [tissue].
et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	and know that when the tear is within the abdomen, the sewing is more grievous than with other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies:	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgment of other wounds:
et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout;	and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, as the arrow has made it, you must reset the intestines and the stitch;
puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe;	then put on powder for flesh growth, and if the arrow has made it, put on any ointment that is at hand until the wound heals.
et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach;	and cut the threads, and let the sutures be sewn, and the maggots;
puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez;	then treat the wound as with others, until it is healed;
et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	and if you have no medicines, place old cloth on it as soon as it begins to discharge pus, and change it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples;	For you have no need of other medicines in many cases where the wounds are simple;
et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles;	and if you doubt that the wound may communicate with the principal members, then it is necessary to apply a light linement in tempered heat oil, or in rosemary oil, and apply it between the layers, and under the bindings;
et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine;	and if he feels pain or putrefaction in the bowels, and this often happens, then use enemas of black must, especially if the putrefaction comes as far as the intestines;
et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	and puncture it internally, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to cure than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine which is called "jeun" cannot heal when it is torn, and this is due to the problem of the veins that are there, and the subtlety of the whole body, and the closeness of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres;	And if the intestine jumps out of the wound, reset it back in place as with the intestines, while it is fresh.
et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres;	and if it is old and turned brown or black, then you must tie the vein which is black, to prevent blood from flowing, because there are veins and arteries there.
puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	then cut what is between the tendons, and place the two heads hanging from below the part beneath the wound until above to ease the extraction when the roots fall, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the vein
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance;	When the intestines are torn and the wound is small, one can restore them in some cases, for I have seen men whose abdomen was pierced by a lance.
et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez;	and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and it became necrotic and turned into a fistula, from which there flowed excretions and caused wind.
je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	I treated it as well as I could, and did not cease to cauterize until it was healed, and the wounds were sutured.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre;	And when I saw him heal, I doubted that the patient had pain in his belly;
et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans;	and there was no harm, but he improved in better conditions, eating and drinking;
et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere:	and the experts said that when there is a small wound in the intestine, it should be bound in such a manner:
pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus;	take flax from large flints, then close the edges of the wound, and when the flax has opened the mouth, place it on the two edges, so that it closes its mouth around.
et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise;	and then cover the head, and it stays such that it cannot be undone, then place another piece of flax in this manner as before, until the wound is completely soaked.
et cout la plaie.	and let the wound heal.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere:	If they burn in the intestine, and cause no harm to the patient, one can suture the intestine with a fine thread made from the intestine of an animal, in such a manner:
pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure;	take the end of this intestinal thread that is well unshrunk, and then tie it to the end of this fine linen thread twisted, then put the thread on the needle, and suture the intestine, and secure it at the wound.
et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance;	and this method of suturing does not prevent the hiss from escaping as long as it is done with hope and expectation.
et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the intestine's folds, there is no means to know, only by subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or it be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it heals, is universally called a "fistula," and especially when it is closed and round.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil;	And fistula is according to the true nodation hard and white, or one does not feel pain, and it is also veined like the feathers of an eye.
et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse;	and sometimes clear, and at other times thick;
aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez;	sometimes few, and at other times enough;
et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes:	and I have spoken about the division of wounds: that every wound that is not healed and has no flesh can only be due to one of the nine causes:
c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors;	that is to say, due to the small amount of blood or flesh;
ou por sa malice;	or because of its malignity;
ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char;	or because there is hard flesh within and on the lips, do not allow it to grow flesh.
ou il i a trop de bowe;	or there is too much blood;
ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit;	or the flesh is rotten, and the matter is of poor quality;
ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure;	or the medicine is not good in the treatment;
ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence;	or because the corruption is of a pestilential nature;
ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature;	or because of the property in the region is late in digestion, and recovery is delayed, and it swells by nature;
ou il i a voinnes ou os:	or there are veins or bones:
et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments of medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or it must be that I shall teach you the treatment of an abscess caused by manual intervention.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors;	Fistula occurs in all body members;
car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez;	for there are fistulas that come from the large veins, and the arteries, and the nerves, or in the face, or in the intestines, or in the bladder, or in some of the ribs, or in the spine of the back, or in any joint of the hands or feet;
et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	and it often affects the property of the principal limb, and similar ones.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance;	And all the fistulas that are in this manner are difficult to heal, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance.
et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier;	and if there is any fistula that does not heal until the point I have said, and you are confident in the treatment, and you see it known, then take a wick of wool or iron, if the fistula is straight, apply it;
et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit;	and if the fistula is curved, search for a fine wick of flax, because flax can bend around the curvature.
et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie;	and if the fistula has ends closed and you cannot well search it with wicks, cleanse it by enema through one of the ends, for moisture conducts quickly from one end to another, and cleanses it.
puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent;	then apply a cauterization within your power, so you can know if there is bone or nerve, and see if it is healed. And ask the patient the pain he feels when pressed by your hand, and locate where he feels it.
et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens;	and when you truly know where it is, and if it is far from a joint, or a nerve, or an artery or vein, or in any of the places that I have told you, then apply the poultice as I have said, and remove the foreign matter and the corrupted flesh that are within;
et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons;	and then the treatment until it is healed, and if the fistula is deep in the right place, you must apply the poultice thoroughly as much as you can. Then put wet cloths in medicated water, and pour them until they reach the head of the fistula, so that the medicine erodes the excess that remains at the bottom.
et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and then apply salve to healthy flesh until it is healed;
et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	and if it is not known by them, cauterize as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted from the fistula, then treat.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit;	If the vein or nerve does not affect the main parts, as we have said;
et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, scrape until all the corruption is removed, then treat the wound with substances that promote healing until it heals.
et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font:	and if it is not healed, and you need to bind it as before, know that you have not gone far enough.
si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu;	and expose and remove the corruption completely until you reach the bottom, then reset it.
et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	and if it is thus healed, that is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir;	If not, know that the corruption is too deep, and you cannot cure it;
si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature;	if there is no other way but to leave it to nature;
et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un;	and if there is a small bone corrupted, and you can remove it with forceps, then extract it with an instrument suitable for this. And if there are many bones, remove all of them, not leaving any behind;
et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	and if the moisture makes it difficult, and there is no error or fear, cut away the moisture and flesh, and deliver the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os;	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, put something putrefying on the wound, and let it remain until the flesh is rotted away beneath the bones, then the bones will be easier to handle.
et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie;	And if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, reset only the corruption until all the blackness is removed, then restore the wound.
et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os;	And if there is a large part of the corruption reaching to the marrow of the bone;
si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez;	And it is necessary to sew and cover until the corruption reaches the marrow, and then treat until it heals.
et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And I will tell you of an abscess that occurred in a man's leg, so that you may take it as an example and aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir;	There was a young man between XXX years and thirty who had pain in his leg due to a cause that came from within the body, so much so that the materials came to the leg, and it swelled with a large abscess, and did not have any reason to open.
mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors;	but the physician, out of his folly, opened it too much, and drained a great deal of material from the abscess, and it became a fistula, and many perforations came that all gave off pus and moisture from the body;
et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors;	and many physicians treated it for two years, and there was no wise one in the art of hands, so much that I was called and saw his leg and the medicines with which they had treated him, and what drained through the perforations caused great discomfort;
et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	and the face of the young person turned red, and had a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these openings, and then searched all the openings, and found that one went against the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens;	I hastened then, and drew back one of the wounds until I revealed a part of the bone, and found it corrupt and perforated, and the corruption came up to the bone within;
je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai;	I thought that what appeared to me of the corrupt bone was all there was, and that there was no other corruption beyond what I removed.
et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder;	and began to treat the wound with long-lasting medicines, but could not heal it.
et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu;	and then began again, and revealed the bone as before, and found the corruption continuing in the bone, and removed it, and pondered how to set the bone.
mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines;	but I could not so much as probe between the fingers of the bone, and it was pierced to its marrow, then I reset it with medicine;
et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	and it was healed and stitched quickly, and it did not seem necessary to restart the work except for the patient's weakness, who could not endure it, and because of my fear of death regarding him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For often there is bloodletting due to evacuation, but it was completely healed, and in the place of the bone grew a hard scar, and it was well positioned and had no harm or adverse effect at all, neither externally nor internally.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere:	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this manner:
pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut;	take the ligature, and draw it tight at the end of the bone that is open, and instruct him to extend it upwards;
et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char;	and put another ligature of thicker linen over the first ligature, and tie it around the flesh that is adjacent to the bone, and draw tight, so that you can drain the corrupt flesh from beneath, and uncover the flesh at the place where you wish to treat it, lest the knot press against the flesh.
et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue;	and place a coal or a board under the bone to cover the rotten flesh;
et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	and it must be sochar as one can see and feel the corruption, and also another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute;	And if the bone is corrupt and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or part of it, then expose all the flesh;
puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit;	then place the coal underneath, and then char from one part to another the corruption, and let the charring last as long as the corruption, as we have said.
et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part;	and if the corruption is in the joint, then char the corrupt joint, and chare the bone on the other side.
et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper;	and if the corruption is in the continuity of the two joints, there is no other remedy but copper.
et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert;	and if the corruption is from a sword wound in the hand or foot, this is very serious. But nonetheless, you must inquire about the corruption and how it presents itself.
et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire;	and cleanse it in all the ways you can, but ensure that the vein or nerve does not oppose this.
et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce;	and know that the incision and the suturing for coppering these bones are many, according to the placement of the bones and their appearance, and their size and subtlety, and their hardness and softness.
et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument;	and for this, it must be prepared according to each kind of work its instrument;
et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies;	and know that the work will show you the instrument you will need, according to the knowledge of this art and the testimony of the methods of diseases;
si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	if you think about the instrument you will need according to what is appropriate.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer;	The shoulder dislocates either from within, or from without.
et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre;	and when you have treated the corrosion with medicine and it does not improve, then you must cut into that limb to the place where the corrosion comes from, so that the patient either escapes death or the greater malice of the member's defect.
et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors;	and the signs are that the limb becomes black, as if it were burned by fire, and after the blackness, follows the corruption of limb to limb, and takes place throughout the body;
si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	if it is due to the bite of certain venomous beasts, such as sea scorpion, viper, and similar ones, if the corruption is at the head of the limb, so the copers, and do not give it any chance to come to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras;	and if it comes to the hand, apply the copers at the joint, so that the corruption does not spread to the arm.
et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute;	and if it comes to the arm, apply the copers at the wound.
et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut;	and if it passes the blade, it is death, and no remedy outside will avail for its virtue;
et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet:	and do so likewise when the腐蚀 comes or pierces:
s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe;	if it comes to the first joint, then bind after the other joint;
et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet;	and if it comes or pierces, bind all around the piercing.
et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil;	and if it rises to the thigh, bind at the joint of the knee;
et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort;	and if it comes above the knee, there is no other remedy than to let the patient die;
et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers;	and the manner of binding or securing the limb is that you bind it both above and below, extending some fingers downward along one length, and others upward along the other length, and you cut the flesh that is between the two lengths to a finger's width, so that the bone is revealed.
puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	then the cloth or skin, and place a linen bandage on each side, so that the skin does not touch the healthy part, and bring about another injury or abscess.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans;	And if the bleeding comes when you work, cauterize the skin quickly, or put some restraining powders on it.
puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	then return to your medicine until it is completed, then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and treat it until it is healed.
et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet:	and I will tell you what happened to the man in som piet.
il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet;	he had a burn that seemed to be scorched by fire, and this corrosion first came to his toe on the foot, spreading throughout the entire foot.
et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez;	and when the wound shows corruption, he hastens to cover it, and it is healed;
et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions;	and long thereafter corruption or another hand wound returned, and he came to me, and I placed on him things reflective after the purification of the body, but the corrosion could not cease;
et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere;	and he vowed that I should cauterize his hand, and I refused, for I had hope of reflecting the matter;
et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible;	and I doubted also that if I cauterized his hand, he would not die, for the virtue of the man was weak;
et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez;	and he utterly despaired, and returned to his land, and hastened to cauterize his hand, and it was healed;
et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	and I have included this only because we need to do so, if we have occasion.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe;	Sometimes an abscess forms in the flesh, and persists so long that it causes a great gathering of pus.
et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz;	and then they will come to a head and pierce it, and the pus will burst, leaving the eyes open, as if in vessels.
et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»;	and the skin above is as delicate as fine cloth, and does not extend all the way to the bone or to the nerve. Such a disease is called "sain" and is not called "fistula.
mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»;	but if it is so long that it extends all the way to the bone through deep seated pus, it is called "fistula.
et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz;	and the skin is such that you peel off all of it, and especially when it is delicate, like threads;
et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	and does not rot due to its decay.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi:	And if you find that the skin will rot, and the decay is not complete, and the skin is thick with flesh, then cure it by scraping thus:
regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite:	look if the swelling is large, and the vein within it has a foul odor, then use the medicated paste of Egyptian medicine thus made:
prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel;	take asecel (a type of plant), oil, and litharge, equal parts, and cook them in a vessel over fire until the medicine is red, and becomes as thick as honey;
et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus;	and then take of it according to your necessity, and do it in water and honey, and with a clyster irrigate the side, and hold the wound steady.
et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant;	and let the medicine remain in place for 2 hours, then extract it by pressing.
fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor;	do this many times, until the side is thoroughly cleansed, and let it dry completely.
et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez;	and once with water of ashes, when this medicine is not present, and use ashes from vine wood, pour water over it, then drain it, and clysterize again until you know that the side is well cleansed.
et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet;	and if the patient cannot tolerate it, neither the Egyptian medicine nor the water of ashes, then clysterize with water and honey or add a little bromide of antimony.
ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain;	or you apply it with honey and wine, where the honey has the property to purify and wash, and the wine makes it hot.
et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin;	and when you have done this, and you are certain that the breasts are well purified, you apply a plaster to induce perspiration, and make it with rose oil and wine;
ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens;	or you apply it with certain medications and ointments, of which I have spoken about their properties in treating ointments;
et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez;	and if the hole in the breast is small and the catheter cannot enter, you enlarge it slightly with a iron, and place therein a tent of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	and if the wound is too large, sew it up leaving it just enough for the needle or thread to enter, and if the puncture wound from which the blood flows is above, let the dressing be higher than where it is.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char;	and when the blood is fully drained, do not leave any flesh to rot;
et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere:	and if you cannot dress the wound as you see fit, arrange it in such a way that the blood flows to the lowest part where it is. For when the blood is fully drained, do not let any flesh rot, and if you cannot dress the wound as you see fit, arrange it accordingly:
que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe;	that the blood flows gently downward, and leave nothing of the blood;
et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain;	and take healing medicines to put on the wound, and keep them under a linen cloth that covers all the wound;
puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois;	then apply the forces near the puncture in the breast a little larger than the first, and spread ointment on the other cloth according to the size of the puncture, and place it over the puncture of the wound to alleviate the pain, and do not remove the large cloth from outside for several days at one time.
et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste;	and that which is over the puncture in the breast, remove often to alleviate the pain, and know what comes from the wound, whether it is venom or little, enough, or digestible, or undigestible.
et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez;	and take note if the patient feels pain or not, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in such a manner, and you see the nature that appears over the puncture of the wound, then know that the breast has already swollen, and bring help.
et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	and then release it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you release the wound, change the bandage, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast expels an undigested bowel after many days, know that the breast does not become hardened.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons cut after a long time, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire;	For there are people who have delayed healing in their wounds, and among those who do the opposite;
et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie;	and if undigested food jumps from the chest after many days, know that the chest is not digesting properly;
et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine;	and if the chest takes time to digest and is far from complete, apply medications that are both drying and warming in substance and dry in virtue, such as ointment of diafinity, for there is a large part of vitriol, and this is one of the last remedies.
pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance;	take an ointment of yarrow, and make it with rose oil, and pour it with old wine equal in strength;
puis le confit et en use;	then let it infuse and use it;
et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu;	and the same made better by cooking and thickening, when yarrow ointment is not present, or you take myrrh, frankincense, and cinnamon, grind them, and mix with honey when it is on the fire;
et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire;	and then apply it with bandages, and place it under the skin, and administer several times by an astrologer longea and roots of celestial lilies, which are as fine as wheat flour and cornflower;
et en use de simples ou de compostes:	and use simple or compound remedies:
broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use;	grind them, and make powder, and put on the honey as I have said, and use it;
et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens;	and if the wound is long and not treated with this treatment, know that the corruption is more advanced and makes an impression in the bone, or in hard members, or in the ligaments;
si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	if the wound of the fistula, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois;	Fistula is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the finger or toe, or by chance arises in other places;
et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute;	and when it is matured, and no attention is taken to it, it comes to an abscess, spreading and discharging pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and by chance it may even reach the entire nail;
et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	and the corrosion reaches to the bone, causing pain that smells bad, and the shoulder of the arm is wide, and the color fades.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the wound does not heal, then you must cut away all the remaining superfluous tissue from the nail, and then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne;	The cauteries are much great help if the bone is sound, and the nail is healthy;
et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout;	and if the nail presses on the flesh and begins to pierce it, and the bleeding starts, then you must place a rag under the nail where the flesh is pierced, elevate the hand, and carefully and gently remove that thin flesh, and apply burning and corrosive medicines to the remaining flesh to remove all of it.
puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	then dress with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner;	And if the corrosion is in the bone, remove it forcefully, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal.
et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez;	and if you see the hand corrupted, treat it as described above, then cure it until it is healed;
et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier;	and if it is wounded and swollen, and it feels great pain, then you must first heal it;
puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor;	then cut the nail of the thumb sharply across, but be sure that the cuts do not come all the way to the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too great pain.
et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	and if it does, then apply something that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain from the sore came from the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	the dislocation that arises in some men by accident is either all fleshy, and sometimes has a tear or it has bones, and once it has a nail, and none of them arise at the root of the joint, or the birth is in some knuckle.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet;	That which arises in any notch of the hand does not move, and that which arises at the joint of the hand may sometimes move.
la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere:	the size of one who is fleshy is light, in such a manner:
taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	size it at its root with a broad spatulum.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer:	That which arises at the root of the joint should be carefully treated:
si te tien dou coper.	if it touches the bone.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In that which is born or must be done last, it is necessary that you cut the flesh roundly until the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate blade, and cure it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The symptoms that come together in this way come from birth, or suddenly from a wound, or from burning by fire, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz;	It is necessary that you correct that seam so that it heals according to its natural forms;
puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent;	then place between two moist cloths or towels in rose oil, so that they do not stick together;
ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	or you place between two pieces of fine cloth until the edges are joined as is proper.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If the wound comes together with one of these two using the palm, cut this wound as is fitting.
des vils	of the wretched
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors;	When their veins are swollen enveloped with excess melancholic humours, which come from many members of the body;
et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	and it occurs more often in legs of those who walk and work and carry, than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you must administer to him once an evacuation of black bile, and then cure him with the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres:	The iron cure is according to two methods:
l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir;	one way is to incise and bleed the black blood;
et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	and the other method is to open the vein and let all the black blood flow out.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere:	The incision is done in this manner:
arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil;	first apply the hot iron strongly, until the large vein becomes fine, then straighten the leg of the patient from below the hip to the part below the knee;
puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir;	then open the vein in I or II or III, of a wide size, then lift and draw out the black blood with your hand, from one end to the other, until as much blood comes out as the virtues of the patient can bear.
et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire;	and then coagulate it, and instruct the patient to dye it with meat juice from blackened meat.
et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	and repeat the evacuation and bleeding when the veins are full, and harm the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere:	The manipulations of the head are according to this manner:
reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes;	realign the patient's leg, if there is much hair, then immerse it in warm water, and rub the leg with hot water until it turns red, and swell the veins.
et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville;	and if you have no bath, heat it on the fire, and then apply it to the vein from the long bone to the head of the kneecap, or in the area below the ankle.
puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent;	then prick the skin with an awl, and scorch the vein from each side, until it appears when you feel it.
et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche;	and one sees it red and black, and when it enters the skin it seems as if it were a white cord.
puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois;	then draw out the thread from under, until it is raised from the skin, and then prick it with an awl lightly, then apply it in another place above three digits.
puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers;	then scorch the skin above the vein until it appears, then lift it from the wound as you have done, and prick it with another awl as you did first.
puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille;	then cut another size, or several if you need them, then lift it out and cut again with the point of the knife, then draw and lift until reaching the second size;
puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope;	then extract piece by piece until it is completely free, then cut;
et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse;	and if you cannot pull and lift it, then insert an awl through the entire thread, strong and doubled, and draw and lift it, and remove from the wound, and turn your hand to the left and right until it comes out;
et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide;	and make sure it does not cut, for if it cuts, you cannot pull and lift it, and this will harm the patient;
et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset;	and when you have treated it completely, place wetted wool in wine and rose oil over the site of the wound;
et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and care for it until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie;	And if the vein is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must untwist it gently, but do not cut it;
et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	and treat it as we have said before.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne;	The iron form used to treat the vein is curved, and you should not cut it, but instead do not damage the vein.
et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	and it is of large curvature, for if it were subtle, it would damage the vein. But it should be large, as we have said, and here is its form:
de la voinne civile	of the civil vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor;	This vein is present in legs, in warm parts where no herbs nor trees grow, and in earth where there is no moisture;
et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	and by chance it arises elsewhere than in legs, and this happens from the putrefaction that comes from the skin, as it comes within the body worms and vermin, growing between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that there comes into the leg a very great inflammation, then change the eyes, and begin the vein to issue forth, as one root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe;	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated, you should wrap it in a piece of linen about one and a half inches to two inches wide, and tie it, and let the linen hang from the leg, and every time there is no point at the fracture, you should wrap it again with the linen and the bow.
et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue;	and if it is too long, you should shorten it by cutting a part, and wrap the remaining piece, but do not cut it at its root until it is completely removed.
car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie;	if you close it, it enters into the flesh, causing an abscess, putrefaction, or bone, and bad illness;
por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors;	because of that thing, it should be treated little by little until healing, and nothing or a scab should remain;
et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse;	and it is sometimes this vein when treated with the palms of long, or ten, and one inch twenty came to me, from which it issued twelve palm lengths long, and when you close it, it produces one fistful or a pertus, and pierces deeply, so that all is released;
et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	and drain the matter within, and apply medicines that combat putrefaction to the area each day, then treat it as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains;	And sometimes at this vein, many pains, and especially when it appears in the joint of the foot or hand, and there comes much of perforations, and from which sprout many pains;
cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	Cure it therefore as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	vers which arise between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer;	This disease is called in our land "bovine disease," because it often occurs in cattle, and is a small worm that arises between skin and flesh, and travels up and down the body, and one feels it well as it moves from limb to limb, until it destroys the skin where it goes, and sprouts forth;
et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre;	and it is engendered from putrefaction of some humors, such as coming from worms and larvae and ascarids or intestines;
et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil;	and if there is doubt or from his cunning, for when it goes through the body, and it rises to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance enters, and destroys the eye;
et ceu avient maintes fois.	and this happens many times.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait:	When you see it cure and draw, one cannot force it when it goes:
si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire;	then you must tie the vein above and below with a strong thread tightly. Then cut it open and draw out, and if you find that the blood has already filled the flesh, and you cannot find it, then cauterize it with fire until it stops.
et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit;	and the greatest harm it causes is that it can run into the eye, as we have said.
et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer;	and if you see it coming or close to the eye, hold firmly over it, then cover up, and pull strongly;
et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	and it is necessary to use the patient for bodily washing with soluble medicines for putrid humors, and beware of meats that cause putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre;	This disease is called "vakirir" in our land, and it is a pain that comes to certain members, and then moves from member to member.
et je vis ceu que je vos di.	and I see what I tell you.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais;	I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm.
et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre;	and shortly after, the vein swell up as if by a worm in the shoulder, faster than anything else, as if live silver when it is cut from another.
li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais;	the pain departed from that place and pierced into the shoulder, and then a little while after spread throughout the body, until it reached the other arm.
puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	then she turned inward in the body, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I wondered greatly how it moved in this manner from member to member, for I had never seen this disease proceed in such a way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme;	In all ways, I wanted very much that the pain move from one place to another, but I did not want it as I saw in the woman.
et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte;	and I thought that it was because the woman had a hard core and exposed veins, and because these conditions caused the wind torments to appear.
et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	and they do not appear according to this reason for those who are sensitive and have moist bodies and veins opened.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer;	And when you see to cure this disease, and the patient feels that pain, if it appears as we have said, scrape off the top and underneath hastily, and then cover over until the wind diseases have left their place.
et cauterize le leu;	and cauterize the place;
et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	and if you do not see it with your eyes, cure it as those who expel wind diseases, such as bitter pills, and pillbugs, and similar things.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows are of various kinds, according to their shapes and the places in which they lodge.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees;	The diversity of them is such that some have large points, small ones, and hooked, and fused.
et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces;	and of those which have two angles, and of those which have tongues, and of those where there are parts;
et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres:	and that which falls into any member, it falls according to two manners:
ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	or in the principal member it moves to, such as the brain, heart, liver, stomach, intestines, bladder, and similar members.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent:	When it falls in any part of these members, and the signs of death, which I will tell you later, appear:
si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions;	then you must be wary of the extraction of this arrow, for death follows in many cases.
et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	and when none of these bad signs appear, and the arrow is not completely removed, then remove it and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole;	And the sign of the brain when the arrow strikes and pierces the bone, and a swelling arises which is above the brain, is when there is scotomia and stiffness and vertigo and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile;
et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles;	and perchance it is without strength in the nostrils, or the ears;
et par aventure pert la parole et la voix;	and perchance loses speech and voice;
et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char;	and the swelling of the wound appears moist and white, resembling a pulse, and also swells as if scalded by hot water;
et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	and if this sign is apparent, keep the wound clean, and extract the arrow if it is present.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide;	The sign of the arrow when it strikes or pierces the heart is that it is near the left nipple, and one feels it as if it were embedded in something hard, not empty.
et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope:	and sometimes the arrow moves like the pulses, and brings black blood, and coldness and cold sweat, and fainting:
saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	then you will doubt that many die.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that never came out is that without bubbles of foam it jumps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs loudly and refreshes himself with cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes;	And if the arrow strikes in the covering of the foot, it hurts the small bones;
et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire;	and causes great pain and great suffering and sighs;
et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	and it moves the entire limb from the shoulders.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow falls onto the stomach, by chance it jumps from the wound with some undigested meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow falls onto the belly, and it jumps out leaving some hay through the intestinal tract, there is no hope in the treatment, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor:	And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and urine spurts out and flows, the patient feels great pain.
saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	The wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, such as the arm, neck, throat, shoulder, auxiliary bone, spine of the back, femur, and legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to various dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because you would do otherwise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis:	It happened to a man that an arrow fell into his arm at the root of the neck:
je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	I extracted it, and removed the rest beneath the fatty tissue behind the ear, and he was cured without any difficulty.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles;	And I extracted an arrow that fell into the fatty tissue of the eye beneath the membrane, and the arrow was embedded, and could not be reached except its tip toward the wood, and the arrow was as large as a Turkish bow, made of light iron without ears.
li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	the patient was healed, and no bad accidents occurred.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles:	And they extracted an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and it was the Arabian arrow with ears.
je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	I extracted the barbs, and pried open as I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit;	And they extracted an arrow from the man, where it was stuck in his chest or abdomen, and thought he would die.
et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition;	and after XXX days had passed, his condition did not change at all.
je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	I incised the arrow, closed it up, and extracted it, and no bad accidents occurred.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus;	And if you wish to treat a man who has an arrow fall or pass through him, and the wound is sewn up;
et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	and if the arrow remains inside, and does not change its natural position, nor causes harm to any of its natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie;	And if another man has an arrow enter his face, and the wound is sewn up;
et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor;	and remains there causing great pain.
et mout d’autres semblans.	and many other similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie;	And extract an arrow from a prince's man that was shot among the straw, and it was slightly inclined to the right side.
et estoit li saiette toute reponue.	and the arrow was completely withdrawn.
Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	I was called for the treatment after it was dropped for three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie;	I handled it with great subtlety, and did not feel it at all;
et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	and he felt pricking and pain over his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast;	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I placed on the wound a plaster of atratiferous digestive ingredients, because the wounds did not swell.
et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	and I saw the wound from the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis;	I applied the plaster for three days, and redressed the wound again. The patient remained in this state for a long time, until he felt the arrow one day inside his nose;
et il le me dist.	and he tells them.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu;	I applied corrosive salve to the wound with my fingers as long as it was open, and probed it, feeling the head of the arrow which was rotting away at the site.
puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement;	then I adjusted the opening of the wound with this corrosive salve until the head of the arrow became clearly visible.
et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir;	and passed well through the ends within four months, and then extracted the arrow by enlarging the wound, using forceps to pull it out from both sides, and it could not come out.
adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	then I continued to innovate and devise methods with instruments until I successfully extracted it with forceps on the seventh day, as described in the form that will come at the end of this chapter. Thus, I restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer:	And the surgeons judge that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored:
je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	I restored it then, and the wound healed, and the patient was cured entirely.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre;	Or I have told you about the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you place your treatment on what I do not say, for books cannot contain everything;
mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	but the master arrowsmith compares only a very small amount, and on what is present and lacking, finds nine works, and nine instruments, for the removal of foreign things that occur in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres:	I say that arrows are embedded in the limbs only according to two manners:
ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part;	or through the shoulder or they enter, or by another part;
et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	and that which passed through it or where it entered, is an arrow entering into the muscles, and passed but once now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue;	And if it does not pass now, let it be until the flesh rots entirely, and allow it to come out.
et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor;	and also if it is embedded in the bone, and cannot come out, let it be so for some days, and change each day.
et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	and then it will pass. And if it does not pass, pierce through entirely with a sharp needle, until the muscles inside are widened, and then withdraw it.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide:	And if the arrow is embedded in the bone of the head and goes as far as one of the foramina of the brain, and any of the conditions I have said openly to the patient:
si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	if not treated at all, but left until it is equalized after a few days, for if the arrow reaches the brain, it is fatal.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not pierced deep only into the bone, and does not come as far as the surface, and the patient remains without any bad accidents for several days, then the device for extraction should be used.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit;	And if it is deeply embedded and cannot be extracted with force, I administer tar ointment, as I have said;
puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the wound until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente;	And if the arrow is embedded in the body and cannot be seen, then seek it with all means.
et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble;	and if you feel it, draw it with an appropriate instrument;
et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans;	and if you cannot do it due to the narrowness of the wound, and because of the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, widen the wound so that the wound is large;
et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire;	and extract the arrow if you can, and if it has feathers that it holds onto, remove the flesh that is stuck on both sides of the feather that you can reach, and then break or bend the feathers of the arrow so that you can extract it;
et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	and carefully ensure that you do not break the arrow, so that you can extract it more easily.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, let it remain until the joint is rotten, then remove it, for the extraction is painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre;	And if the bleeding makes it contrary, administer what we have said about the treatment in its chapter;
et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement;	and beware of the incision of the nerve and the vein, and place something as you can to easily draw the arrow without danger, or soon or late, firmly or gently;
et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	and place the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow struck, for this is the greatest help that can be given, and if you cannot, then align him according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment:	The arrow that comes from another direction, or where it penetrates any part of the body, or the skin is swollen so that one can see or feel it apparently:
taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai:	Raise the tweezers up, as far as they can grasp, and then extract:
si saut fuer maintenant.	if it should now jump out.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is retained in the bone, turn your hand round, until it enters the bone, and enlarge the bone, then pull it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer;	And if it cannot come out, leave it for now, and then restart the extraction until it comes out;
et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust;	and if the shaft of the arrow is there, pull it out completely;
et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument;	and if the shaft has fallen and you see that it must be extracted, then use the hooked instrument to administer the pull, so that the point of the arrow enters the hook of the instrument;
et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	and then extract it completely, and if the arrow is hooked, use the instrument at the point entering it to facilitate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is touching, it is necessary that you cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as needed.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope;	And if the arrow falls or pierces in the belly or bladder or side, and it is near, and you can cut open, then you must cut.
et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est;	and beware of cutting the vein and the nerve, and then extract it, and then sew the wound if skill is needed.
et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	and the treatment until it is healed.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the forceps used to extract arrows is similar to the beak of a bird, and here is its form:
Et en sont mout de manieres:	And there are many ways about this:
grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the feathered rod is similar to the feather of a bird, to push at the tip of the arrow, as shown in the form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the form of the tongs for pressing and knowing this is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of veins of the body common
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir:	Of veins through which one draws blood, there are thirty-one, of which sixteen are principal, that is to say:
II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»;	Two bumps that are behind the ears, which are called the two "herbech";
et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans;	and the two arteries that are in the temples apparent;
et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»;	and the two veins that are in the corners of the eyes, which are called "aspires";
et li voine que est emmi le front;	and the vein that runs along the forehead;
et li voinne que est au chief dou neis;	and the vein that is at the root of the nose;
et les II guindeges qui sont ou col;	and the two glands that are in the throat;
et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»;	and the two veins that are in the upper lips above the mouth, and these veins are called "augeherich";
et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	and two veins that are beneath the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras:	The veins through which we commonly bleed are five in each arm:
l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»;	one is the cephalic vein, and it is on the left side, and they call it "vein of the head.
et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»;	and the middle one is called "fascia," and it is composed of the cephalic and basilica veins, and they call it "vein of the heart.
et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	and the basilic vein is on the right side, and they call it "vein of the belly," and it is above the fosse, and it is the one through which we bleed, which opens clearly above the pit.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains;	And the vein called the radial is between the thumb and the ring finger, and it has two sinuses;
et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes:	and in the leg or foot there are three veins:
l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit;	one is below the curve of the left pocket, and the second is sophene, which is on the right ankle;
et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei;	and the vein called "nese," which is in the ankle on the other side;
et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine;	The sinew of the veins that are behind the ears helps with old catarrhs and migraines;
et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre;	and the qualities of the healthier part, as I tell you, and it is that you reset the head of the patient, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth;
puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief:	then bind the patient's neck with a screw, so that the two veins behind the ears are visible in two places dependent on the head.
quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche;	place your thumb there, and where you feel the pulse beneath your thumb, cut there.
puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues;	then take the lancette, and make the incision from below the vein to the bone, then lift your hand above the entire length of the vein, and cut through the skin and vein thoroughly in two depths, and let the blood flow out until you see it.
puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee;	then extract and bind, while she is sound;
et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	and I have already spoken of the incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz;	The healing of the two arteries that are in the two temples is good for migraines, sore eyes, and long-term blindness, and for tears in the eyes;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis:	and the qualities of the healing are as I say:
et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement;	and it is that the patient's collarbone is extracted so that the two veins are clearly visible;
et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche;	and feel the pulse beneath your throat, and then continue with the procedure;
puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit;	then lift the heart above the vein at your index finger, and place the lancet below, and lift the vein and the flap as you did in two other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need.
puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton;	then release the patient, and place your hand on the vein for an hour, then put on a cloth.
et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee;	and then press it firmly, and hold it until it is healed.
et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	and we have also spoken of their application and extraction, or the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor;	The treatment of the vein on the forehead is just as effective for the cephalic vein in diseases of the face, and for migraines, and for rheumatism.
et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere;	and the quality is such that the patient twists his neck until the vein appears.
puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	then take the instrument called "fosseur," whose form is as follows:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues;	and place the point on the vein, and press with your hand or something else, and let the blood issue according to the quantity you see.
puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	then straighten the patient's neck, and bind the vein until it is sound, and only once the work is done with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus;	In any case, it is not appropriate for the flames to be too hot;
et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	and apply the flame in a crosswise direction, for the bone is nearby, and by chance, the flame may burn through when it is fine.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice;	The health of the two veins that are in the two lacrimal glands helps them, and with headache, and with redness, and with the orbital part of the eye, and with diseases of the face;
et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant;	and the quality of their health is such that diseases escape them by twisting at any point, as mentioned before;
puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	then the healthy one, and let its length be a bit long, its width a bit wide, for there is no flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise;	And if the flames are fine, they might break;
puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	then let the blood flow as much as you need, and then tie it with thread, and tie it well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene;	The health of the vein near the neck is good for water, and for hard scurvy, and for diseases of the face, as in migraine and redness that comes to the face, especially when it is old;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre;	and the qualities of the vein are such that the patient feels pain in his neck, then in his nose when you grasp it with your left hand, and take the fine long flax thread, and insert it between the two nostrils, because the veins do not open well otherwise, and the sweat will begin to flow now;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree;	and do not apply it too strongly, and let the blood flow according to your need, then bind it for a night, because it is quickly restored;
et c’est li forme dou flaime:	and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes;	The health of the two glands helps in the narrowing of the alaina, and in the beginning of mesenteritis, and many diseases, and impetigo, and corrosion, and herpes, and estiomenes;
et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit;	and the qualities of health are such that diseases remove their roots from both sides, as we have said.
et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est;	and let the masters be on the side of the patient's head, and let the diseases settle on the seat, then heal the vein along a long narrow path, and draw off tempered blood, or as much as is needed.
puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle;	and do the same on the other vein, then release the bond, and moderately restrain all the veins, so that diseases do not choke.
et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	and let it remain until the morning, so that the wound heals.
de la sainie des leivres	of the sinew of the glands
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The veins of the lips above help in swelling in the mouth, and to corruption of gums, and fissures of lips, and around the nose and between them.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit;	And the quality of the healed state is to sit the patient in front of you and hold his neck as I have said;
puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires:	then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, and they are known by these: one is black and by the small black veins around them.
cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	then prick both of them, and if you do not know them and are in doubt, then prick the largest one from each side, and do the same for the two veins above and below, for they are of the same kind.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the disease beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche;	The veins that are beneath the tongue help after the healing of the cephalic vein, and this is due to the constriction of the throat, and diseases of the uvea, and diseases of the mouth;
et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire:	and the qualities of the healing are that the patient feels relief in their hands before the sun, and the tongue becomes light, and look beneath on each side a black vein:
saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	then heal both, and do not perfect them too much, for beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres:	The veins of the arm that are commonly healed are treated according to two methods:
ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»;	or with pricking all the large flame mint leaves, or subtle olive oil as you hear sharp, and is called "anisil";
et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	and they are wide and thin according to the width and narrowing of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the martyr's flame is very renowned, and is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble;	and it has need to open the large veins full of visible blood, and those containing much mingled blood;
et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	and it is the form of olive oil flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more pointed subtle, and is for cleansing thin veins, or where there is thin yellowish blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre;	The vein of the basilica, which is one of these veins, helps diseases that affect the throat, and the neck, and the eyes, and the abdomen;
et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	and it is fitting for the patient to bleed and to avoid the artery that is below.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit;	And if he wounds the artery and a hemorrhage occurs, it is fitting to stop the bleeding as I have said.
et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	and must not be pricked by the flame, but cut as with a razor.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre;	And if the basilique does not open clearly, then you must extract it, and replace it with another;
ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras:	or you take out some of it, or you treat with it the vein inserted in the arm:
elle apert manifestement;	it opens clearly;
et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	and the wound with the flame razor, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz;	And if you wish to know the place to treat, then you must extract the arm, and touch the place until you feel the pulse;
puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil;	then mark the head of the shoulder, and then bind the arm, and cauterize the vein with flame.
et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere:	and be sure that you do not injury the artery when you see the head swollen, for it is the artery.
eschui la donques.	use it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere:	And if you see it bulge up high as urine in a child, and the veins are red and fine, know that it is veins of the artery.
haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient;	hasten then, and place your finger lengthwise, then remove your finger when the vein has stopped bleeding, for this often happens.
se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides;	bind the arm, and leave it thus, and do not move the limb for the patient.
et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	and for fear, and do not let him move until he is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient;	And if the wound is not cleansed and it pains you, and medical assistance is not present, open the artery if it appears, for the head of the retraction is needed.
et estainche li sans.	and cleanse the wound.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor;	And take a bark of flax, cut it open, and take one half and tie it on well until the next day.
se li sans estainche, c’est bien;	and if the wound is cleansed, that is good.
se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc;	and if not, treat it as we have said, using powders that cleanse blood.
et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	and the cauterizations are not suitable for many positions due to the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit;	The vein in the middle helps to drain blood from the head above and from the body below, because it is composed of the basilica and the cephalic, as we have said.
et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner;	and the surgeon must be careful beneath the nerve, and if it is too close, and he finds the nerve, and it swells, then the cauterization will not heal.
et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil;	and this nerve opens many times, and if it does not open in some people due to its subtlety, then you must anesthetize the surgeon with a麻醉剂;
et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	and cut the nerve to your power.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, cut it open along its length.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz;	The health of the cephalic vein helps, for it draws blood from the head and aids the eyes;
et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	and it is better to treat with pressure from olive oil flame or myrtle flame, for this is the safest of all veins, as it does not cross any nerve or artery.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence;	In any case, it is best to choose the lightest vein, and do not harm anything if it needs to be done for the first time, and one should repeat the procedure.
et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	and sometimes the eyes swell in some people when it needs to be done for the first time, but it should not harm anything.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the sinew is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir;	The first thing that you must know of a physician, is that medicine is not practiced for gain and to preserve health, and to avoid future diseases;
et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute:	and let medicine be performed in one of the three veins that are called:
c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique;	that is to say, cephalic, facial, and basilic;
et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent;	and the physician should be called at the beginning of spring and autumn, and after eating in winter, when signs of fullness appear;
et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	and the physician should be called on the first or third day after two or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens;	The medicine administered for diseases has no fixed hour, but whenever need arises, at any hour and at all times.
et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	and it is not advisable to treat children up to fourteen years of age, nor women who have been pregnant for less than seven months.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Old people who have passed sixty years should not be treated either.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz;	And when anyone wishes to be treated, in whatever manner it may be, it is necessary that he purge the bowels with a light enema, if there is little retained feces, so that the veins do not receive from the intestines the putrefied superfluities harmful to the principal limbs.
ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques;	nor is it advisable to treat those who are too full of meat, nor those who are drunk, to the point of being heavily intoxicated, nor dropsies.
et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors;	and if one wishes to treat after colic passion, vomiting, and belly discharge, and frequent intercourse in women, and labor, and watching and fasting, and those whose virtue is entirely diminished, or by something of the weapon or of the body.
puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir;	then subtly resolve the humors, if the swelling is great, through meats and through beverages and through medications, if you have the power;
puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit;	then by bath, if nothing prevents it, to subtly resolve the blood, and heal the vein near the foot between the third toes as we have said;
et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses;	and keep him from work, labor, and luxury, and similar things;
et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans;	and be bound and joined, and let the healthier be higher than the one being treated, and rub the arm two or three times, then remove the bandage moderately, for when it is too tight or loose, the swelling cannot subside.
et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on;	and then rub the area with your hands until the veins swell, and you can feel them;
puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	then moisten the veins with a bit of old oil, then place his left hand over the vein under the area to be treated so that the vein does not dry or burn.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus;	For there are veins that flow like cords during the procedure, and some are filled with wind or air, such that when you place them near the flame, you must withdraw the flame, as you cannot open the vein in this manner.
et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	and if the vein is operated on and the wound is too narrow, for this reason it is necessary that the surgeon be skilled in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin;	And if the vein works the first time, that is good;
se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	If not, begin again slightly below or quickly above that vein, if the limb is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras:	And if the limb is swollen, and the patient feels better, let it be for one or two days, and do not apply a bandage:
par aventure i venra apostemes chaus;	by chance abscesses may come out;
ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait;	do not take a bath, then begin the treatment again if it pleases him;
et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement;	and if the hole is small, or the wound is shallow, and you doubt that there is not as much blood as you see, then fill that hole itself with the flame directly.
et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez;	and work a bit hastily, so that the joints swell;
car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	for this happens often when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile;	If you see the joint swollen, do not re-open the wound, and place a bit of olive oil on it, for it lightens the body's blood and heals the oil that is in this joint.
et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc;	and thus administer the oil in each wound that you treat for veins, to stop the flow of blood.
et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu;	and this same thing makes the joint stiff and sore when it is placed on the joint.
si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	if the blood and pus are subtle when they are too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre;	And if there comes an abscess large, which happens often, even when the incision of the vein is small that time, hasten and place above the spot a wet sponge soaked in water and salt with a bit of heat, and hold it for an hour;
et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie;	and you must do this after the bleeding from the vein has ceased, and if it remains at the spot after a few days without any black or green discoloration, it will not harm him;
et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	and if you see, place above it some substance of aloe or myrrh soaked in cucumber, onion, or something similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique:	And often an abscess and appearance arise in the tissue of the basilica:
met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	Place your hand there, and if you find the area soft upon pressing with your hand, this is the bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere;	Hear that you should not apply anything of what we have said, for accidentally it could touch the artery.
mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	but apply a dry plaster to harden the area, then continue treating with other remedies until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw from each according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges;	For if the wound is black, let it continue to drain until it turns red.
et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez;	and if you see it large, let it continue to drain until it becomes fine.
et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	and if it is too hot, let it cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges;	And it is fitting for one who is full and strong, and needs an extraction of blood, that we make the wound larger, and let the flamed be wide;
et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant;	and for one who is weak, do the opposite, and it suits him to be treated less and more often, and one should treat him by cutting across, not by pricking.
et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	and this manner of treatment is safe from hemorrhage and nerve compression, and is better than long or wide treatments.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates;	and for one whose body requires treatment, it is fitting to give soft bread with juice of pomegranates.
s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	if it is heated, draw off the blood three or four times. And if it has a cold complexion, eat moistened honey syrup before the meal, or aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if it swells on the side, after the discharge of much blood, it must inhale broth of flesh, and fragrant subtle syrup, and use the other things that we have said in the division or chapter of syncope for the evacuation of vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if it sees fit to let the arm swell and be injured again, when it is weakened by great swelling, it must be allowed to swell little by little, according to the quantity of its virtue continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever sees fit to let the arm swell after the first swelling, and if it has strong virtue, it must be allowed to swell for seven hours after the first swelling, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And if one sees fit to be injured on another side, it must be injured on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre;	For it has much blood in the body which is now heated, and this causes fever;
si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson;	if it is necessary to draw off a large quantity, and enlarge the puncture so that it heals in the flesh;
puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens;	then when you satisfy all the conditions for healing, and place your hand on your pulse when it is healed, so that death does not occur in the flesh, and this happens often when the surgeons are negligent.
et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus;	and it is not fitting when you see the arm dislocated, and cause blood to flow a second time, and the wound is closed, that you press strongly upon it;
ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz;	nor if it is curved, that you stretch the arm hastily, for that would be harmful;
mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois;	but let it be until it heals a second time;
ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	or you prick it with the tip of the flame, until the blood from the wound has ceased to flow, and place a bit of cloth soaked in water on top and press gently upon it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be, and do not compress it, until the abscess is relieved.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if the need arises to treat the blood a second time, let it be done in that very vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is treated in place of the vein in the head because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges;	And the method for this healing is that the patient places their hand in hot water until the fingers become red.
puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc;	then bind moderately, so that the vein appears well, then heal now through the middle, not wide nor long.
et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez;	and let the punctures be wide, and heal well near the joint of the hand, and if none can come out, place the hand in hot water, and let the blood flow in the water until you have enough.
et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit;	and if it is in summer, do not immerse the hand in hot water, for it should be used more in winter than in summer.
et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	and the healing of this vein is safer than all other veins, for there is neither artery nor nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere:	The healing of the treatment of the right hand is effective for all diseases of the liver, and this is the method:
estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie;	strain the hand, and immerse it in hot water, until the vein is swollen, if one can see it;
et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien;	and if the vein is crooked, and you can feel it completely, it should not cause any pain;
et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	and do not apply it too strongly, for the nerve is closely beside all the flesh, and then place the hand in hot water, if the flesh is frozen in the wound and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have let the blood as much as it needs, put a cloth with oil and salt on the vein to seal it quickly, and do this for each arm.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The sickness in the left hand is good for the disease of the mouse [likely referring to an abscess or similar condition], and do everything as I have told you for the right side.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The soul's health is good for all diseases that are below the body, such as liver diseases, retention of flowers, disease of the reins, and of the old thighs and legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet;	And the quality of its vein is such that the patient should pour hot water on it and rub it over the vein until it swells, and tie it above the joint of the foot;
et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains;	and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot there flows much lymph.
saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	Clean the wound or larger wound, or at the ankle, where movement is needed.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant;	And if you clean it at the foot, beware of the nerves beneath, and clean it through as when cutting;
et soit li flaimes anesil.	and let the flames anise.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the stone cannot come out, put the foot in water, and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz;	And if the cleaner needs it for the first time, reapply it in a slightly different place the second time, because the joints are salted.
ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	do not doubt the nerves, as we have said, and do the same for the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The loins of the sciatic vein are at the ankle, and its stone is worth for pain in the hip when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne;	And the quality of his cleaning is that the patient enters or bathes in it, and four dozes are drawn above the ankle by twisting, for otherwise the vein will not open.
et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant;	and if it opens, heal it in all ways that you can, and by passing through it;
et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	and cut it well that you can, for the liver is soft, and it is very difficult to grasp with hands.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners;	And if you do not find it, heal any vein that opens or is on the back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves;
et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint;	and let the blood flow as much as you see fit, and then untie the ligature, and place cotton and bind it;
ele est maintenant sanee.	it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	with suction cups
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre;	Suctions are made of horns, or of skin, or of glass;
et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres:	and ventilation is performed according to two methods:
ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	or by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres:	And this ventilation which is performed without pricking is according to two methods:
ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu;	or it is done with all fire, or with fire.
et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief;	and ventilation which is performed by pricking and extracting blood is done in fourteen places on the body, of which one is entirely at the shoulder.
et li autres est emmi le col;	and the other is placed at the neck.
et II autres en II costeis dou col;	and two more at the sides of the neck.
et li ventouse desoz lou menton;	and the suction cup below the chin;
et li ventouse des II espaules;	and the suction cup between the shoulders;
et li ventouse sus les crupies;	and the suction cup on the kidneys;
et les ventouses emmi les II bras;	and the suction cups placed in the arms;
et les ventouses des II jambes;	and the suction cups on the legs;
et les ventouses des II chevilles;	and the suction cups on the ankles;
et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne;	and the suction cup does not treat blood from major veins, but only from small veins scattered in the flesh, and for this reason, it does not weaken one much, as we do with the treatment of a vein.
et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	and it should not be administered, nor with all fire or sense of heat, in any disease that comes from overfilling, until the whole body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens;	And if due to necessity of diseases we must bleed, or for custom, we shall administer it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and between times.
car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief;	for there are those who, when they need to bleed, feel pain in the head;
et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz;	and for those who experience overfilling and redness in their face, and in their head, and darkness before their eyes;
et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc;	and those who experience a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and are spitting blood;
et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	and if there are such who think, and see by signs blood, wounds, deaths, and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially when it is between the months, we command them to bleed after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors;	The health of the muscles and aids to the fracture of the head ... that comes to them, and it is not right that this be after the evacuation of all the body;
et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement;	and this ventosation is in the place of the health of the cephalic, and it is not right that those of cold complexion use it, or who have cholera, for it does them much harm.
et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	and for this reason, it is not right that those who have cold diseases of the head use it.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And those who frequently draw blood thus become forgetful, and because of this, it is necessary to place the cupping device a little more downward due to the fear of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion;	The ventosation applied to the neck is in place of the health of the head and the basilic vein, and for this reason, it is effective for narrowing the pit, and cutting into the channel of the brachial artery, and at once, and for replenishment.
et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	and it should not be held too tightly, for if it is held too firmly, it causes forgetfulness or stomach and heart issues.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique;	The windusations at the second ribs of the neck are for headaches, eye pain, migraines, strangles, and tooth root pains, and are placed in the location of the health of the basilica.
et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	and it must be instructed to the patient that he should expose his hand when placing it, not compressing the artery and avoiding hemorrhages of blood.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche;	The windusations below the chin are for mouth diseases, and gum decay, and similar ailments that affect the mouth.
et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	and it is in its place for the health of both sides.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The wind-vasations of the shoulders are for diseases that come from heat and congestion.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes;	The opening of the costal veins is equivalent to that of three veins in the arm, as they drain blood from these large veins.
et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	and instruct the healthy one not to cut too deeply, for the liver is naked of flesh and knows beneath nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire;	The cupping glass on the buttock is equivalent to hemorrhoids in the pelvis and diseases beneath. It should be large, made of iron, and well-sealed.
et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit;	and by chance, if it were too thin, it would break.
et i fai grans plaies.	and he makes great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors;	The cups applied to the legs heal openly, for they draw blood from the entire body, and are effective for old pains in the kidneys, marrows, and bladder, and reduce swellings;
et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	and they are placed on the two ankles and on the two feet, and in any case they weaken the body after long use, and bring paralysis in many conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc;	The way to apply the cup is to first ensure it is vacuum-sealed and then attach it steadily. Place it quickly and move it evenly without stopping until you see the area turn red and swollen, and the reddishness of the blood appears.
puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez:	then apply heat, and replace the cups, and observe the arrangement of the body, for some have firm flesh, and clear pores:
si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes;	it is necessary to prick only once, and make wide wounds, but somewhat deep;
et suce legierement.	and gently suction.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois:	And if the abscess is large, it is necessary to prick twice:
la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	the first time to dilate the way of the large blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois;	And if the abscess is very thick, it is necessary to prick a third time;
et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	and when we wish to draw a little blood at a time, we prick only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent;	And if we wish to have much blood, we often begin;
et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif:	And if the blood is thick, we pierce it often, and the ends must be that the veins are suddenly pierced, and it is necessary for those with thick skin and hard ones, and who have small pores, that you anoint the eyes of the suction cups with aperient and solutif oil.
se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite;	If it is in summer, with violet oil, or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil.
et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if it is in winter, with mustard oil, or lily oil, or chamomile oil, or some similar one.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the superfluity is large and cold, take bitter almond oil, or balsamite oil, or anise oil, and similar.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the one being cured has flesh and large pores, it is not necessary to put any oil on it, but it should be washed after fomentation with rose water, or cold water, or mullein water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or other similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, let them rise from almond, or mulberry water, or sumac, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans;	And those who have large superfluities rise from old wine, or from sacred water, or from decoction of angelica or chamomile, or other similar substances;
et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II;	and it is not fitting to use a suction cup before or during the bath, but after the bath for an hour or two;
et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	and do not sleep after the suction treatment, and it is necessary that he be warmed when he is to be suctioned and when he is suctioned.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez;	And watch that the one who is being cured is choleric, and if the blood is too cold and inflamed.
si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses;	and it is fitting that he take cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces with vinegar, and similar things.
et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	and eat little, and fat of castrated animals, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons;	And he who has cold complexion, should take syrup of honey, and moderately fragrant wine between old and new, and eat little, and eat small and light birds and pigeons.
et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier;	And on the day he will use the cupping method, he should drink more than eat;
et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz;	And it is necessary to give some men either treacle or mace before or after the cupping, to comfort the principal limbs;
et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And let them be given in small quantities, but it is not good that those who are hot should drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne;	The suction cups that are placed without causing injury are those placed on the liver, and on the thigh, and for gout, and on the belly and the mouth and the veins and the hip, because that limb does not suffer injury to the eyes, and one does not apply fire only to attract blood from member to member, as we place them on the nipples when the infant nurses.
por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre;	to thin the viscosity that is in the limb, as we place suction cups on the belly and on the mouth to alleviate the member;
et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu;	and relieves the pain, when there is an abscess or stone, it relieves the abscess by its attractive virtue by chance, or removes the stone from its place;
et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement;	and thus she does it when placed upon the liver and upon the bladder when there is retained windiness, and these cups are administered empty to suction only;
et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	and sometimes they are administered together with fire, and sometimes filled with hot water or water in which herbs suitable for this purpose have been boiled.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the suction cup applied with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre;	And let it be two inches in width and half a palm from the middle with a small perforation in between, as for threading a needle, and made of brass, so that it does not burn the patient when placed on the limb.
et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent;	and in the middle have a cross piece of brass or iron to hold a candle, and let there be both large and small ones according to the diseases and the strength of those who use them.
car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	because the suction cups of children are different from those of adults, and different from thin ones compared to fat ones.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre:	And one must place this suction cup on the same limb:
empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide;	take the wax flange or linen, and place it inside the suction cup through the rod that is placed in the suction cup, so that the light be at the bottom of the suction cup and not burn the patient;
et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse;	and then place it on the limb, and let it be at the puncture as we have said, so that when one looks, if there is vapor, and remove the suction cup;
et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	and apply the linen in the same way as before, and repeat often if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement;	In the cupping applied to diseases of the spleen, for all acute conditions, there is no need for a needle or puncture, and it is not administered forcefully when it is full of fluid, and is placed on the limb only.
et c’est li forme:	and this is the form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus;	Without needles they are not administered forcefully only in limbs where one cannot put cups due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar parts.
et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans;	and on the bare charred areas, such as the elbows or knees, and other similar areas.
et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren;	and the quality of the suckling is such that when you find without needles in soft clear fluid without damage, you should use them.
et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres;	and they apply a nut in sweet water until they become softened and have nothing in their cores;
et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues;	and then use venous incision and suction cupping, then rub the limb until it becomes red, and place on the bruises;
et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	and when they are full and fall, if it is possible to place a suction cup, then put one there, for this is not very effective afterward.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint;	If not, lift the limb off the bed, then wash it very well, and then dry it.
et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés;	and if the limb is too sore after removing the bruise, moisten a linen cloth in cold water and place it there, until the bruises are healed.
et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez;	and if the wound is multiplied, put on broken glass, or garlic, and similar things, until it heals;
ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant;	or you put on the wound half of peeled beans, and leave them until they dry out at the wound, it will stop bleeding now;
et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	and if you have more need of them, take other bandages.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent;	And if the bandages do not want to stick, rub the wound with fresh blood, or prick it with a needle until the bandage sticks, and then place them on it. As soon as they smell the blood, they will dry out;
et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	and when you see that they are渗出，你撒上一点捣碎的没药和盐，或灰烬，它们现在就会掉下来。
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and are for the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent;	Know, dear friend, that the remedies in this chapter, they did not see any of the ancient books, nor did anyone read a letter about them;
et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin;	and for this reason, the knowledge has been lost in our land, for I have never found any good ones;
et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie;	and I know nothing of them, save through the knowledge in ancient books, or because I have studied so much that I have mastered this knowledge, and through experience, and through the habit of my life;
et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	and I have described in this chapter what is contained, and I have summarized it at the end, and have clearly shown the forms of the instruments that are used, as I did in the two chapters before these.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we must say in the prologue of this book the summary of our words and the chapters where the wise ones place their understanding, remaining on the truth, so that those who are proven may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars;	I say that when a break or dislocation or twists or wrenching comes to someone, it is necessary for you to hasten to heal the patient on both sides, if anything fails you, such as weakness of body, or illness, or old age;
ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois;	or where the limbs are either too warm, or too cold;
et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre;	and should the limbs be cold, this means cold jousts, and meat of fowl and chervil, and do not drink wine, nor consume any fatty meats, and do not fill yourself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have doubt of an abscess being hot, or spreading of matter in the limb;
si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	if the patient recovers under his former treatment.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary to feed the patient meat that promotes rapid healing or has viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, peas, and fish, fresh eggs, and good wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	And in the case of meat, it represents nourishment and more quickly heals the fractures.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans;	And know that the bones of the old and decrepit cannot be properly healed or set according to their nature because of the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of small children;
mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant;	but if there is no care, reset the broken bone with large tendons that harden and join the limb together, until it enforces as it was before;
et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	and do not completely remove it from his work, and for this reason, he should be nourished with large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that the fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	And know that the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot or the leg, and I will tell you all kinds of fractures in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	And there are fractures that go lengthwise, and others that go across, just like the cuts of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And there is fracture with wound, and fracture with a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu;	And have his instrument for each manner, and his tool proper in the restoration, according to what memory brings to its place;
et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main;	and it is known that the break of the bone is due to the twisting of the joint, and clearly appears by lifting, and resounds upon pressing with the hand.
et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure;	and when there is no twisting and it does not resound upon tapping, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there is no point of breakage;
mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	but it can well have twisting, or cracking, or small breakage.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it does not suit you to move it by hand, then apply medicines that come after this, and then hold it delicately now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne;	And know that the break that goes in length, and are the two parts of the joint, you must now put them at equal points, so that abscesses may come to life.
et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez;	and if abscesses come to head, let him leave it for some days until the abscesses are pacified.
puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces;	then place it evenly on the skin where you can gently and cleanly, know that the restoration of the former is lighter than the restoration of that which has parts.
puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	then hold it, as is fitting after this.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main;	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, support it from two sides, if it is a hand or foot, or with your hand if it is a small limb, or with two strings, or one string and your hand;
et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor;	and place the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the injured member are separated, you must reduce them by all means at their roots in the skin where you can, and guard that through your work no injury or pain come to the patient.
et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien:	And feel well with your hand if you think it is not properly aligned:
si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	if it is set beautifully, and do not hold it too tightly, nor press it as those who cause an abscess to come by their work with hot incision and contraction on the limb, as we have often wished.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere;	And when the limb is in place, well restrain the patient so that he does not move it, neither while awake nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other manner;
et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	and ensure that the limb is so secured that it does not feel any pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor;	For when he feels no pain, it is not yet at its proper point, and one must place him in such a position that he feels no pain;
et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez;	and see to it that he is placed correctly, so that no twists remain when he is restored;
et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	and the quality of the broken limb is according to what I have told you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are varied in smallness and in largeness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans:	For there are small limbs, such as fingers and toes:
si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz;	and it is fitting to wrap them in soft, fine linen cloth;
et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe:	and those that are large, such as the thigh and leg:
si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche;	If it is necessary to wrap in a wide and hard bandage, because the wide bands encircle the entire large limb and restrain it equally from all sides, so that there is no shifting;
puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure;	then tie with light bandages three or four times according to the limb, and hold your hand slightly on the entire bandage, then go above the break and restrain less, so that the break can move a little.
et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet;	and gradually soften the bandage a little, until you reach a large part of the healthy area, then take another bandage, and wrap it again around the broken area.
puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus;	then go to the part below the break, and restrain it moderately, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first paragraph above.
puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	then place between the tied-off ligatures of linen or cloth, so that they be entirely equal, then tie all around the bandage, and then place your well-made dressings on top, if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors;	And if there is swelling or an abscess, place on top something soothing for the abscess that reduces swelling, and let it be so for several days.
puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	then place them over your dressings, and let them be of half the width of a large cut cane, or of wood used for splints, or of palm leaves, and let them be according to this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres;	but it must be that the dressing which one places over the fracture is somewhat larger and wider than the others.
et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor;	and let it be as long as is fitting for the member's size or magnitude;
puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure;	then hold on the stileths as you did at the first hour, then tie above a suitable thread as in the first time over the breaster;
plus estroit est ensus, adés moins;	tighter here, and less there;
et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol;	and it must be that the thread be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and of soft flax;
car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	for if the thread is thick, as I have seen in works of those who make their hours from twisted flaxen cords, and that is a great error, for the thread cannot be equal if it is too fine, and it should not have less than two inches of space between each stileth.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is injured by the shoulders of the needles after the tightening in their sound places, put over them lint or a cloth bandage so that it does not swell.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	And when the wound is burned and the sinews are broken, I will describe the treatment after this.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not advisable to tightly bind the needles for all broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant;	For when the limbs are large, it is not fitting to apply great strength for seven days or more according to your certainty of a hot abscess occurring.
et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion:	and see the manner of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and torsions:
et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	and it is that you take flour that is kept at the walls of the mill, and mix it with abundant egg, and apply this preparation, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it, and this is the common manner of the plaster restoring fractures in many dispositions, especially for women and small children, because it is neither too harsh nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion:	Another manner of plaster restoring fractures and dislocations and torsions:
pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.;	take З parts of bark and hand, 3 parts of eye and myrrh and gum arabic and mastic, mix X parts;
mirre et aloes, ana V З.;	myrrh and aloe, mix 5 parts;
alechil VIIII З.;	alcohol IX parts;
et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef;	and make it into a powder, and mix with honey of an egg;
se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	if the complexion of the person is hot, use this plaster, for it is a good composition and restores broken bones quickly, and is beneficial to many.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion:	Another manner of plaster that is good for sprains:
pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.;	take mugat and vismalve, use X З.;
mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.;	myrrh and aloe, use 9 З.;
acaice VI З.;	camphor VI З.;
bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	bottlewort armenian X З., and grind well, and prepare with water or yolks of eggs, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure:	Another manner of plaster for joints and bones dislocated from their sockets, and alleviates the pain ensuing, and the cutting and breaking:
pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	take new wool, and the marrow in grease and cooked oil, and put it on the wound.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not heal, but it is good for alleviating hot abscesses, and properly removing pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez:	Another way of plastering which heals broken bones:
pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Take dry fig leaves, and ground them with terrestrial plantain leaves, and make a plaster from them.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another plaster for the healing of bone fractures and to reduce the swelling of abscesses.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie;	Take root of violette, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of wheat, of each one part;
et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	and grind them together, and compound with wine, and if the limb is heated, compound with moist coriander water or water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way to apply a plaster stronger than the first, when an abscess is hard and comes during the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie;	Take root of violette, and seed of flax, centaury, Melissa, and hyssop, and chamomile flowers, of each one part;
et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	and grind, and mix with salty water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	And Hippocrates states in his book that one should not apply anything on a broken limb to restore strength that cerote made of wax and oil does, and nothing else more, and he says it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And Galen seems to suggest that one should apply on the broken limb things dry and a little warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor:	Another method of plastering that is good for wounds and pain:
pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	take mustard and combed wool of sheep, or bird feathers, and vinegar, and salt, in equal parts, grind them, and make a plaster from it to apply to the place.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu;	And then remove the plaster after some time, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor do the bones move from their place;
si ne lou deslie par mains jors.	if not, remove the plaster with your hands.
Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant;	And if pain comes to the place, or itching, with restlessness or swelling, then hasten, and release it, and remove the plaster now;
et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor;	and take a light cloth, and a moist sea sponge, and soak it in water, and raise the place, until the itching ceases, and the pain is soothed.
puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut;	then let the limb rest for an hour, then place it on dry wool soaked in water or rose oil, and bind it with a cloth until you are sure of the warm abscess.
et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant;	and relieve the inflammation of the limb, and let the pain go away, then resume the fine binding, and a bit of plaster, but do not strain it so hard as before.
et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	and finely until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is empty and redness and pain and swelling have been removed from all parts, and you need to apply a plaster and bandage, then proceed with it as you did at first equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII;	And if nothing of what we have said comes to the limb, or it does not dislocate after three days or four or five or seven.
et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus;	and even once let it be twenty days, according to what we see, until the fracture heals and brings the joint close to its place.
adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant;	then apply more constraint than at first, and let it grow its flesh, as I have said before.
et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir;	and if you see the limb dry more than necessary, know that no healing can occur.
arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure;	apply hot wet compresses, every time you dislocate it, and let the swelling subside a bit.
par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement:	Through this work, cut the tendons in the limb, and quickly mend it as the wise fools do, that leave the limb deformed:
c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	It is bad, and these works are full of fears, and I see nothing else but to leave it and do it rightly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of breaking
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees;	Many kinds of fractures exist, with various forms, and the causes are predetermined.
car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust;	because there are fractures caused by sword impact, and the gashes cut through the entire bone down to the marrow that is beneath the bone.
et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	and because of this, this kind of fracture is called "hache" (axe).
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»;	Or the spear pierces the bone from above without piercing it through, and is called this kind of fracture "absolute";
et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	and these are the wounds from these two fractures, great or small.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a compression break, or a fracture of stone, or falling on stone, or other similar ones.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a break nearby, which approaches just to the tissue beneath the bone, or above the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»;	And if the wound is located in the bone as fine as a hair, and the fracture is small, and because of this it is called this kind of fracture "capillary".
et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres;	And if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or falling, or some similar thing, and causes a piece of the bone to enter downward, and the swelling is as when blacksmiths strike on cauldrons.
si entre li piere dedens.	and if between the bones inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant;	And this happens more to those who have or a head with moist bones, such as a child's head.
et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles;	and happens in all these ways of breaking where small pieces are separated as splinters;
et je em parlerai en son leu.	and I will speak of it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And know all manners of breaks through their subtraction, and by inquiry with tests, and through the corrupt flesh that is upon them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of the hair is known in this way: when the bone is discovered and rubbed over it, black breaks appear.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the break, take heed of the bad symptoms in the patient, and if you see any ill symptoms such as vomiting of bile, loss of consciousness, fainting, convulsions, fever, and the eyes turning outward and becoming red, and other similar things due to various conditions, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any terrifying symptoms, and you hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the fractures come first to you, and it is in winter, then you must extract the bone before the fourteenth day after the month.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, you must hasten to extract the bone before the seventh day, so that the flesh beneath the bone deteriorates, and the accidents as we have said occur.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi:	And if the bone fracture comes as far as the cloth that covers the brain, then you must split the fractured part in such a manner:
et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset;	and that you make an incision in the head of the patient's navr, and expose the bone in all ways that you can, and more over the figure of the wound. And if a flow of blood comes to the exposure of the bone, or an abscess forms, then use the aid that is appropriate, and it is that you fill the head with moistened cloths soaked in rose oil.
et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc;	and let the wound rest until the abscesses subside, and you are assured of the cessation of bleeding;
puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige:	then begin beneath the bone to extract, and this is done according to two methods of work:
l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	one method is that you make the incision narrow in front, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then one cuts a larger incision than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde;	And the second method is that you have several different incisions, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed, and made of iron.
et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	and work lightly, so that you do not bruise the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os;	And if the bone is hard and strong, you must pierce it from below, as you make incisions with tenons, not perfectly but so that they do not penetrate beyond the base of the bone. The tip should have a margin or circle above it, so that the tip does not pass beyond the bone.
et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test;	and you must have more than one, so that each comes to its place of the thickness of the bone, and that you have threads for all tests;
et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	and this is the form of three kinds of threads:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez;	The quality for piercing through the broken bone is that you place one thread on the bone, and turn to your two assistants until you know that the bone is pierced.
puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures;	then place the thread in another part a bit after, and do this all around. Cut out the space of the bone which is between the perforations more subtly than you can, gently as we have said, so that you bring the bone to your hand or to any of the instruments you have such as forceps.
et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	and beware that you do not touch the skull nor the face.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire;	And when you have pierced and treated the bone, it is necessary that you reset the displacement which has remained from the bone to all other instruments resembling an incisor, but it must be more precise and finer than the other incisor.
et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens;	and if there remain no small bones or any scales, gently remove them with the instruments.
puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	then treat the wound with bandages and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus;	And the other method of work is that which Galien said, which is simpler.
et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	and let it burn very strong, and this is its purpose.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the fracture opens up, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place beneath the head of this lancet-shaped instrument the one described here in detail.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os;	And do not cut entirely from one side, and let the part be divided into two halves, so that the incision is near the bone;
puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz;	then strike with a small hammer above, so that you lightly strikes the bone all around, and take good care of the membrane that is beneath;
s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	if it is close to the bone, gently remove it, for it can be removed with great harm and fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone fracture does not penetrate to the membrane, and the bone is cut only on top, and there are small pieces, then it must be treated by smoothing out that roughness, and removing scales with a fine razor of which you should have various quantities, to apply in each place what is most suitable, according to the work and the shape of the fracture.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you need to use large razors first and then finer ones, and do not stop until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement;	In each of the other fine incisions and subtle breaks, you must act according to its direction;
et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	and this is something that is not attributed to him who has dedicated his study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie;	And if the wound is uncovered, you must take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and immerse it in rose oil, and apply it to the wound;
puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil;	then take another linen cloth doubled over two or three times, and immerse it in wine and rose oil, and place it over the first cloth;
et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement;	and do this as lightly as you can, so as not to weigh down the wound. Then apply the salve over the other cloth, and do not press it too hard so that it touches only the wound;
et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses;	and let it be thus for one or two days, until the abscess is pacified, then release it, and administer medicines such as roots of lilies, flour of wheat, incense powder, and arsenic, and similar things;
et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication;	and make powder of these things, apply it to the wound, and administer further medicines without causing irritation.
et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice;	and ensure that the wound is thoroughly clean, neither leaving out the ointment nor allowing pus to form. For when pus forms on the brain tissue, it can flow and cause great harm to the patient.
car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	for when you apply something caustic to the wound, nerves will not be able to withstand it.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, take care, if no bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, there is doubt concerning it.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac;	And if darkness comes only because of the medicine that has been placed on it, and it has such virtue, then you should take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil and in gum one wad, and apply it to the wound.
puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then treat the wound as is proper until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os;	Know that either both parts of the neck above are broken, or one alone, for these are two bones.
et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	and the one below is cartilaginous, and does not break, so it does not cause swelling or twist, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil;	And if one of the two parts is broken, you should place your little finger or perforator of the neck, and set the break evenly within your index finger, and into the pocket to secure it, so that the neck regains its natural shape.
et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	and do this lightly, and make sure that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is above the nose and the fingers cannot reach the place, it must be that you set them evenly on the head of a needle somewhat large.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues;	And if the injury is on two sides, do the other side as well, and hasten to restore the first day, if you can.
se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	and if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess is subsided, then apply to the head of the newborn cloths of linen, if the injury is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est;	or you apply it to the other side, if the injury is there.
et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	and let the cloths be so large that they fill the newborn's pores.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And any restorer should melt the wicks in butter and change each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin;	It does not seem right that they should be made moist in the preparation of a hen's egg, and with flour powder.
puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	then leave the cast, while the bones are hard, and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi;	And sometimes use goose quills instead of casts, and if at the sore wrap a bandage, and keep the blistering tool handy, and blow on the patient from among them.
or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	or do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses break during the work, apply a poultice or moist cotton in rose oil, or with a little balsam.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis;	And if there are no abscesses, put an ointment on the wound, made of silk flour and incense powder, cooked with a hen's egg, then place light wads over it, and do not tie the bandage too tight.
et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu;	and if the break in the bone is small, and it is broken into small pieces, then extract it with suitable instruments, then close the wound, treating the injured flesh, and joining, as with plasters and ointments suitable for such.
et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and if there is no wound within the bone, treat the surface, and apply grains of colocynth until it is healed.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the rupture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is ruptured but there is no wound open, and the break is only fissured, not broken into pieces like beams inside, one can recognize it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide;	It is necessary, if the break is in the right side, to place your index finger in the mouth of the patient;
et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	and if the break is in the left mandible, place your index finger from the right hand on the break gently, and fix it with the other hand behind, and make it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the break in the jaw is separated into two parts, you should apply an extension to both parts, making them equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double;	And if movement of the teeth occurs, or a rupture, strain them with a gold or silver or silk thread, then place a dressing on the broken jaw and put a double bandage on it.
et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And place on the dressing a large stiff piece of well-made cloth, or a piece of leather equal in size to the jaw, and fasten it securely to the cheek. Instruct the patient to rest and eat light meats.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet;	And if you see that the swelling changes, release it on the third day, and then reset what has changed.
et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote;	And apply a plaster with powder from the mill mixed with abundant egg or sinew flour, after you have removed the dressing.
et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez;	and place a light cloth over the plaster, and if the plaster dries out, and the position of the patient does not change, leave it until he is healed;
maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	many times it heals in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if a gangrenous abscess comes, administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee;	And if there is a fracture and wound together, ensure that no piece of the bone has been removed;
si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	so subtle in removing with instruments appropriate for this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with flambes according to your necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these fragments, and there remains none, close the wound if it is large, and apply plasters convenient for this, to promote healing until it is healed.
de la forcele	from the forcele
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres:	The shoulder fractures multiple times in front of the shoulder, and the fractures are according to three ways:
ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer;	or it is fractured and dislocated in two parts, and there are pieces, making it the easiest to reset;
ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	or there is a fracture with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie;	And the procedure is when there is a fracture with a wound, that you have two assistants, so that one holds the shoulder that feels the force of the broken bone;
et li autres estende lou col vers la partie;	and the other extends the arm towards the proper position;
puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	then place the fracture evenly in its proper position, so that it has neither appearance nor movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit;	And if you need to extend further, place a round pad of cloth or wool over the shoulder on the patient. It should be as large as needed.
et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	and extend and hold the broken bone, securing the pad with your hand, so that you can place the fracture evenly as it should be.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder outwards, because it comes from below fully, then it is fitting that the patient lie often on his side, and place under the shoulder a medium pillow, and have the attendants press the shoulder downwards, until the bone of the shoulder be lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus;	And then treat the fracture with your two hands, and if you find any fragments, you must incise over it;
et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as;	and draw the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join due to any protrusion, apply pressure with one of your incisors that you have.
mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	but place it over the fracture, to prevent displacement:
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre;	and it should resemble a spoon, and is not misplaced, and should be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the nature of the work;
et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os;	and use two heads, as you can see, and let one be wide, and the other narrow, as is the wound you made when treating the bones.
et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	and when you are certain of a hot abscess, close the wound, and if the rupture is small, or you doubt it is a hot abscess, cover the wound with cloths and tents according to its size.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if abscesses come around, I wrap them in rose oil and vinegar, and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier;	The compression of the bone, when it is painful and due to a cut, is that you apply on the bone a plaster made from mill dust and egg white, and place light stops over it, and put a sphere underneath, if you need it.
puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre;	then take a very wide bandage of about one palm in width, and place the cloth doubled over the stops, and apply the plaster.
puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant;	then take a strip about three digits wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage, so that the ends of the bandage hang out.
et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide;	and place the stele on the blister, and turn the bandage around the neck, underneath the healthy axilla, and underneath the unhealthy axilla;
et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint;	and reset each part, and when you see that the ligature holds the blister properly, and clearly see that the stele does not move over the broken bone, then reward it daily, and when the ligatures are loosened, apply the restraint;
et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut;	and have the patient lie on their back, and when they sleep, place a small pillow underneath the axilla to lift the shoulder upward;
si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors;	if the fracture of the scapula is realigned by aligning the shoulder, or you tie the arm to the neck, and do not untie it until no harmful accident occurs, for twenty days;
puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez;	then resume the plastering, if you see that he needs it, and hold it steady until it is restored.
et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	and it is restored in at most twenty-eight days, and in fewer for some individuals.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the breaking of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement;	Often it happens that the shoulder breaks or is damaged in the middle, and cannot be fixed without external application;
si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues;	so adjust the joint according to the break, and reset it according to its natural form, in all ways that you can.
puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double;	then apply on the shoulder powder from the mill with abundant egg, and light bandages, and place over a double cloth.
puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment;	then place a wide and thin board, slightly wider than the shoulder, and if there are movements anywhere on the board, fill those areas with linen stoppers, so that the board dries evenly;
et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor;	and then bind it tightly with a large bandage, so that the board does not move in place, and check the knot each day;
et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit;	and every time it dislocates, bind it again, and adjust the board if it has moved out of place, and let the patient lie on their side.
et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en XXV.	and the shoulder is restored in twenty or twenty-five days.
Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	And when these numbers are completed, release it, and be sure, because it is not bone that can set lightly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone tends forward, and not over the heart, cut it out, and do as we have said in breaking the strong ligament to treat hot abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of breaking the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc;	The bones are sometimes broken in the middle, but this happens rarely;
mais il brise sovent au defuer.	but they often break at the end.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it bends to one side, and the patient feels great pain, and has difficulty walking. Immediately, and by accident, they may vomit blood, and the movement in the broken bones becomes apparent, and everyone can see this well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient;	And the restoration is such that if the patient lies often on their back, and you place a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and join the ribs of the two sides with your hands, and subtly and evenly adjust all ways that you can, until the figure of the bone is as it should be;
puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve;	then apply plasters and poultices over the fine salt layer or other light substance, wrap it in a cloth, and bind it to the broken bone so that it does not move;
et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint;	and turn the thread round on the back, and hold it properly, and reward each hour the cloth, and if it loosens, hold it tight;
et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures;	and if it is necessary to disengage it, due to corrosion or itching that comes there, or pain or abscess, hasten and disengage it, and apply a fresh poultice, and treat what has come in ways of treatments;
puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	then apply the poultice again, and hold it until it is healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the breaking of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses;	Know that the breaking of the ribs comes only in those large ones behind the back and at the head inside, and they break only because they are fragile.
et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	and we feel well at the inquiry of the wound.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is to place the break equally, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the plaster, and bandage it with a cloth if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile;	And if the fracture of the ribs is sinking inward, the patient feels great pain and spasm, similar to pleurisy, because the bone pierces the membrane;
et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	and they apply leeches, and immediately the patient vomits great quantities of blood, which is a serious illness, and the old method involved great skill.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if some say that it is fitting to administer foods that swell the belly, to drive away the colic.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make those who have not had an abscess come to one.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have had one, let them be cured.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison;	And they say that we put cups on the side to suction strongly, and this seems reasonable;
toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	in any case, there is doubt that the cups will draw the excess fluids to the side due to the weakness in that area.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And if any of you say that we should cover the shoulder with wet wool in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to make the duration equal, then it should be treated with the pleurisy cure, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac;	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot endure because of the bone where the ligament is torn, and doubt exists for the patient, it is necessary to incise over the place of the broken rib, and it is necessary to place something underneath the instrument to prevent leakage.
et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then one must incise the bone, and gently extract it, and then stitch the two edges of the wound if it is large, and treat it with plasters until he is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu;	And if abscesses continue to come, place moist cloths in rose oil, and apply them to the area.
et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And treat the area as needed for the abscess, and let it lie properly over the rib where it belongs until he is healed.
de la brisure dou col	from the break of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie;	Sometimes there is a break in the bones of the neck, and it rarely happens that it bends;
et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	and also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be cured or not, observe whether their hands are softened, swollen, and dead, and cannot move or extend, and when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is fatal in many respects, and if they can move and feel well when you hold and prick them, know that the joints of the bone are saved, and that the patient will recover if proper care is given.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit;	And if such a thing comes to the spine of the back, and you wish to know whether it is sound or not, observe if the flesh is softened, and if the symptoms are in the hands, and on the back, with sudden ventilation and involuntary evacuation.
et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	and when it is felt on the abdomen, there is involuntary evacuation.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is sooted on its back and he wishes to heal, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz:	Know that it is fatal:
si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	if not treated properly.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this does not happen to him, it is the lighter matter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez;	And the treatment is that if there is a hot abscess, you apply a rose oil or egg yolk oil until it subsides.
puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer;	then apply one of the comforting and drying poultices, and bind it with a bandage, and instruct the patient to rest.
et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	and do not sleep on that part where he feels the pain until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur;	And if any bone splits, it is necessary to bind it with a cloth.
et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and remove the bone, then join the two edges of the wound if it is large with stitches, and treat it with ointment promoting healing until it is healed.
et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier;	and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the humerus", you should hold your left hand's pouch and place it evenly in your right hand as much as you can, then apply the plaster and bandage over it if needed;
puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	then hold it tight, and if there is exposed bone, incise and remove it, and treat the wound until it heals.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the bone of the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief;	Then it happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it has happened, there will be a slight alleviation at the head.
et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	and incise longwise, and incline towards the side, and causes pain at the site, as well as swelling of what is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure;	And the restoration is that you extend your hand upwards, as long as you are above the burn.
et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li;	and know which are the breaks and their configuration;
et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	and if the break is only in the head, set that break equally, as long as it remains in its natural position.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is along its length, or it inclines inward, you must lie the patient on their stomach so that the restoration of the fracture can be aligned.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve;	And when you have set it equally, apply a plaster, then place a wooden or copper splint on top, and bind the brace so that it does not move.
et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	and place the head between the ribs, as long as it is in an equal position.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their healthy side, or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit;	And if abscesses form around it, do not touch them, until the abscesses are alleviated, and apply what we have said before.
et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident;	and then return to the restoration, and hold it as it ought to be, if there is no further bad accident;
et c’est li maniere.	and this is the method.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres:	The auxiliary is that which is between the knife and the head of the shoulder, and if it is broken, you must restore it according to one of the two methods.
dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	of which one is that you take a stick of medium thickness, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege;	And tie the two heads with two ligatures, and pull them up, seating the patient on the seat;
puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval;	then he places the broken arm on the stick, until it comes to the armpit, with a crosspiece of wood in the middle, then pulls up any heavy thing or the attendants extend downward;
puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	then place the broken part equally with his hands until the break returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that you place the patient on his back, and tie the hand to the neck, then command two attendants such that one holds the part above the break with both hands, and the other holds the part below the link, extending each to their respective sections.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is stronger, hold the ligament below the break, and above the break, and extend each of the ministers to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure;	And if the break is near the head of the shoulder, you should place one end in the middle below the armpit, and the other towards the side, below the break;
et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute;	and if the break is towards the side, you should place the end gently, without effort, until the break is equal over the bone and over the side;
puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	then set the break equally as it should be, and hold it steady, if no abscesses are present.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez;	And if abscesses are present, you should not hold it steady for more than seven days, and place wetted linen in oil and rose oil on the abscesses until they are calmed.
puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein;	then he holds it in place, and the way to hold it in place is that you apply the plaster over the burn, then set the arm on the shoulder support, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the side.
et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	and place the cloth, and hold it in place on the shoulder support, and on the arm, so that the arm remains straight, unless something prevents it or the bone is dislocated.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part;	And if you doubt that the bone is dislocated, use a splint, and place over the break a wider and stronger splint than the others, with two fingers' width between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it spans the break by three fingers' width from each side.
puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	then hold on the flasks, as I said at the beginning of this chapter concerning the breaker, stronger and less by removing.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit;	And if you see the base of the flasks and the tightening, as we have said, in the hour that you set the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, you let it remain tied for seven days, as we have said.
puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	then examine each of three days the healing, that itching or swelling not arise at the place, or the swellings not be able to come to the limb because it is too narrow.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the treatment, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac;	And if no such accidents occur, do not release the bandage after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and keep his hands over his stomach.
et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens;	and place over the shoulder joint a cloth well filled with evenly cut wool, and watch each hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or that the tendons do not become softened.
si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz;	if the remedy through the virtue of medicine, and give the meat that we have placed before, in such a manner that the meat be over the deepest veins;
et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	and when it begins to heal, let it be large.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout;	And it is custom that the shoulder joint and the leg should be replaced after 40 days from then.
et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	and then one must release and administer baths and ointment medications to heal the limb.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the stricture is ugly and contracted, it must remain to be untied for one or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet;	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "foscile" bone; one is small and is that which follows the pouchet.
et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi;	and the other is large, and it is this one that is beneath, opposite the small bone.
par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	by chance, the large foscile bone may be broken alone, or the small one, or both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations;	When the small foscile bone is broken, the restoration is light, and the healing;
et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	and when the large bone is broken, the healing is poor, and more severe than when they are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is the small fragile bone that is broken only, then it should be extended gently and placed evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort;	And if it is the large foscile bone, it should be held tighter during reduction.
et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor;	and extend it over the chest, and hold the hand pouch higher than the others, and the little toes lower than the other toes, and let the patient cross their hands on themselves, and the cushion in front higher, so that the patient does not suffer any discomfort.
puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	then extend the minister's arm to the part below his hand, or at the elbow, and others above the other ministers.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then place the bones evenly, according to their best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the break into pieces, place each piece in its place. And if there is any detached part that cannot be grasped and restored to its place, cut it out, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler;	And with the knife for wounds, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter;
si pren la cure.	if you take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz;	And if during the beginning of the restoration abscesses appear, cover the poultice with a dressing made of rose oil and white wax, that it be neither too hard nor too soft.
et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	and bind I the cloth gently, until the abscesses are calmed.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres;	And then remove the wick, and apply the plaster of the powder of the mill with abundant egg, then place the bandages, and let the bandage of the burner be stronger, and a little wider than the others.
et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions:	and know that it should have six bandages or arms in various arrangements:
soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II;	let the burner be in one of the bones, or in two;
et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre;	and hold tighter above the burner than elsewhere, and always less by pulling away, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter;
et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres;	and let the cloths that are on the wound be soft and moist, and not hard or harsh;
et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	and let the threads, from which it is drawn, be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the ligament after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;	And if any bad accident happens to the limb, such as itching that comes to the limb, then it is necessary to rinse the limb with warm water until the itching is缓解。请继续翻译接下来的句子：Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez;
et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	and let the limb rest not too tightly.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then reapply the binding. If the ligaments have softened and the bones displaced, address as necessary.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you notice that the swelling cannot come to the member, because it is too tight, it is necessary that you loosen it a little, and let it be for a few days, until the swelling subsides, and then bind it again.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said come to the patient, do not let him lie dislocated for up to twenty days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos;	or in case of need, then place his hands on his neck, and let his shoulders be level, and take care to prevent movement and displacement, and sleep on his back.
et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	and know that this fracture is restored in XXX days or in XXXV, and by chance in XX days, according to the mixtures and combinations of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the hand fracture
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that in the back of the hand and at the base of the fingers, there are few fractures, and there often comes much swelling.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement;	And when the plant of the hand is broken or bent, it must be splinted and set straight in front of him equally;
puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint;	then place his hand on the board stretched out, and have the attendant extend the broken bones, and set the joints equal, until they are well aligned;
et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu;	and apply the plaster and wafers if no abscesses come, then place a bandage according to the size of the limb;
et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	and be wrapped in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie;	And if the broken bone is in the upper part of the sole between the toes, make a sphere of bandages, and instruct the patient to hold it against his broken sole;
et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	and then wrap it with a long bandage, and let the padding be of cloth as large as the palm of the hand, and wrap it as fits.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the foot, it is fitting that you place one istle above and another below on the sole, so that the hand be open and straight, then tie tightly around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the toes.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient;	And if the broken bone comes to any of our ribs, if it is displaced, set it equal, as fits.
et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve;	and wrap it with the sole, and if you see that you place a small pad straight to lift the broken bone, and let it not move.
et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés;	and if the fracture is on the other shoulder, as in the index or one of the others, set it equal, and bind it with the healthy shoulder that is next.
ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet;	or you tie them all together, keeping them still, or you place a splint on it, as one would for a bag.
et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	and take care in the restoration and arrangement of a hot abscess, and aid those who come, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier;	The bone of the thigh is often broken, and well one can see it when it turns front and back.
et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	and the restoration is done by binding the ligament above the fracture, and the other below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment;	And the patient lies on his back, then each minister extends his limb equally.
et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	and this is when the fracture has reached the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is near the root of the thigh, place one bandage against the knife, and the other bandage below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval;	And likewise if it is near the knee, then let the limbs extend from the knee, and let there be downward extension;
puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	then place the bone in its natural position with both hands, and then apply the plaster and the bandage, if no abscesses appear.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure;	And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside first, then return to your work and treatment.
li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	The healing is done in such a manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus;	It is necessary that you wrap the burn with a cloth of hard double thickness two or three times, and let the surplus remain, then move the leg until the heels are at the root of the thigh, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg, behind the knee under, and the head of the thread above;
puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe;	then wrap the leg and thigh with the cloth, place a strip over the burn, and put a strip on the bone of the leg;
puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure;	then place eight strips of cloth around the leg and thigh to equalize the compression, then begin to bind in three or four turns around the burn.
et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint;	and as you go further from the burn, the binding should be less tight.
puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet;	then examine the two heads of the thread that you have placed between the thigh and the knee, and in the third space above, then return above to the head of the thread, until you see from below.
et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	and hold it so that it does not move from its place, then leave it thus, until there is no abscess or swelling or any other similar condition.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois;	and if it does occur, release it and apply what comes next as we have said many times;
et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet;	and if there are bits of bone that protrude, you should sew them up if possible;
et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer;	and if it cannot be sewn, then you must cut the skin and extract the bone;
et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	and treat as we have said, until he is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras;	And sometimes the thigh is broken when we insert needles, as in the shoulder and arm;
toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	in every way, in the restoration done, the patient does not limp.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thigh is restored in one day, or somewhat less or somewhat more, according to the多样性 of constitution。
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the groove of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the groove of the knee there is little breakage, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it breaks, it is not merely a crack or hole, but comes about from any wound, and feels like a deep wound.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet;	And the restoration is such that we place what is warm on both sides, until it moves as much as possible.
puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant;	then apply the plaster, and put a round needle if you need it, and hold it properly. Then restore all the arrangements as we have said in other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar cases.
si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	if you apply to each accident what it needs, until they are healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the break of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»;	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called "mustelz" by straight naming, and the other is called "foscile".
et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	and breaks in the same way as it happens in the arm, and for this reason, the restoration is equally the same as that of the arm, and the procedures are all the same. And if both bones are broken together, turn the leg in every direction.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the fine bone is broken, then turn it forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien;	And if the large bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it can be seen clearly.
et torne desoz.	and turn around.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement;	Then administer extension, and set it equal, and tie the straps equally;
mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere;	but in any case, if the fracture is ugly, and there are multiple pieces, the extension should be less and more gentle;
et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	and adjust according to its virtue.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz;	And when you have completed your work, take two bands of soft wood that fit around the leg on both sides, and let them be long from the middle of the thigh to below;
puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien;	then wrap them with one band over and under, and tie them in the middle so that the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and thus it is well.
et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie;	and none administer the bark of the long leg, and it is from the elm, and they place the leg to guard against movement, and properly done in the fracture where there is a wound;
et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident;	and move the leg each day, to see if there is any new abscess or other accident;
si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	if the wound be healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the bones at the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	A the foot no break comes, but in the bones of the foot a break comes sometimes and in the toes much more, and there is strength only with many conditions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus;	And if there is a fracture in the bone of the foot, and you see these bones overlapping each other, then place the patient's foot on the ground as if it wanted to go, and then put your foot on top of his, at the point where the bones are raised, and press until they return to their proper places;
puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	then apply the plaster and ointments on top, and place under the foot a small board for two heads full, then bind to the foot appropriately, then having wrapped it with cloths around, and other things you need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three days or four have passed, untie the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main;	And if any of the two broken, restore them, as we have said for the bones of the hand;
puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment;	then place on the broken bone a splint according to the length of the bone, and let it be a bit wider. Then place under the foot that board I mentioned, and bind it appropriately;
et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet;	and if there are two or three, or more, broken, place on each bone a splint according to its size, wrapped in one linen cloth, and bind the board under the foot;
et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	and let it be placed over the head of the table downward the abdomen of the foot, so that it touches well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit;	And you must not forget the other things that I have said to other breakers, as we have said;
et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	and attend to each accident as it requires.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone at the hand
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier;	When the bone of the woman's nature is broken, make her sit elevated, then incline her towards the back part, and she should be held from behind.
puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto;	then fill the cavity of the woman's nature with cotton, and put in as much as it can hold.
puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto;	then release the woman, and gradually raise her back, and then the cotton will come out as it reaches the entrance of the woman's nature, and the bone will return with the tissue.
et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor:	and when she wishes to urinate, remove the cloth, and when she has urinated, replace it, and thus for seven days or so.
si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature;	the fracture will be restored, and if you wish, take a bladder of berry, and tie a string to the end, and fill the entire bladder with nature.
puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens:	then blow into the string, inflating the bladder until it is full inside.
la nature si revenra li brisure;	the nature will cause the fracture to heal.
puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	then fill it with cloth, and leave it thus for some days, until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche;	And when the bone of the shoulder in man or woman is broken, reset it thus as we have said for the bone of the hip.
et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	and these broken parts nearby to him who puts his study and use thereon, and understand my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration:	and the breaks signify in many dispositions the right way of restoration:
enten le donques.	understand it therefore.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge;	In the vein, when it is broken, take a goose quill and insert the vein into it;
puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	then wrap it with cloth around, and let it be for three days or wrapped, and it will be quickly healed.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	It is necessary for the one who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, such as the thigh bone or shoulder blade or similar, to be healed now, as our treatments indicate.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is sound, treat it with vitriol, if you have nothing else, then proceed to restore the damage at that same hour or on that day, unless an abscess develops.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if an abscess develops, delay the restoration until the next new day, as long as the abscess is pacified. Do not touch it on the third day or the fourth, for you would cause evil accidents to arise.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is visible on the uncovered shoulder, it is necessary to place it gently with your hands, extending it slightly.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie;	And if you do not have the extension, make one with iron, which has seven or eight long prongs, and the width is according to the size of the wound.
et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure;	and because of this, it is necessary for the doctor to soak three or four [rags], according to what he may need in each treatment of a broken bone;
et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	and let them be clean and slightly large, so they do not fold under compression on the limb during your work, and let them be tight in front, and large in the middle forward.
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent;	And it is called "palanche," which is why the curved heads should be placed on the head of the visible bone.
et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	and apply it once, until it returns, and let them be even one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot properly grasp the bone, then you must cut the head of the bone, so that the instrument can hold it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir;	And if you cannot reset the bone, as we have said, then use a piece of an appropriate instrument, or probe or needle, to your ability;
puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	then reset what is stuck in the bone due to hardness and small cracks.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is reset, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit;	If you do this until it is in its place, then moisten the dressing with wine tincture, and properly if it is so.
et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption;	and do not place any ointment or other thing on the wound that it may cause putrefaction and corruption.
puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure;	then administer herbs when you have restored the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the surrounding area, according to the size of the wound, and take great care that the wound is not constricted by the bandage.
et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois;	and many times the foolhardy have done so, and caused the patient to die or become corrupted at least once.
et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	and let the compresses be softer and more supple than other fractures.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles;	And if the wound is deep or large, and you suspect that a bad accident may have occurred, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, then it should not be dressed with cloths.
mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	but envelop it internally, instead of cloths, with hard bandages, and secure them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days the wound inking at the wound, remove what you have put on for all wine, and apply healing ointment for wounds, as tetralfarmacion and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you must loosen the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is set and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And the limb must be aligned in such a manner that the wound heals smoothly and gently.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if many days pass and the wound does not close further, know that there are small bone fragments, for which you must clean the wound with a tent, and remove all these detached pieces that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the shoulder, or any other form of corruption, it must be treated, according to what is stated in his chapter before.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse;	And when the bone is broken and exposed in the limb, as with the bones of the thigh or shoulder, or other similar large bones, do not set it, for many times death results, but leave it until it decays.
par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues;	by chance it may fall after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if you can;
et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	and if you cannot, let it be.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of blisters that come over the scalding
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre;	Many times after the healing of the fracture, especially when it is near the joint, it is a sad sight to see the figure of the limb;
et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	and by chance it may not be able to make the limb perform its natural actions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres:	Therefore take care if the fracture is fresh:
si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil;	if you administer styptic medicines, such as aloes, incense, myrrh, and sarcocolla, acacia, and other similar substances, so that you use any of these things, or all together, and prepare them with styptic wine, or with an abundance of egg, or with oil;
et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors;	and place them on the nose in stoppers, and hold well, and do not release with your hands for days.
et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee;	and then dislocate it again, and repeat with another, until the nodations are removed.
ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite;	or hold well on a well-made piece of flannel.
car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres;	for the property of flannel is that it removes all swellings on the limbs.
et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent;	and if the nodation has already turned hard like stone, and it needs to be removed, then apply a cloth above, and cut the excess away.
ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	or have it removed by any razor until it is removed, and treat the wound until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of the member which is weak after the siege
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes:	When the fracture of the bone is restored, and the limb remains weak and delicate,
de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit;	of which one is because it was bound too tightly, and was not tied as it should have been;
ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre;	or because there were too many bindings, and the nourishment could not reach the limb;
ou por multitude d’arosement;	or because of excessive bleeding;
ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre;	or because of too great movements, or not at their proper time;
ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	or because there is little blood in his body, so he is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui;	And the treatment is that you make the patient eat and strengthen his body, until the blood increases in him.
et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce;	and give him a bath, and provide him with joy and pleasure.
puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre;	then apply ointment to the limb, so that the ointment attracts to the large ulcer, and frequently wash it with hot water, until the ulcer heals.
et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	and returns to its natural form.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	of the limb twisted after recovery
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil:	When the limb is twisted after restoration, and the broken bone is exposed, and the form of the limb is ugly, nonetheless it does not lose its natural function:
si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre;	for do not believe the fools who say one must break the limb all over again, and many foolish people have done this in our land.
et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors;	and these operations are blamed, and great harms arise, and sometimes death follows.
toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses;	wholly, if the nodations and tortures are fresh, it must be treated with hot water, or boiled soothing herbs such as leaves of vismarula, roots, and melilot, and similar things;
et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus;	and apply a soothing plaster, as well made, and take the vismarula poultice, and cook it with gelatin fat or hemp oil, and apply it on;
ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	or take fat figs, and grind them with colostrum, and similar medicines that quickly alleviate.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the nodation is removed to be rubbed continuously and for a long time with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And move the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement;	And if the tortuosity is hardened like stone, and it needs to be removed with a steelawl, then it must be filed up to the bone, using a fine incisor lightly.
et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	and apply caution and study in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book on dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation occurs to someone, it is fitting now to reset it without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu;	and if one delays, the eyes will swell, and by chance if they are reset with pins in place;
por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez:	for it is not fitting that one moves it when it is swollen:
maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors;	many times it brings about spam and other pains;
toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez;	in all cases, when this happens, make the patient lie down, then let them rest until all the abscesses are pacified;
puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	then raise the limb with hot water and oil, then gently reset it, and treat each limb as it comes back to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations of the shoulder to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jawbone
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres:	Often it happens that the jaws are dislocated downward, and the dislocations of both sides occur according to two ways:
ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc;	or they are somewhat displaced from their sockets, and somewhat softened.
ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	or they are completely dislocated, hanging toward the ear, and saliva drips from his mouth that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, enveloping his tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is slight, it often returns to place through natural means.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie;	And if it is complete and thorough, you must reset it quickly, without delay;
et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars;	and in such a manner that the minister grasps the patient's head, and places his thumb or a cloth in the pocket of one hand at the root of the jaw dislocation in the mouth, if the dislocation is on both sides;
et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal;	and the other hand should be held steady, to keep it even;
et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	and instruct the patient to soften, his jawbones, and move them in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And you place the joint evenly, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement;	And if the reduction is good, especially if it involves both jawbones together, apply hot and oily herbs, gently resetting them.
ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	nor violently to reset, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens;	And when they are reset evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well, soften it by applying moistened cloths made of rose oil and wax, then bind it loosely with soft bands.
et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules;	and let the patient sleep on his back, and let his shoulders be between two cushions, so that they do not move neither to the right nor to the left, nor attempt to move their necks, but give them light food until the pains are gone, and bind the jaws.
et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	and then let him eat lightly, and do not trouble him to open his mouth for eating and drinking until the jaws are well bound and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandible bones cannot be reset to place within an hour and are not fully returned to their sockets, then fevers and stiffness become accustomed, and by chance there may be intestinal paralysis, and by chance vomiting of black bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions;	And when you see this, know that it is fatal;
et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	and often the one who experiences it dies within nine days.
de la forcelle	of the forceps
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot dislocate the lower rib within the continuation of the bone and is only dislocated once at the fracture, and one can feel this.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras;	And the restoration is that the patient lies often on his back and stretches his arms;
et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra;	and then press the head firmly with your palm, and it will return;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint;	then apply the plaster and the bandage, and secure it;
et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer;	and the shoulder that is near the cut cannot be reset;
se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit;	if it can, and if it is reset even once, then reset it to its place as we have said;
puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez;	then apply the plaster and the bandage, secure it, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed;
et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	and in the same manner, the shoulder of the scapula is brought back when it is dislocated from its place;
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres:	Know that the shoulder is not dislocated for three ways:
de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz;	of which one is that it dislocates at the part of the neck on the outside;
et li seconde est a la partie dou pis;	and the second is at the part of the shoulder blade;
et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc;	and by chance dislocates above, and this happens rarely;
et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners;	and does not dislocate behind because of the shoulder, and does not dislocate within because of the nerves;
et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment;	and often dislocates outward towards the neck, especially in those who have little flesh, because in them it moves quickly;
a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	For those who have enough flesh, make incisions, and缝合。 (Note: The last word "rentre a poines" does not have a direct English equivalent in this context and seems incomplete or incorrectly written. It might be intended to say "and close" or something similar.)
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men through a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated for this reason.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains;	It must therefore be tested thoroughly until you are certain;
et adonques encomence la cure.	and then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste;	And it is known that dislocation occurs when it moves downward towards the armpit, and place a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear difference between them.
et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes;	and you will find a depression at the head of the shoulder, and below the armpit at the axilla, as if it were a hollow.
et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens;	and the patient cannot bring their hand to their nose, nor move with any movements;
et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier;	and also, if it is dislocated upwards, though not hidden, for you will find it clearly by touch;
et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	and this manner of dislocation is not difficult to reset, when it is new or when the person is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu;	And the method is that the attendant lifts the patient's hand upwards, then places their fingers under the armpit, and resets the joint by gently lifting it upwards to its proper place.
et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz;	and the attendant lifts the hand and extends it upwards, then places it under.
si venra hastanment.	if it comes quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude;	and if it does not come as we have said within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water;
et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree;	and the patient should be treated with soothing and relieving remedies, such as a decoction of almond tree, fenugreek, and marigold in water, and it should be applied.
puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide;	then dress the patient's back, and place a cloth of medium consistency neither too soft nor too hard under the bandage. Then put the patient's foot on the cloth and tie the shoulder blade securely, and stretch the hand of the patient.
et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval;	and secure the patient's head, so that it does not move downward.
celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere:	that shoulder dislocates again immediately, and if you reduce it according to this manner:
et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides;	and you should have someone who is larger than the patient present;
et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar;	and stand upright facing the patient, and place the shoulder under the armpit of the patient, and lift the armpit upwards, so that the patient hangs in the air;
et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	and another minister pull the hand of the patient downward towards the abdomen.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, he may add something heavy to him, and the dislocation will return now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere:	And you reduce it also in another manner:
et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile;	and it is that you insert the long poker into the ground, where the head of the shoulder should be as round as a fist, and neither too large nor too small;
puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust;	then it should be placed over the patient, but let it have a hood covering its mouth, and the patient being long of the length of the staff;
puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment;	then it should extend its hand downwards, and the joints will return to their place quickly;
et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure:	and if it does not want to return despite all these things we have said, then perform this treatment:
pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	take one stick of two arms' breadth and four fingers' width, which has a head rounded to enter perfectly under the armpit, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide;	then tie it over the head of the stick with a hood, so that the stick does not burn the patient, then place it under the armpit of the patient;
et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part:	and stretch out your arm above the pole of the long one, and tie the shoulder above the pole, and the arm at the head of the hand, then place the arm on the step of a ladder of width, and let the hand hang down, and leave the body hanging from another side.
li jointure reva ens maintenant.	the jointure returns to its place now.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is done, in whatever manner that may be, you must place under the armpit a pad of wool equal, then apply the plaster mixed with powder of grindstone, with incense and egg yolk, over all the shoulder and around, then remove the pad accordingly, and turn the bandage over the plaster, and wrap the hand at its neck, and let the hand remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost;	And it must eat little, until the limb is strengthened, for it will heal faster;
et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve;	and then eat more after 5 or 7 days, and move it;
et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	and if it is firm and not softened, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is dislocated due to moisture or for another reason, it must be treated with three cauteries at intervals, as is described in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis;	And if you do all this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joints do not hold, and cannot lift your arm upward, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened.
et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	and know that the joints will never return to their proper place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure;	The dislocation that is in the buttocks, and the breasts, or rear, is caused by impact, and extension of hands, and is applied elsewhere.
et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	and treat until he is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after healing there is pain in the limb, and delay with movement, the patient should take bath many times until that pain subsides, and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient;	know that the joints of the elbow are dislocated at points, and return to their place at points.
et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien;	and when it has lost its moisture from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not responded to, for it can be seen clearly and felt clearly;
et desalue selonc chescune figure.	and has lost its moisture according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the diseased part with the healthy one, you must see it clearly.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And the joint is stiff, and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder in any way.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener;	And you must reset it in the same manner as with abscesses that come to a head and heal, for if abscesses come to a head and heal, it would be harmful to bring them back.
et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier;	and by chance it cannot be reset in every part, especially when it is at the rear.
si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	it is worse than other dislocations, and causes even greater pain, and by chance it may lead to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains;	And the restoration is such, when it is thus that one can bring it back, that you extend its limb with your two hands;
et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	and its arms be spread out, and the hands placed according to the edges around, in front and behind, and place the joint at its socket or at the root of its palm, until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his hand, and fixes the root of the palm cut which is displaced.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension;	And if it will not return to its place, apply strong extension;
et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension;	and it is such that two ministers extend the arm, and hold it with their hands, so that it does not move with the extension;
puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large;	then turn the arm in both directions, after you have wrapped it in a long and wide double cloth;
et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne;	and when the eye is placed over the joint to smooth the jointure, then apply the grease of any eye until the jointure returns;
et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	and when it is in place, apply dry plaster with egg yolk, and hold the limb steady, and may the arm at the shoulder of the patient, and let it for some days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse;	And if the jointure is firm in its place, release the bandage, and let it.
et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis;	and if you see that the jointure is not set well, then reapply the plaster and the bandage, and let it so for some days, until it is firmly placed.
puis le deslie.	then untie it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez;	And if it feels painful after the repositioning of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and gently rub it, and press it until it subsides.
ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain;	or you place a piece of fatty sheep fat on the joint for one day and one night, then remove it, and let the area be immersed in water or a bath.
et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain;	and when it swells, rub the joint well, then place the fat piece on it again, and immerse it in water or a bath.
et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this two or three times until it is healed.
et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus;	and if you see, place moist heated sheep's fat with butter on it and press it in place.
si revenra a sa disposition.	if it returns to its position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures.	The shoulder joint is particularly dislocated, and the return is light, more so than other joints.
Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	In all cases, it must be reset quickly to its proper place as soon as it is dislocated, whether the joint is swollen or an abscess has formed.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne.	And the resetting is done by placing the injured hand on a table, extending the minister's hand, and setting the patient's palm over the location of the joint. Hold it until it returns to place.
Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu;	In all cases, you must ensure that it is properly aligned;
adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	then place the patient's hand side down on a table for stretching and realignment.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, put the patient's back of his hand on the table, and the attendant place his hand on that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien.	If it returns now, that is well.
Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If not, apply plaster to incise and drain the abscess, and let it be so until it can resume.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte;	And if he cannot endure it, and you cannot put it back in place after a few days, then the joint will remain misaligned.
et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout:	and it will not harm the patient as long as the hand remains soft, and cannot grip anything at all.
adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere;	then you will know that the nerve is cut, or the artery.
si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	if there is no other means to treat it, by chance nothing else works.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put on the plaster that we have said, then bind it and let it be 5 days, then unbind it and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is any swelling, apply hot liquid grease and rub it until it heals.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre;	The fingers of the hand are sometimes dislocated on each side, sometimes at the back of the palm or in the wrist;
adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins;	then reset the fingers, and hold them with your hands until they return to place, then support the hand of the finger, and bend it towards the part where it is dislocated;
et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor;	and leave it for two days, and then set it straight on the second day;
et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut;	and do not bind it, as we have said, and release it each day, and allow it to move, and bind it at night;
et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez;	and do this often, until it is tight, and likewise do so, if it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, and do so as you did before, until it is healed;
et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	and likewise do so, if it is dislocated in another place.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	of the dislocation of the shoulder blade of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder blade of the back or neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there is no point in treating it, as death hastens the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I.	And the signs are that the vomit leaps without will, nor can it be held back, and often a limb becomes softened, or both thighs or both arms.
Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars;	And often the spine moves in four parts;
celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»:	that which moves at the rear is called "gilbositez":
li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance:	the treatment is such that you should remedy if the yellowishness has come from childhood:
si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	if there be no cure or healing for it.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit;	And that which comes from falling or blows or similar things, the ancient methods of treatment with grand words say that it does not bring great profit to all.
mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	but I have abbreviated it according to my intention, and have formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit;	I say that in the yellowishness that comes to the foot, there is no remedy or healing;
et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis;	and likewise that which comes directly to the two sides, and can only be cured by that which properly comes to the back, as I say.
et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece;	and it is that the patient be extended on his back with the limb in an even position, and have a cloth beneath him, so he does not swell;
puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles;	then stick a hot poker into the buttocks and the other at the feet, and tie a bandage under the armpits of the patient, and the other at the hips, and the knees, and the ankles;
et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons;	and two ministers know the bands, one at the buttocks and the other at the feet, among the two pokers;
et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	and let them be well closed, the poker as we have said, and the minister place his palms on the buttocks firmly, until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee;	And if it does not return by this cure, take a board of three ells long, and lay it under the wall, and if the patient is on his side, place the head of the board under the wall, then put the middle of the board over the spine;
et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu;	and place the patient's feet on the other end of the board, and press well, until it returns to place;
et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	and if you see, do it at the joint that turns by hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc;	And when you stick two hot coals at the head of the patient's arm from one side, and near the feet with the other, place half a palm length of long pepper between each coal.
et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent;	and have in each coal hole either the pointed stick or the stake, and let the coals be firmly in the ground, so that they do not move;
et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet;	and between each two coals have one turning coal, upon which the irons turn, and have in two turning stakes small coals of a palm's length, to turn the stake;
et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	and then bind the iron between the cheeks to the stake facing the head, and the other iron away from the feet to the other stake, and each minister turns his stake with all the iron, and the master place the spike evenly as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez;	And when it is even, place a drying plaster with abundant egg, and then the stoppers, and then the stake of a piece of three palms long, that pierced the vein of the fatness and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with an iron as we have said, and use the patient for subtle healing until he is cured.
et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant;	and if any matter comes at the end of health, it is necessary to administer soothing and relaxing medicines, with the dosage that we have said above;
et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations;	and sometimes a piece of flax is administered, and sometimes there appears an appearance in the lower spine of the back, and one should take care that it be dislocation.
et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption:	and it is the bone that protrudes, for which one must not have presumption:
par aventure feroit venir la mort.	by chance it would bring about death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of the dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures;	Know that the joints of the hip and the shoulder joints only come from dislocations alone, and do not occur in the same way as other joints.
et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties:	and the joints of the hip are dislocated according to four parts:
dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier;	dorsally and ventrally, and in front and behind;
et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	and more dorsally it is dislocated, and only slightly dislocated in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu;	And the knowledge of a dislocation dorsally is that when one joins the diseased leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the diseased knee is more open than the healthy one, and the diseased knee cannot bend as far as the healthy one.
et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	and it is the muscle that is affected and swollen from an abscess of heat, because the head of the thigh bone comes into play.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it happens is that these accidents are contrary to those mentioned above.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement;	And the signs of him who is in front, are that his leg is well according to fulfillment;
toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	In any case, do not bend the knee in pain, and if one tries to make it move, it cannot, and it retains its urine, and swells the ankles, and when it goes, it passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him to whom these happen later are that he cannot extend his knee nor bend it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the ankle is softened, and the head of the thigh is at the site below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure;	The remedy for this case of dislocation is that you reset it if the dislocation is old and remains in its position, then there is no need for further treatment.
et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	and it should not have any presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre;	And in the case where the dislocation is fresh, and there are four ways of dislocation, you must hurry to reset the joint, and stretch it inside and outside, and move it to the right and left.
par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	If it returns to its place, it has no need of further treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil;	And if it does not return in this manner, it is necessary to prepare the minister well, and hold the leg firmly with both hands, or at the part that is tied above the knee.
et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe;	and have another minister extend his hand above in such a manner that he places his hands under the armpits, then bind it with a cloth around the thigh;
et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien;	and another hold the head of the patient.
et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	and extend upwards and downwards at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains suspended.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common for the four similarities, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance.	If not, then it must be treated for its likeness.
Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele;	When dislocation is at the shoulder blade, you must stabilize the patient on the healthy side, then place the ligament at the root of the thigh, and below the angle, then tie it above towards the angle and away from the spine.
puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment:	then bind the other minister's arm, and embrace the large ligament of the injured thigh, and extend it downward firmly.
si revenra a son leu maintenant;	it will now return to its place.
et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	and this method of dislocation is less severe than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres;	And if you cannot tighten it in this manner as we have said, then you must tie the patient's two feet together with a strong ligature above the ankles and knees, and ensure that the injured leg is extended about two fingers' breadth more than the other.
puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc;	then let it hang from the head of a stake, and two arms length.
puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	then command the minister to embrace the head of the thigh, and let others hang with the patient who embraces firmly the thigh, for the joint returns quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi;	And when the dislocation is downward, the patient lies down, as we have said in that concerning gilbositeit, and draw the ligament on the injured leg properly, and on the heel also.
puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme;	then place two hot coals, one on the head and the other on the heel, then insert the coal between the thighs of the patient in the proper position.
et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	and plant dry cloths between, so that it does not blister the patient, then stretch each minister before him, and align the eyes with his hand at the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	And if it returns, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	And if not, place it on the table and press it as we have said in the gilbositeit, and let the patient lie on the good side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit;	And when the dislocation is in front, it is necessary to stretch the injured leg quickly, and according to what I have said;
et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	and place the eyes where the pain is on the injured leg, then press with the other hand, and stretch downward toward the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches;	And when the dislocation is behind, it is not necessary to stretch the injured part downward or lift it off the ground. Instead, it should be positioned as if the hip were dislocated behind, as we have said regarding the position on the two hips.
et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table;	and it should be above its surface, and the ligament stretched as we have said before, and must be pressed on the joint at the table;
et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz;	and it will be in place when the patient extends his legs, and they will be equal;
adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve;	then adjust the thighs, and apply the plaster, and bind it with a bandage, so that the hips do not move;
et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus;	and let it rest for 3 or 4 days, then remove the bandage, and apply the plaster again;
et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors;	and if you see that they are equal, bind it as before, and let it rest for 3 days;
puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	then release the ligature, and let it go freely until the limb is strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres:	The knee is dislocated in three ways:
c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier;	it is to say, within and without, and behind;
et ne desalue point devant.	and does not dislocate at the front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez;	And the sign is this: you instruct the patient to bend their leg at the knee, and if it does not fit against the thigh, know that it is dislocated;
et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez;	and the restoration of all this is that you instruct the patient to sit straight, and extend their leg if possible, and place your back against theirs, and put their foot on your feet;
puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment;	then take his knee with your palms, and draw it between your two hands, then bend the two sides of the knee apart;
et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement;	and extend his foot further, so that the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that he moves his leg lightly with his thigh.
et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie;	and apply the poultice, and keep the leg elevated at the thigh, and bind them tightly for three or four days, then release the binding.
et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	and do not allow the patient to walk much until the limb is strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not straight, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The ankle is sometimes injured, and sometimes completely dislocated, both inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee:	And the sign is that the ankle is swollen, and tends forward to the part where it is dislocated.
li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	The treatment is light, and one should gently extend it with his hands when he is merely suspected.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville;	And when it is dislocated completely, you must seat the patient upright, and hold him by the ministers [slaves or attendants] except by the leg, above the ankle;
puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut;	then draw the foot to you with your right hand, and then to the left twice, then extend it upward, and firmly place the foot upward;
et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet;	and do this twice as we have said, by firmly placing and drawing the foot;
s’elle revient, c’est bien;	if it returns, that is well;
se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient;	if this does not work, restart the operation, for it returns;
et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide;	and if it cannot return this way, place the patient on their back on the ground, and drive a stake firmly into the ground between their thighs, and tie cloths around, so that the patient does not move.
puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet;	then hold the thigh, and another minister extend the foot to the hand or the ligature, and tie it around the neck of the foot;
puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent;	then extend each minister equally, and the stakes be placed firmly between the patient's thighs to hold the patient while extending.
puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	then place the shoulder in an even position at its sides, and another minister hold the healthy leg from above, and the dislocation will quickly return to place.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois;	And when it is at the right point, put the plaster and plugs over it, stretch the skin, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are behind the ankle so that the bands are not too tight;
puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain;	then leave it for 2 or 3 days, and as the bands soften, stretch them;
puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors;	then release it on the third day or fourth, and instruct the patient not to move for 4 days;
et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	and if it goes beyond this time, it is not certainty that it will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses arise, you must relieve them as we have said elsewhere until they are healed.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When they are dislocated, you must beautifully extend them with effort, and this is a light matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne;	And if the dislocation is in any notch of the foot or ankle, it is necessary to seat the patient on a firm surface or on a bench completely upright, and place his foot on what protrudes from these joints, then stretch his foot well until it returns.
et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie;	and when they are equal, and there is nothing apparent, put under the sole of the foot a shoulder blade for two shoulders, then hold it firmly, and leave it for three days, then release it;
et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	and let it rest until it is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert:	When a wound comes with the dislocation, and one sees it healing, many times the patient dies:
si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis;	if you are not overly presumptuous in the treatment, if you are not wise in the art and have not used it long, and if you are not always patient and merciful and not too bold;
et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit;	and use at the beginning of things to cool an abscess, and leave the patient in God's hands if you see no hope of recovery;
et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne;	and when you see hope, now reset the limb to its place, as the abscesses come to life.
et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis;	and when the limb is in place, administer things to appease the abscess with heat, and treat the wound as it should be, with drying ointments.
et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples;	and if with the dislocation there is a fracture, and broken bones, set them, and do as we have said in simple diseases.
et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	and guard against entering a state of fear, as I have said, for it will affect you according to your Creator, and for the knowledge of your weapon and body.
