O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, most dear sons, I have completed this book which is the latest in the science of medicine, and I have made its end through his explanations and by his declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it has come to my vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say, "surgery.
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is scarce in our region and entirely lost, the science has perished and been cut off, and nothing remains except the small descriptions in books by the ancients of what their hands have performed.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this came errors and vanities, and the intentions have been closed, and the science has been abandoned.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I should vivify the whole order of this treatise according to the way of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and will come together the forms of cautery tools, and other instruments of the work with the adjustment of declaration and preparation of them as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And for the reason that no skilled surgeons are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who undertakes this to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, their forms and their conjunctions and separations, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and sinews and the number of them, and their movement and veins moving and resting, and from where they issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And because of this, Hippocrates said that the need with the thing is much, and with the work is little; and especially in the art of hand.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	We tell you at the beginning of this book that whoever is not knowledgeable about the things previously mentioned, must take care lest he do anything in error and cause harm to people; so that I have often wished more of those who engage in this science and abandon it without knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a fool who incised an abscess of scrofula or throat in a woman, and incised the arteries of her neck; because so much blood issued forth that the woman died between his hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another fool who extracted a stone from an old man, and the stone was large; so he took with it a piece of the bladder, and the man died within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to draw the stone, and saw the condition of the patient and the size of the stone, and knew well that if it were cut out he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another patient who was treating the duke of our land who had a broken leg, and with the breeder he made a wound; and the ignorant surgeons fixed the break on the wound with splints by strong ligature, and left no heat at all on the wound, and left it thus until it ended; and ordered that he not loosen it at all; and remained thus until the leg swelled entirely and the foot came to destruction.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and hurried to come and release the leg; and when I heard it dislocate, he was at ease and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all ways when corruption was already confirmed or member, and could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to go through the member until the member was entirely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And apply another poultice which collapses the abscess and then inflame by the malignity of its virtue.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For an abscess, when it is pure melancholic humor, it should not be touched with iron if it is not in a dry state where one can remove all that is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this, skilled surgeon, you are in need that you know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: namely, work where there is danger in many positions. And I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Because it is necessary that you take care, so that the foolish speak ill of you. If you take your weapons in confidence, and undertake your sick lightly and firmly, and use the better way so by the grace of God you come to salvation and be joyful; and leave the terrible diseases for good health; and remove your weapons from those who cause you doubt, and have faith in them that you might go from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galiens says in some of his admonitions: "Do not take care of a false illness, lest you be called a fool.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have discussed this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cauterizations and cauterizations with medicinal water, and they are ordered from the head down to the feet; and about the forms of instruments, and the tools for cauterization, and everything necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and about suction cups and wounds, and about the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and they are ordered with the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapters are about resetting dislocations and twists, and similar things; and they are ordered from the head down to the feet, with the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	As we remember the work, it must be said about the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of the aid and its harm are subjects of lengthy and subtle science and secret responses; and many wise ones spoke about these, agreeing with them; yet I find their words insufficient, for I fear the lengthiness.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the fire cautery helps universally in all humors where there is matter; there are two complexes: namely, hot humor with matter, and dry humor with matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the complex of heat and dryness with matter, some debated and said that the fire cautery is great help; others said the opposite: that the fire cautery is not useful for diseases arising from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is hot, and should not be applied to diseases caused by heat or dryness. Those who spoke against this said that the fire cautery does great help for hot and dry diseases that affect the bodies of men.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you examine the body of the man and his moisture according to the temperament of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this saying.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it to be true through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And in all ways, let no one intervene except those who have experienced it, and who know through long practice the chapter on cauteries, and the diversity of human temperaments, and the dispositions and causes of their illnesses, and the courses and duration of diseases; we fear nothing from other temperaments, especially in cold and moist illnesses.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the signs assembled and agreed with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that the fire cautery altogether with heat is part of wound treatment, and has a greater goodness than the cautery from burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire is simple, and harm only comes to the limb that is burned, and does not hurt other limbs much.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The burning medicines spread from limb to another, causing diseases that hinder healing in other limbs; and by chance, they might even kill the patient. The fire for its height and the goodness of its substance does not do this if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this through experimentation and the long course of service and study I have devoted to the art, which is based on the truth of things; and because of this, I excuse the length of my words. For it pleases me not to deprive you of the secret concerning fire and the quality of the work, how it expels diseases from the body, as the philosopher states in demonstrating; receive it into your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, sir, when the cauterizations should be performed, and they chose the times.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that cauterization is suitable in all times, because the harm occurring can be minimized by means of the cauterization; and especially if the cauterization is for pains necessary and urgent that cannot wait until greater mischief arises in the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think so, dear sir, as the foolish people do; for the disease that is healed by cauterization does not return; and they say thus: but it is not as they believe, because a cauterization is only medicine that changes the complexion and dries the humors that are the cause of pain, and is worth more than other medicines for the speed of its virtue and the power of its work and authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it can happen that the disease comes once according to the patient's constitution and the location of the disease and its virtue; and in him are gathered the superfluities by the acquisition of meats and similar things, if not cauterizes applied at the site where there is little superfluity and moisture, such as dental cauterizations for pain, and similar things, and then the pain does not return at all; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And few people understand why cauterizations are called the last resort of medicine, and this is true; but they do not believe that cauterizations work after medicine, and their intentions are false, for when we administer methods of treatment in any disease and they do not work, then we administer the cauterization, and it does work.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore, it is clear that cauteries are the latest in medicine, not according to the intention of wise men.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauteries made of gold are better than those made of iron, and they did not say this because of the quality of the gold or its high value; and they said that the heads of the cautery do not cause putrefaction, but it is not true, for I have experienced it, and found that it is true in some people; and cauteries of gold are better than those made of iron, as they claimed.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And whenever you heat an instrument of gold, you cannot tell when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it will cool quickly; if it is heated too much, it will burn. Therefore, there is sufficient reason to be cautious.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this, we use the fire cautery that we have prepared for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you have ordered this chapter from the head to the feet, because the veins should be easier to find.
dou cautere olivaire	of the olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moisture and cold on the head, and in it there are two kinds which we make because of a disease called "soda," and because of many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and ears, and for the multitude of dreams, toothache, throat pain, and especially all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purified by a solvent medicine for three or four days, according to what the virtues and strength and custom of the patient can endure; and then raise from the base of the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then seat him crosswise between your hands, and place his hands over your knees; after that, put the root of your palm on the root of his nose between his two eyes; and where your two means come, let it bleed from both sides, then heat the cautery called "olivare," whose form is as follows:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the left side marked with ink, and let your hand descend and withdraw little by little, twisting it. Then lift your hand solely, and relieve the pressure if you see a small bone; and if you do not see it, restart the cautery until you see the bone as I have said. After that, take a bit of salt, and put in wet cotton inside, and place it on the wound, and let it be for three days. Afterwards, put soft wool over it with butter; leave it there until the scalding is gone. Then treat the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmaçon" until it heals.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients said that when a wound remains open longer, it purges more; for this reason, they would aid it.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And it was said that the cautery must be left on until part of the bone is burned, and then the burnt portion of the bone is removed and cleaned.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And another says that the cautery must be left on until it burns as wide as a woman's ring that she puts in her fusez, to facilitate the movement of humors out. One must keep the wound open for a long time; afterwards, one must clean and suture.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cautery do not seem to me to be entirely good in all respects, except perhaps for those who have reason to fear. I believe that the lesser cautery should be used; for the shoulder is weakened by continuous discharge due to nature, as we testify in other limbs. And even when the patient's shoulder is weak from nature, and the first application of cautery seems more beneficial and healing to me, from this I work in all such cases for salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	of the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When in the head there comes a chronic pain that lasts long, the patient should use years and pills called "cochie," and of cleansing of the head and oils and plasters; and if one makes the fire cautery as we have said before, it is not useful.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the head of the patient is of strong nature and not too cold; then cauterize over that cautery a bit as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After cauterizing over each horn of the head to the bone, as we have said before, make the fire cautery on the forehead which is called "vasselz"; and the forehead is where one places the suction cups; and move your hand so that you do not go too close to the bone: the patient feels much greater pain in this cautery than in others, and I will speak about it elsewhere; and the cauteries for the horns should be finer than those used for the middle part of the head, and this is their form.
dou cautere dou chief	for the fire cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When pain comes suddenly in a part of the head, and the disease extends to the eye, and the head is cleansed with purifying medicines, and other treatments for the diseases have been done as I said in the division of diseases, and all this does not help: then he makes cauteries in two ways, that is to say with medicine ague and by fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauteries with medicine ague are made by taking a piece of alum, removing the bark and covering it slightly on the head. Place this piece where the pain is located in such a way that you can place the piece of alum under the skin; when it is placed there, hold it tightly and leave it for twelve hours; then remove it and apply a piece of garlic instead, and let the wound remain for two or three days; then put a cloth soaked in butter as a dressing.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the application of ointment until he is healed; and if you see, then do those of some burning medicines that I have written or tenth treatise on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is done in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the iron cautery with coal to form it:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the tip is made in the shape of a small bowl with only a little curvature, and in the middle there is a small appearance; and place it on the painful area, and hold your hand and slightly move the iron lightly, until the half thickness of the flesh where the bone is is burned; and lift your hand so that the artery, which is above, does not burn, and let plenty of blood flow.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After place cotton in the wound, and keep on the head for three days; then put soft cotton with butter, and cure the head with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish cauterize this headache with the cautery called "cultellare", do it entirely by its point, and beware of cutting the artery in this headache which is not old.
de emigraine	of headache
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you cure a headache as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not profit, and you see that the cautery previously mentioned from medicine and iron is not sufficient, then it must be that you heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white-hot; and burn over the painful area a line half an inch long, and withdraw your hand once, and hold back so as not to cut the artery and do not come to the bone; and beware of the jaw that moves when eating, and the nerves have regard only to the move and that spasm does not arise in the patient, and beware of the discharge of blood from the artery when it is cut, or cutting has great fear and especially for those who are not known, and are not studied and experienced; and leave the work unfinished; but I will tell you how one stops bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it occurs in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize him between the shoulder blades as we have said, and cure the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery as we have said or chapter of the extraction of the artery, with the cautery that has two blades; and this cautery is better and more helpful than the other.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	Of the pain in the ears due to cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When there is pain in the ear due to cold, and medicines and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division have been applied, and the pains do not change, then heat the cautery called "poins," as described below:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After piercing all around the diseased ear, or in two places where the pain is felt on both sides, and withdraw slightly upwards from the root of the ear since you have signed its edge; let there be ten points around each ear; after that cure the wound until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	Of the torture of the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture which must be cured by cautery is not among those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make any cautery for symptoms that come from drying and weakness of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this symptom of torture that moves from phlegm in the body, and spitting, and gargling do not help, then it is necessary to cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one at the root of the ear, and another slightly above the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; place the cautery on the part that appears healthy, and make the cauterization just above the top of the skull, a little below the tip of the nose, and another on the temple as long as an inch; let the cautery remain there until the middle of the neck is burned; and this is the form of the cauterization.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the likeness of the surgical case we placed before, but it is a bit more subtle, and it should be that the knives are a bit larger; after treating the wound as I have said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you treat it as we have said, and the patient does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then I make four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one on the head itself, and one on the side of the neck called "vessels" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the opening of the stomach; and treat them as we have said before.
de litargie	For litharge
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, give the patient great and purifying herbs for the brain; after rinsing the head of the patient thoroughly, put on the occiput the plaster of mustard which is written or treated in treatises on plasters; and it is the manner of the cautery: so do it as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is healed thus, well and good; and if not, perform three cauteries descending from the head to the neck, with a day of large intervals between each cautery. Cure as with the others, and if you see fit and the patient suffers, do the cautery in the middle; and if needed, two others above the two horns, and cure until it is healed; let the cauteries be called "olive," as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the cold from the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleansed of dandruff and of what we have said before; after treating the head of the patient, then apply a fire cautery through the head and over each horn, one at the back and three along the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is suffering, and the disease is severe, then apply four cauteries along the spine; and let it be until the deepest part is burned, and withdraw your hand; after which treat with salves until healed, and use the cautery called "olivare" as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Lepentics should not use fire cautery except for those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to modify the brain with years and other treatments that we have mentioned in the division when the patients are great and suffer from weak medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot tolerate the heat, let them do gargling and chewing, modifying the brain often with good meats; after placing the head in the middle, and let them do the fire cautery according to what we have said before, and on the vessel, and on each horn; and if the patient is strong and suffers greatly, let them do cauteries as I have said for those with paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to the manner that I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is injured, if you perform the fire cautery finely according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When by the cause of melancholy the superfluities or corrupted moisture and thick humors are present, then use the fire cautery of such cauteries as we have said for those with paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by the cause of melancholy the superfluities are declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give him to drink something whereby his brain may be cleansed, according to those things that were mentioned before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After placing the head of the patient; after making the linen torteil well made, as a circle, place it under the head; and let the patient sit crossed-legged, and be well held from all sides; afterwards present the liniment, and apply it with butter of old barberry; and heat over fire moderately, such that the cloth, if placed on it, can bear it; after removing the circle from within under the head, and letting it cool; and do this to the patient each week once with another good government, until he is cured.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you see a fire cautery being made by making pricks all over the entire cautery.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cautery moistens the brain more; and then place soft cotton in butter and gelatine.
de l’awe des eulz	of the awe of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When awe comes first to the eyes through the signs that I have mentioned in the division, then begin and let the patient drink something purifying the head, and guard it from all moisture, and make him sweat or take multiple baths on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After this, instruct him to turn his head, and make a cautery through the head, and make two cauteries on the two temples if the descensions of awe are at both eyes together, or one if the descent is in one. Cover the entire cautery with all the veins and arteries beneath the heart, and let the cautere be long according to the width of the temple; and guard against the running of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, stop it as you have learned to do.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and during incisions how to handle it; and sometimes one must apply a cautery or hot iron over the two rear bones.
dou cors des larmes	of the body the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears from the eyes are old and accustomed and are on the veins, or delaze the arteries that are in the appearance of the head outside; and one sees that it is cold phlegmatic superfluities, then I make the cautery as I said at the beginning of the work descending to the eyes: I cautere over the head, two cauteries over the two temples, and two cauteries or hot irons over the two bones; and if there is need more, one cautere saignantly above the solar plexus with all the small cautery.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	from the body through the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When the treatment according to what we have said in the division does not benefit the patient, then you should give the patient three nosegays to drink; after that, treat the head, and apply a fire cautery or in the middle of the olive oil cautery; and make two cauteries on the cautery called "clavilis" above the two sinuses, a little below the hairline; and be careful not to damage the artery.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil becomes softened due to illness and moisture, then cauterize with the cautery called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	of which here is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see that you make two cauteries on the two sinews as long as the sinew is; and leave the hand not aside until the third part of the paper be burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair which points to the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes it happens that the hair of the eyes turns to the teeth, and pricks the eye, and then cauteries are made according to two manners: namely with fire, or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are equal, then place the patient in good health; afterwards draw a figure on the paper of the eye that is as well as the leaf of the hawthorn, and let it be the beginning of the sign among the hairs; then put moistened cotton in egg white and myrtle balsam over the eye, then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the figure you have drawn several times, that the corners be burned in place; and the signs of health of the work are that you see the paper withdrawn, and the hairs raised to the outline of the eye; then withdraw your hand, and leave thus for three days, afterwards put moistened cotton in butter until the burning is removed; after that treat with ointment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And if after that the hairs come and the paper is softened, then you should start the cautery on that same place again as you did first; and if the hairs are thin, cauterize until the paper is raised to its natural place and is even, and do not prick the hairs near the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cauteries of burning medicine are that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and even. Then make a piece of parchment in the shape of the bay leaf. Take French soap and hot oil, one drachm of each, and grind them well together; then apply it quickly so that it does not cool, placing it on the parchment as you would the bay leaf shape, and put eyes over the paper. And if the illness is only in the eye, work in the eye, and if also in both, place moist cotton in egg white under the eye. And the patient's head be in your good hold, and place your finger showing on the medicine, pressing it and the wick every time the patient feels the medicine biting, for he feels the bite as from fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, remove the medicine according to your discretion.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the swelling has passed, lift the area up, and reward if you see the paper lifted as if it were lifted by the constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is so, it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, apply more medicine to the area or the medicine has not taken effect, as long as your actions are equal, and your eyes are steady; then place a damp cloth in butter until the sore is healed, and after that, treat the area with an ointment called "dyafenis" and others, until it is cured.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to carefully watch over your work so that the medicine does not stick to their eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterwards, and the hairs prick in the eye, restart the treatment on that side which is softened by the paper properly, as you have done before; after the wound heals; and this is the form of the leaf of the mirtle.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that men's eyes are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this, your constraints; and do not always direct the right path to him for whom this art is studied.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of fistula by fire cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then you must cauterize it according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place their head on your sound side; and have the attendants hold their head between your hands in such a manner that it does not move or shift from its position; after which put moistened cotton in the white of an egg or in persimmon juice over the eye; after that heat the cautery which is divided: and place it on the head as formed by a swallow's feather, ensuring the cautery fits together; if you see, let it be pointed from one side to another, and if you see, let it also resemble a tent; but in any case, what is placed there must remain still for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After this, if the fistula is open, and there is pus, drain it and dry it out; and if it is closed, work on it, and draw forth the bile; after that place the hot cautery in the form of a feather, and hold your hand at the part above the eye where the cautery will be, so your hand does not do foolish things; and put the cautery in the grease around the eye, and corrupt it.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery up to the bone, it would be well.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, then restart the cautery once more, and another if you need to, and let it be for three days; afterwards put on soft cotton in butter, and continue the treatment with the ointment until it is healed, and if forty days pass and it is not healed, apply an aqueous corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed; and proceed according to what comes in its chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a method of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Understand the fistula, and cut it open; afterwards place one thin wick of cotton in the opening:
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make it the quantity of one pennyworth of pitch; and hold your hand or palm firmly, and let not the patient move at all, that the melted pitch does not run into his eye; and it must be placed on the eye of the patient a wet cloth in the middle of an egg white or in wine: the pitch so heals the fistula and the healthy part with marvelous health.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery as we have said, that is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if not, it must be treated with pertusin on the neck, and restore the fistula to the body of the neck according to what is proper for its own condition.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, cracks occur in lips called "poil," especially in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When the cure for these cracks, as we said in the divisions, does not help, then heat the small fire cautery blade according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And quickly place it in the cracks until it becomes hot; afterwards, apply a plaster to the area until it heals.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or in the eye, or palate, or at the roots of the teeth, after it has purged and drained and is matured and becomes a fistula; and you have cured it as we said in the divisions, but it does not help: then you must use the cautery according to the size of the fistula; afterwards, open or perforate the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron cools at the bottom of it and behind it; and do this one or two times after the cure as we said in treatments until it heals; and if it is cured thus, that is good; and if not, then you must uncover the area and remove the corrupted bone according to what you find in your chapter.
dou movement des dens	of movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and if treatment with medicines is ineffective, then place the patient's head in a healthy position; afterwards, heat the cautery as described below in such a manner that you put a cane under the tooth; and insert the heated cautery quickly, holding your hand so that the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth; after that, remove your hand and repeat the process according to your desire; afterwards, have the patient fill their mouth with salt water for an hour and rinse out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in this manner, the tooth that was moving is set firmly, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupt moisture dries up.
de la dolor des dens	of the pain of teeth
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When pain in the teeth comes from cold or there is cold present, and medical treatments are ineffective, then it must be treated with two methods of cautery: wax cautery and fire cautery.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Fire cautery with wax is such that you take wax from a cow, and melt it in the end of an iron or tin spoon; then take cotton and wrap it at the tip of a tent, and the ointment from the melted wax; put it quickly on the aching tooth, and hold until it cools down; and do this often so that its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. And if you see soft wool and cotton in cold wax, put it on the aching tooth, and place hot iron on top until the heat reaches the pulp of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The fire cautery is such that you take a cayenne of iron or tin, and let it be large so that the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient; after heating the cautery, as will be formed later, put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this often, for the pain will be removed on that day itself or the next.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And the patient must fill their mouth with good butter in the urgency of applying the cautery, and then quickly apply it; this is the form of the cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And apply the cautery to whichever tooth you want, and according to what you have power to do; this is the form of the cane:
des scrophules	of the scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofula is from phlegm and cold moisture, and does not respond to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery with coals after which comes the form, and have two openings for the smoke to escape from the other side; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once or as needed, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, place the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days; and place a moist cloth with butter over the area until the burning sensation is gone; after that, treat the wound with ointments and bandages until it heals.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cannula:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the moistures overcome the channels of the body, and especially when this comes from a cold complexion, then it is fitting that the patient be drained first with solutive medicines; afterwards apply the cautery at the root of the throat, and take care not to come too close to the throat, and do not burn the heart but only a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	Afterwards apply the other cautery at the joint of the neck at the top of the spine, and let the cauteries called "clavile" be as we have shown the form before; and treat the area as we have said before until it is healed.
de la toust	of the fire cautery
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all the diseases of the body are due to cold moistures, and the patient has no fever or drying, and the illness is old, then apply two cauteries on the flanks at their sides; and another cautery placed between the breasts; and let the cauteries called "clavile" be as shown in the form described before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, cauterize at the point where it is called "poins" which was formed as described earlier in the disease of the ears; and let the points be up to thirty, or near that number.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After the treatment of the eye as previously mentioned, let the cauterizations be three according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because these cauterizations are lighter, for you make three together.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After treat the patient on his back and side; afterwards, tickle the heart which is inside with your left hand at the ribs; and if the dislocation is out of place inside, heat the cautery which has two nooses of the kind that have the form:
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize the heart until it perceives pain up to the side, and bring together the figure of the cautery as four cauteries; and for this, a cautery with three nooses is made, because the figure of the cauterization consists of three cauteries; and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cautery that has three nooses.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And adjust it on this first nerve, for which there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	Place on the fire a heap of coals with salt; after this, let the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until he is well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, little happens, then make a cautery over the thick part of the cautery clamp, or many cauteries by pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joints are closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patient is cured.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach to such an extent that it disagrees with his constitution, and there is much catharr in him, and the usual methods of treatment are not effective, then the patient should be treated on his back, extend his legs and his arms.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	After this, I will make III cauters over the spoon of the foot for the quantity of a doigts, on every cauterize cailliche, and II cauters above the II sides so that the figure of the cautery be to III angles, and have space between one another so that they not be joined together when they lie putrefied; and let the cauteries be so perfect that they penetrate the two parts of the keur, and the figure of the cautery according to this form without alteration:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you see a cauterize of a large cauterize in the stomach according to this form; and he who has fear of this cauterize, cauterize with pain and bleed above the stomach i. point according to the quantity that you see of enche; then cauterize altogether the cauterize which is called "poins".
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the wound we had before, until he is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver comes to pain from cold and moisture and great windiness, as long as it is forced from its natural disposition by superfluities; the patients are cured of this as we said in divisions, and if it does not profit them, then the patient must be treated on his side; and mark three cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, below the hypochondria, where the costal region of the body comes; and have an space between each cautery the width of a thumb; and let the cauteries be as long as the body, and do not press your hand much over the entire cautery; and be burned only the halves of the heart, and let the patient lie on his side; and if he cannot, then lie down, extend his legs, and raise his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if your will is to cauterize these cauteries of the cutellaire, and you are subtle and wise in the art, and guard that you do not burn all the heart, for you would dry up all the body; and that it come just to boil, for the heart is very subtle thereabouts, and the wise one to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you wish to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the capsule: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too severe; and if it is in the capsule, the pain is intense.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this cure draws out the humors, it is necessary that the patient be treated on its head; then mark where the vein or abscess is, and then heat the cautery which should resemble fire, of which here is the form:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And apply the cautery until the veins are well burned, and continue until syphilis appears; after the treatment, as in the treatment of cloths, until it is healed; and it is not fitting that anyone who has not studied medicine long should use this cautery, and by whose hands these diseases have corrupted sometimes.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he can boldly operate, and nevertheless, it seems to me that women value this.
dou cautere de pleuresin	For the cautery of pleuresin
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should use cautery of pleuresin roots of aristologe, and in this manner: take a root of aristologe long, the longest you can find, and dry it, and make it as thick and as long as needed; anoint it with oil, and hold it over the fire, and apply the cautery between the forcele and the neck, two small cauteries slightly downward in the part beneath the beard; two cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, declining a little backward; one cautery under the penis, another above the stomach, one between the shoulders, and two behind the rib that is between the shoulders; do not press your hand, but apply it openly as if smelling it.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And it is said by any old one that no man uses the fire cautery as if for shaving, and heats it and places it between the ribs, until it comes to that abscess; and then the pain went away, as we have said in the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or fistula comes which cannot be cured.
de la mice	from the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not improve at all, then they apply three methods of cautery, all of which are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of which one method is that you make three or four cauteries, aligning according to the length of the mouse, as per the figure of the liver cautery we have said before; and do not press your hand fully on the entire cautery, and let the patient often lie on their back; and another method of cautery is that you heat the cautery with two prongs, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the keur which is at the location of the mouse, or where the pain in the patient comes from the left side, and let the elevations be such that you lift the keur according to the shape of the keur, according to the length of the body, and the cautery should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After letting the two inflamed nerves burn until the cores are pierced from the other side, then remove the cautery, and thus it will be four. And if you see, burn all the cautery to three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has gotten gangrene over a long time, and it is useful to change to another of the treatments previously mentioned.
de ydropisie	for dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	The cautery does not work for dropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods we have described in divisions, and your treatment does not help much, then you must make four cauterizations near the mouth, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back on the spine, and one at the nipple; and let the cauterizations be close to the skin of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After allow the cautery to remain open for putrefaction long enough, and do not delay the treatment of the patient after the cautery; and hastening of healing would occur, and both intentions would be fulfilled with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly should be like that which we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, as described earlier.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in those who are hydroptic and are full of yellow bile, you must apply the cautery on the back of the foot between the thumb and the ring finger; and remove your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, otherwise it would burn to a golden color, and let the cauteries be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After make on two legs two cauteries in each leg at the point of the cuticular; and let the cauteries long, one below the knee in front and the other above, between the legs; and leave the cauteries long without curing, until the awn comes out; after that cure the other wounds as we have said.
de la menoison	of the excision
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, as long as the retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are weakened and cannot be cured by usual means; and you see the patient suffering greatly with strong virtue, make the large cautery on the stomach according to what he has spoken about earlier regarding the stomach cautery, at the circular cautery. And four cauteries inside the subtle mouth under each subtle cautery circle, and two cauteries on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, make the fire cautery on the hand, and one cautery on each arm, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large one, for the cure is beneficial when there is good help.
de la cure des emorroydes	for the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When the hemorrhoids are open or multiple, and are old, being large cold and moist humors corrupted, and have been treated as we said in divisions, and it does not benefit, make cauteries: three on the spine of the back, that one just above the iliac crest a little bit by little bit in a triangular manner, and one cautery below the navel two digits; and if you think his stomach is cold, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the faeces swell, then make the large cautery on the stomach as previously said, and another on the liver, and another on the gallbladder with the entire cautery clavicle; and leave the cautery open long enough.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment, let the limb heal until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the suppuration which is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you treat the suppuration which is called "thelul," heat the cautery as if for shaving, and then place it fully burning on the thelul treated; and let your hand remain there until the cautery reaches the base of the vein, from which no pus comes; do this once or twice, and if there is much suppuration, cauterize each one as we have said; after that, apply beneficial ointments until it heals; and if you cauterize with a large cautery on the chathim, it will have greater help.
de plaie mal curee	of a wound poorly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure a cut or opening, as we will recount in its place, there comes an illness that cannot be cured except by fire cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is any coming fistula, and is envenomed and cast forth by corrupt pus and moisture, you must prove it with a whole thin tent, and keep that you know of the whole tent how much it has of depth.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery to the searing point, insert it into the fistula according to how deep the tent entered, and repeat the application of the cautery until the corrupted flesh is burned away, one time or two or three times as needed; and beware of burning the nerves within and the large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	if the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestine, beware of these things, and do not make them elsewhere in the fleshy part, and think that it is not persons; after treating the thing until it is healed, and if the pus is dried up and the materials are removed over a long time, then know that the pus is completely healed; and if the materials are not removed, know that the pus is tainted, and the bones at the root are corrupt; and in such a way as one of those we will say in its place.
de la maladie des reins	of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from cold and great wind comes to the kidneys, and does not take hold of a woman, then you must make her fire cautery on the kidneys on one side and the other using the clavile cautery that we have previously mentioned; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in a line, and they will do greater aid.
de la vessie	from the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then make a fire cautery in the part below the bladder where the hairs begin at the base of the penis, both on the right and left side, and let each cautery be as long as one inch; and make the cautery above the spine, or wherever you may need it; and let the cauteries be placed according to the form previously described.
de la marris	of the spleen
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the spleen is cold and moist, and does not allow conception as a result, and the flowers are corrupted and their ends come slowly; and when they do come, there is great pain: then it is necessary to make three cauteries between the thighs, as we have said for the bladder, and two cauteries above the spine; and let the cauteries be placed according to what we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the viscous moistures descend to the socket of the hip, and for this reason it moves out of its place, the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and you will find the ligament from the dislocation viscous, so you must cauterize the patient on the socket of the hip with a cautery resembling a circle, and mark before the joint around the socket as it turns, so that the socket is within the circle; and let the cauteries be such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you do not have such a cautery at hand, make three cauteries of olive oil, and let the cauteries be as perfect as all the rest; and continue to treat until he is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes to the socket of the hip, and it is due to cold and moisture, and the patient has been treated as we said in the division and the treatment does not work, and the disease is old: then you must purge the patient of the large humors with foul pills or other good pills similar.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	Afterwards, you apply the cautery; and the manner of the cautery is according to two methods: namely, a combination of burning medicines, and the fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	The fire cautery is conducted in many ways, of which one method is as follows: you cauterize on the socket of the hip with three triangular cauteries according to this form, and do so with good depth and size, with each cautery spaced the width of a thumb apart, and make them olive-shaped. Once done, you cauterize in the middle of the head of the hip; thus, there are four cauteries according to this form:
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, cauterize with the cautery of the circle that we have already described in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a manner that the circle contains all the hip, and all the parts of the thigh be burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way we treat sciatica, when the pain stays in the hip and does not reach the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes to the thigh and the leg, then apply two cauteries on that side where the pain is felt, placing one slightly on the left part; and let the cauteries be either cutaneous or burn the thickness of the thigh; and if the patient feels the pain extends to the toes or near them, then cauterize where he feels the pain for three or four points with the cautery called "points".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the skill is needed, and he feels that the pain is from the knee towards the thigh, he should apply a cutellaire or circular cautery, and take good care in all your cauterizations that you do not leave the cautery on too long so as to burn the nerves and the great arteries, and that you do not cause more harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who cauterized on the ankle of the foot and left it on too long so that the leg became entirely swollen, and the foot as well, and all the feet were perforated and corrupted.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After an abdominal solution from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pains are in two parts together, cauterize in one and in the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise men said about the cautery of the hip, of which here is the manner: make such an iron and let it be at the head as thick as one nail of a finger, or a bit less, and let them interlace it and let it between interlaces and let it from one interlace just to the other distance the length of a nut; and let the interlaces above two parts, and let them also like peas, and may have the hand of iron well made; and this is its form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is entirely red and emit scents, and then place it on the socket of the diseased hip, and turn it toward the healthy side; and let the cautery once the cautery cools and leave it for three days; and then apply a plaster of butter, and keep the wound open long enough; after the ointment treatment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use this fire cautery rarely due to fear of its look, and few see it being used; nevertheless, those who can endure it are good cauteries, and he places it where it adheres.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The fire cautery in medicine is such that you make the instrument of iron or brass in the shape of a chisel through which passes the margin of the door, and let it be either of tin or iron on one long side, and at the height have two inches, and each has the quantity of the thickness of one finger; and may be open front and top, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing the hip box on the patient lying on their healthy side, press your hand tightly over the hip box; then throw into the two circles of hot awn which has been heated by fire for a little while, and let it remain one hour or more, and allow the patient to feel the heat and burning from it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is found to be like a bite from fire; and when the bite has passed, withdraw your hand with the instrument and lift the hip gently, and leave thus for three days, and put on butter until that which is black from the scalding is removed; and let him lie three days until corruption is expelled; and this would be the last aid after the treatment with ointments until he is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, apply the instrument gently according to what you have done for the hip gradually; and this is the way of the gentle heat, and I have written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and live lime, as much of one as the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	or there be a small hole defaced such that the point of a razor might enter; and set over this one another pot well leaded, and put on ash and charcoal and soft awn on top, until there be two thereof above the powders as you shall have well pressed by hand; and let it thus remain until it descends ash and grease or where it can be leded, then take all that awn, and cast over charcoal and over ash as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then it will be much watered and administered in degrees of medical work and in cauteries of other limbs. For it makes as great a work as fire, and to other medicines with which one cauterizes well the thigh as with terebinthine and honey and charcoal with soap; all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a cure where a noble was treated for pain in the hip and sciatic vein, and the great master, and he says that no other treatment was done, and that he was cured at one time when this cure was performed, and he bathed as he instructs hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he says that you should take fresh and dry mercury vermiformis, and grind it a great deal with a little grease, and apply it to the hip and thigh and leg where the pain is located, and leave it on for three hours; and by the quantity so that the patient no longer feels the heat.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then let him enter a bath until the body is somewhat warmed, and put him to bed, and the pain will go away entirely and he will be cured.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use such a fire cautery with these medicines if it is not after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides said that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with sheep's fat, it helps much; and the cautery should be done in such a manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take wool and grease it with old oil, and apply it to the groove between the big toe and the other toe called the fossicle.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Afterwards, take dry sheep's fat, and heat it on fire until it becomes glowing coals, and place it on the wool, and let it remain until it cools down; and repeat this process again, and do not stop doing so until you think by sense that it has reached the hip, and the pain is ceased; and this manner of cautery is called "sheep's fat cautery.
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain from the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back from falling or percussion or from too great an evacuation or from similar expansion of cold matter, none of these cases are suitable for cautery, though it may be useful for that which comes from the infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	It must be after that the patient is devoid of fetid pills or other similar matters that on them you make over the back, where the pain resides, three lines signed with enche, and in each line V cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and the cauteries should be made according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, make III cauteries or IV at the medium clavile according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This disease often comes to small children, and the signs of its beginning are that they have a tight throat when they awaken, and fear; and you find in the last spine of the back and between the other spines the appearance that comes upon them.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and find it needs to be treated, cauterize it with the circular fire cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cauterization for each part of the spine is equal.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, cauterize between the spines with a sharp fire cautery two or three lines wide, and let the points be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After the wound of the leg is healed as we have said, and ensure that you do not apply a fire cautery in gangrene which is in the spasm of a nerve.
de la dolor des jointes	of joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain is due to moisture spread throughout all the limbs of the body, and when pain comes from the feet, which doctors call "podagre" properly, and when it is caused by cold and cannot be cured with treatments or medicines, it is treated as follows: make many fire cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cautery be olive oil according to this shape:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need to prick at the sole of the foot, and it is cauterized with the entire cautery we call "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come down to the knees and other joints, and this happens often, then make a cautery on each knee three or four times from each part, for all the olive oil cauteries; and if you need more, do more, but keep your hand out only as long as the wax of the heart is burned.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knees and back, then administer the cautery as we have said in our chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make punctures two lines wide around the wrist; and if there is still pain in the fingers or in the palm of the hand, make punctures on each joint and over the hair of the hand; and if the pains come down to the elbows or to the shoulders, cauterize each part, and give good governance to the patient and mild medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you give it good governance and purge the humor, it will be healed by the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the syface
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When rupture comes in anguish, and the bowels descend to the knees, and this is new, it must be that when you see him treat it by incision, he should not eat that day; and give him things that let down the wind, so that the fœces descend from his belly; after which make him sit on his back between your hands, and command him to hold up his buttocks until the bowels are repaired, and lower them with your fingers, and mark over the rupture under the bone of the thigh, and make the mark seem like half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery as is its form:
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it is white and emits scents.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the bowels at their place; and the ministers hold his hand so they do not return. Work well on the thighs of the patient, and place the cook and the squire on the thighs, and the other by the foot which holds the hand. Then place the cautery at the sign on your entire hand, and keep it straight and hold it until you reach the bone; and if you do not reach the bone the first time, restart another time until you come to the bone. And carefully watch that the bowels do not slip when you make the cautery; that you do not burn them; and that because of this the patient does not die or suffer other ills.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you cannot reach the bone with the fire cautery, your work amounts to nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it must be that the cautery for children is fine according to the size of their fingers, and similarly, that of adults according to their size; after three days, cure the area around the cautery with butter until the scalding is removed; afterwards, apply other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient lie on his back for forty days until the wound is well stitched; and it must be that their nourishment is prolonged so that the blisters do not burst when they are ready to enter rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wishes to rise, he should be given a well-made bandage, and the period of forty days should continue; let him have good rest, and he should work little and avoid excessive drinking and eating, and speaking too loudly; and when he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say after the treatment to cut in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not increase further, then make the fire cautery according to its quantity, and let it be heated one-third of the cord; after the treatment according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that one should cauterize it with a cautery at three angles in this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but mark the head of the cord first and draw a line across the width above the rupture, and another below it, and hold your hand through all the cautery.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauteries are lighter and more soothing.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes in any limb, due to falling or injury, and this pain lasts a long time, and the cure of medicine is ineffective, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "poins," and the cauteries should be applied according to the length of the limb and its size, strength, and virtue, as well as its location of twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If the first cautery is effective, that is well; but if not, you should apply another cautery over it, because such is the custom that the pain must shift to a neighboring part of the limb. Therefore, you must make the cauteries until the patient is healed.
de meselerie	of enchantment
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The enchantments are sometimes aided by the fire cautery through great assistance, especially for diseases that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	If you see the disease at its beginning, and it is cured according to what we have said in the division, and shows no signs of worsening or spreading, and you doubt that corruption may spread throughout the patient, then make V-shaped cauteries on the head: I from the crown to the forehead to the end of the hairline; II between the two horns, and III behind on the occiput. Let your hand remain until the cautery reaches the bone, and continue until the outer layers are removed so that the vapors of the gross humors may escape; and make a cautery on the mouse hole according to what is described above.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And if the me浊elière is scattered everywhere; and it clearly affects her, then you must cauterize with these cauteries that we have said or chief, and the cautery on the nose, and two on the spine of the neck, and six on the spine of the back, and one large one on the chest and another under, and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the foot, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the palms; and beware of the nerves that are behind the inner heel, so as not to burn them; and sometimes make a cautery on the bone of the hand, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more cautery you apply, the more help you give, and it benefits the sick; and know that the sick do not feel pain from the cautery as the healthy do, because their body is already completely corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it must be that the cauteries are large and small according to the members and joints, according to those you may find in manners of iron.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After the cure, let the head of flour with honey and other cures until it is healed.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling comes to any member and is cured by medicines and oils and poultices, and it is not yet healed, then make cauteries on the member according to the size and smallness of the member; and let the cautery be a little within the skin of the keur; then cure with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes a cautery is made by hand and with a pin and on the back, at the end of the nerve that moves the member, and thus the swelling is removed; and in any case, no one should do it unless they are knowledgeable about the members and the outlets of the moving nerves of the body.
de albaras	of yellow bile
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is inflamed, and medical remedies are ineffective, then cauterize with a cautery slightly hot, according to the thickness of the sore, until the whitish color is removed and the color changes; then cure with flour of wheat and lentils with rose oil and leaves of plantain, and of colon and almond, each in equal parts; mix all together, bind with a cloth, and apply to the place until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the cure for a chancre by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a chancre begins to appear, and you see it stop, cauterize with a circular cautery around the entire circumference of the chancre.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And all the wise men said that one should make a fire cautery also in the middle of the ulcer; and all the same, this does not seem good to me, for I fear it may be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have seen it happen once; and it is more suitable that it be cauterized between, at the cautery called "circule," as we said when discussing cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When someone has a disease called "adubelati," and it is slow to die or due to the excess it causes, or due to the hardness of the sick person (that is, too old), and he has little blood, or due to dryness; and you see that it should hasten to die: then cauterize around much with many small cauteries pricking; after, leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	She will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierce through with the entire cautery, heat the cautery as described here:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" until the cautery pierces the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it from above in such a manner that the course of the putrefaction is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment, until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire treatment with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another manner of disease is called "corrodens," and it is nothing but a corruption of the limb, for it eats away the limbs as fire consumes dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this disease in a place that can endure the cautery with all fire, then heat the clavile cauteries very small and large, according to what is fitting for the place or where the disease is; after the cautery from all sides until you char the entire corruption, and let nothing remain of it, so that everything that is corrupted be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then let it be for three days, and apply soothing broths with oil until the scarring from the fire is removed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the application of ointments causing charring.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if you see after three days that healthy charring does not arise, that is good; and if it does not, then repeat the cautery on what remains dislocated from the corrupted parts.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this mixture has sometimes been cured with medicinal water instead of the fire cautery; but nevertheless, the fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the cure of the medicinal water in the division: take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of the warts that come on the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that on the feet, from burns, a disease arises which is called "clos" according to our understanding, and it is a large, hard lump that causes pain in the foot.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterization for this disease is done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	That is to say, the fire cautery, and the hot water cautery.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is what you heat up until it resembles the tip of a roof tile, and it should be made of good iron to fit the nail in all directions, and have thin edges; after that, place it hot on the nail, and turn your hand around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail; then leave it like this for three days until it begins to rot; afterwards, make a plaster with crushed wild mallows mixed with salt, and leave the plaster on all night, and the nails will fall out and be拔出。
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by burns on the body, and this happens many times in hands and feet, you must apply a hot cautery to it; and it is done in this manner: take a coal of charcoal or iron, or a roof tile tip, and place it over the nail and the althea (for warts); then put the coal there so that it surrounds entirely, and then add some warm water, and hold your hand well, pressing your hand as you turn so that the edge of the coal comes to the root of the nail, and can find the hot water deep way to the root; and let the patient suffer a bit from the hot water burn for an hour; then leave it like this, and it will uproot itself completely from its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	So do this one after another, until you cleanse all that is in the body, then treat the wounds that produce flesh.
li cure dou trembler	cure the shaking
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some tremble from cold or nerves, or from fever quartaine or another, it is necessary that you make four or four cauteries on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra; one at the base, and one on the stomach with the olive cautery; this will stop the trembling, and hasten the recovery of the cold disease.
des pustules puans	of foul pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes apparent by distillation from the body bathed, or foul pustules from large corrupted matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	if it is necessary at the first sign that a cauterization be done on each head of the pustule: a fine fire cautery made from juniper wood, with its points heated by fire, or from long wormwood root, or from a lentil-shaped cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And sometimes the cauterization is done at the beginning when they appear in this manner, and it prevents them from growing further, but the excess is broken and they are healed; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	when the artery is cut
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great hemorrhages from the artery that is cut during the wound, or in incising an abscess, or with a cauterization of the member, and similar things; and it is a most grievous thing to smell.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And whenever this happens to anyone, you must hasten to place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it tightly until the blood is pacified beneath your finger, and no more trickles out; then put the olive cautery irons, both small and large, on the fire until they are all red hot; then take one, whether great or small according to the wound and the limb in which the artery runs, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the blood is coagulated.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it jumps out when you remove your finger from above the vein, and the cauteries are hot, so take the other cautery quickly which is on the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to do this one after the other until the blood is coagulated; and beware that you do not burn the nerve which lies beneath, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when blood flows from the artery, it cannot be well coagulated by itself if the artery is large, unless it is done in one of the four ways we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction when it is not treated, or by tight binding with thread, or by medicines placed there which have power to coagulate blood; and it must be bound and held immediately.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will treat a stench from lint closely with cloths or put burning things there, or other similar things, if it does not help much, then it should not.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to someone and he has neither sight nor medicine present, he should place his index finger on the wound of the vein as we have said, and spread it well so that it is stenchy above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but the moistened muscle with cold frequently until it is much colder and frozen and stenchy; and then make enquies before those of his need for cautery and medicines.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book on surgical treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter where it is necessary to use a fire cautery or a burning medicine, and the ointments and causes and instruments and forms of the cauteries; and I placed that chapter from the head down to the feet, and I will follow the same path in this chapter because one finds more easily what one wishes.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And since I begin this one, it is necessary, dear friend, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first on fire cauteries, and for this reason, it is necessary to be greater caution.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I advise you not to undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many people come for treatment in various ways.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come so afflicted with their illness that they die lightly through the frenzy they find from their illness, and due to the wickedness of their condition; one must have fear of these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And among these there are those who will give you their sense and say: "Wait, I am cured"; but the illness is spiteful.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you who have this manner, but put more careful consideration in your honor than in your greed, and do not readily agree but rather wisely of what you are certain and can take and lose; and use prophecy and indication in the treatment of your patients for their salvation, and this will help you gain good reputation, glory, and memory of long duration.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Dear dear son, May our Lord give you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to breathe in the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter by discussing it section by section, as I discussed the chapter on fire cautery from the head to the feet, because you will find it easier to understand what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	from the head filled with fluid
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this illness often comes to infants at birth, and when the birthing hands hold too tightly the head of the infant; and sometimes it comes from the reason given that no one knows.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease except in children, and among all those I have seen, death hastened; for that reason, it seems to me that I should abandon the work in partial cures.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I have seen a child whose shoulder was full of fluid, and the head grew larger each day to the point it could not bear it; and so much moisture gathered beneath the bone near the syphaculum, between the heart and the bone; and the work must be such that when there is moisture between the heart and the bone, and the abscesses are small, you make a wide incision through the head; and let it be as long as two fingers, as far as the moisture extends; and see to this form of the spatumile:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is greater, and the abscess is larger, make two cuts in the shape of a cross, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs you see are the corners of the mouth open on each side, and the pus jumps when you press it with your hand from within, and this does not respond: then you must make three cuts in the forehead according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after the incision, extract all the moisture out.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After holding the cuts with bandages and powders, and applying wine and oil, leave it thus for five days; then remove the bandage, and treat the wound with cloths and ointments, and let the forehead heal evenly. Then give the patient dry meat with little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another method of incision is that you look where the abscess is largest, and the gathering of the pus; for sometimes it is in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Mark then where the abscess is largest, and the filling of the pus, and cut a hole according to what you can do; and beware that you do not cut an artery; and wait for fluid of blood, so that the patient dies from the discharge of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	Of rheumatism
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When a person has a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or the pus, and the illness is old, and medical treatment does not help, then the last remedy is the cautery with those on which they will cut the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	It must therefore, when you see the eyes injured, instruct the patient to turn his head; after which, rub the eye with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then remove the patient's eyelid on one side of the cloth; then look where the vein lies, and the eyebrows are behind the ears, and little are restored; then mark the brows with ink, then cut both sides with a sharp spatillum from two parts, so that the cut reaches the bone, and this be done by the width of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, place the spatillum over the artery and cut above, cutting as twice the width traversely.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, let it gush out continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to feeling, you must measure the quantity of the space of three dice, then cut and cut until reaching the bone; what it is fitting to put out of blood is six denars, and by chance a little more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if there remains above the point of the syphax, let the cloth that we place on the abscess not come alive, then drain the wound and bind it, and the ointment cure until it is healed.
de emigrainne	Of emigration
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old emigration comes, and acute catarrh, due to the moistures of tears and the heats in the temples and ancient sore eyes and similar things, and these are treated with methods of medicine cures, yet none of this benefits them, then extract the arteries in the temples and use cautery, as we have recounted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of extracting them so is that the patient makes himself behind the hairs of his temples, and directs to the artery which opens in the temple, for it opens well through its beating, and is little responded to outside except in some very cold men; and if it is responded to, the patient holds his neck with some cloths, then rubs the area with a rough cloth, and soaks the area with hot water until the artery appears clearly; then take the spathe of what follows:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	then gently scorch the skin until you see the artery, then draw it upward with forceps, and remove well the threads beneath each part; and if the artery is fine, turn it with the point of theawl, then cut from that part according to the size of the two heads.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	For if it is not cut, it will never heal completely.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw off blood from six veins, just to three; and if the artery is large, you must ligate it with two strong threads of silk in two places, so that putrefaction does not occur before the suddenness of the wound, and do not cause an excess of bleeding; then cut the superfluous part between the two ties in that hour itself, and then, if you see fit, apply the cautery of the surgical cautery down to the bone until the shoulder is cauterized; this is the major work, if the patient does not have fever and he is of a hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cautery is help to finish the moistures: because it is of greater aid against moistures.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For the extraction of arteries, it is necessary to fill the head with old cotton and place well-made tents on top; when you release them, they should be treated with dry medicines that promote healing, and with tents until he is healed; and if there is no cut in the artery as much as you operate, then quickly cauterize by fire or use cotton of vitriol and squeeze it with your hand to ensure the clotting; and if you do not have this now, place on the head an appropriate amount so that the blood coagulates, and wet the head with cold water until the blood stops, and hold it as needed; what is more perishable and lighter in the extraction of arteries should be cauterized at the vein from the cutting part of two sides, but the cuts should be well thick to prevent longer their heat.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instruments are too hot, they hold less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And there should be between the two knives a large piece of ginger, and then when you have signed on the place of the two wounds, and you heat the iron until it comes just to the bone, and open the vein in two wounds; and let them be distant between the two heads because they are not soldered by this cautery throughout; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When the tears from the eyes are flowing down the veins that are above the root of the eye, and applying medical treatment does not help, and you see the patient's forehead turning red, and feel intermittent trembling on the front; and the eyes are hot and moist so that the hairs fall out, and the papers become heated and scorched by the heat of the tears, it needs this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And they called it by the ancients "bruise cure", and what you do for a patient who has this illness, if he has hair on his forehead, is to make three cuts equally long according to the length of the forehead; and let one of these cuts be as deep as two nails running down from above the root of the hairline, and the others two along the sides above the sinews, and beware of cutting the arteries that are above the sinews; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the lower jaw, and each wound should be the size of three nails in length; have prepared a piece of sponge and much gauze to wipe away the blood, then apply a sharp spatulum from both sides as shown here.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision which is from the temple to the second incision; and brandish all the cheek that is between the two cuts completely over the skin above the bone, then continue from the middle incision to the other second one, and then remove the spatulum.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	If you place the instrument called "cultellaire" in the first incision, and it is very sharp on one side, and not sharp on the other, this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the blade cutting towards the buttock side of the heart, and the notched edge towards the bone, and push it until it reaches the middle incision.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the vessels descending to the eyes until the incision is continuous up to that which opens at the heart, and then make another cut in the middle incision up to the other edge; and then extract the blood equally, and express the leu for the blood taken; then place a tent of old cotton in each incision, and put moist cloths in wine and oil and ointment, and keep abscesses from forming; on the third day remove the bandages, and apply large plaids of hot water, then treat with ointment basilicon with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	of the eye pain
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	when a person frequently comes down with acute catarrh, and you see the eyes turned inward and small, and a weakening of vision, and burned papers; and the nose runs, and the discharge has an aqueous quality, and the patient sneezes; then know from these symptoms that those materials and this catarrh do not come forth only from many veins, but also from the mucous membranes.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you should instruct the patient to turn their head back, then make a great incision through the forehead, and another of lesser width.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And begin from the incision at the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision reach the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when eating. When the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, then separate between the two lips of the incision and put old cotton, and linen; then cover above with moistened wool in wine and oil, and be careful to avoid a hot abscess; when it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat with things that promote fleshing.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In a manner: take two parts of flour of wheat, and four parts of colocynth, and make a plaster; and apply it to the wounds to draw out flesh throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the stopping up of ears
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into the ears is one of four things: or grains, or beast, or mine stone or similar thing such as iron; or seed, such as barley, beans, peas; or flowing things such as water and fat and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it falls into the ear a stone or some other kind of thing that does not stick to the ear and does not grow in the ear, put the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, if it drips any amount of violet oil or sinew oil, then proceed with its extraction; and cause the patient to sneeze by means of incense, and plug the nose with ointment when sneezing comes, and place pieces of cloth or wool in the ear; and keep the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Often comes a sneeze from this treatment; and if it does not come, proceed with the extraction using fine forceps, of which the form is described.
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it sneezes with the forceps, that is good; if not, proceed with the extraction using a fine hook of small curvature; and if it does not sneeze with this, make an ear pick from silk thread and insert the tip of the thread or a hole in the ear firmly, and plug what is around the thread with soft wax so that the wind cannot enter with the thread; then pull strongly to induce a sneeze, for often a sneeze comes as we have said; and if it does not come in such a manner, take glutinous resin and spread it over the stone or whatever it is, and place an instrument well prepared for this at hand, and put a little cotton inside; then press the resin on the stone or whatever it is, and pull strongly.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she does not burst from all these things that we have said, you must quickly cut the ear as one would an abscess that is hot and swells and spasms; and the manner of cutting is that you make the first surgeon of the patient for the cephalic, and draw out the blood according to the measure of its virtue, then seat the patient in your hands and turn the ear upwards, and cut a small incision at the root of the ear where the fat or flesh hangs; and let the cut be as round as the moon until you reach the stone, then remove it according to your power, and suck it hastily into your mouth; and cure it until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a grain that is hard and swells, administer the extraction; and if it cannot come out, administer the spatumile tenue subtil according to this form:
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not do this when you think the grains are moist due to ear moisture, until you have made many pieces; then extract with fine tongs and by suction, as we have said, so that the extraction be gentle.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the ear wax that falls into the ear, the patient should use nose blowing as a first aid measure, and clean the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let the patient lie on that same ear where the wax is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it comes out forcefully through that, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not, take many stones according to the length of your soft and light twigs, and heat them slightly on fire; and put one end of the twig in the malaide's ear, and strike from another part of his foot, and stab with another stone on the stone in the ear; and do not cease doing this from stone to stone until the arrow is completely discharged, and then thus it will be completely discharged; and if you see, take a reed, and put one end of the head into the ear, and the other head against fire until the softer reed is burned; then do this with other reeds until the arrow is completely discharged, as we have said in the stone.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the arrow, if it is small, like a flea and similar thing, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is large and can be felt, administer the extraction with forceps; and this is the thing that is easier to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you cure them as we have said in the division and treatment of distillations, and the cure does not help much, then you must look at the ear in the sunlight: if there are no apparent worms, you draw them with fine forceps, and if they do not appear, you take the wax with which they are formed.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it is narrow inside and wide outside.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And insert the finest probe into the ear according to the amount of pain the patient feels, then gradually expand to the entire wax; do this frequently until all the worms emerge.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not obey to come out, plug the ear with cotton wax as I have said in the case of stones; and if they do not protrude forcefully as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven effective in extracting worms, and you will find them treated in the treatment of distillations; and you should distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, as shown here.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And be it of silver or tin fine through the little holes, and over the outer part for distillation; and to press within the distillation with an iron instrument well made for this, and if you wish take the razor and envelop between the point fit cotton; then cast your eye or your juice, and what you wish of your medicines in the wick, and let the wick be in the ear; then put within the razor all the cotton, and press your hand firmly enough until the oil is distilled or movement from the ear; and smell the sick within, and let the distillations be slightly heated on fire as one distills in the ear; and guard that it not be too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stoppers of the ears
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born who has no perforation in the ears; and this same thing happens to men by blocking of the ear due to a wound or flesh grown within the ear, and these blockages come occasionally fully formed in the ear, if one cannot see them; and sometimes there is only partial closure of the perforation, and the hole is clearly visible.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which comes fully formed, if one cannot see it, is of great concern for treatment in many respects, and in that case where you can see it, you should place the patient's ear in the sun; and look inside: if you see the obstruction clearly, then the work has all this spatillum of which this is formed.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And it should be warm and cutting both in front and behind completely clear, so that it does not blister the ear; if the obstruction is of flesh grown or a growth in the ear, then use fine forceps, and remove it gently, until all the flesh is entirely removed.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the operation is perfected in the ear, take a fine sharp razor and heat it slightly on fire, then place it on the earlobe.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you sense the operation where the patient feels grieteit in the ear, pierce slightly, and ensure that you do not damage the nerves of the ear; then place a tent in the ear according to the size of the puncture, and apply marrow in Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Do this each day until the wound is healed, or take a tent and marrow in rose water, and powder over broken vitriol; and if you see the ear swollen, it must be that you remove the tent and apply another moistened tent with cerate made of rose oil and wax, until the swelling is gone; then treat it until it is cured.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if bleeding occurs, plunge a sponge and bandage in cold water, place it on the ear, and use other dressings that stop the bleeding which are or to treat distillations.
de la char des papieres	of the wick of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This is the herb that comes from papers of eyes when they are moist and are dried. You should spread them with tongs and forceps, and cover the head with a spatula made from its roots; then place it on the eye treated with broiled vitriol.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without decortication, cauterize them with the thin lens cautery, and the cauteryer moves after incision; often they repaire, because no part remains of their roots; and when they are cauterized by fire, those roots are burned and do not return.
de la gresle	of the gravel
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	many times in papers come eyes that seem gravel in their form and hardness, and because of this the illness is called "hail," and is a gathering of moisture large on the skin above and below; the operations are such: see if the hail moves from one side to another, and this is a light thing to know; then open it wide, then burn each part lightly, then take it with tongs, and cover.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	if you cannot cover it without piercing a bit the skin, then do not harm the patient; and if the rupture is large, it has a seam, and cure it until it is healed; and if it is small, do not apply much force, for ointments will restore it quickly and induce flesh.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the gravel descends into the inner part of the ear towards the upper section, invert the paper, and place the gravel with tongs, pressing it from both sides; and if the paper is removed by incision, it matters not; and when the gravel is cut, wash out the eye with salty water, and cure the wound until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat from the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a fat that is contained in the membranes of the eyelids, and this happens more often in children than in adults, and does not greatly harm their eyes. They experience catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at sunlight because tears rush to their eyes; for this reason, they lie on their faces and sleep with the damp papers that are under them, causing swelling and appearance covered by exinach which appears in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press on the shoulder with your hands and feel the joint within.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the manner of the work is that the patient places his head on your lap; and then take a linen cloth, and set up a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity contained within the joint of each part, then put it over it; and press with your hands from both sides so that the joints are assembled within the circle; and make a slit in the middle of the moisture along a sharp trench, and let its width not be greater than the incision made on the healthy vein; and make the skin perfectly through as you see the joint; and in many dispositions, joint fluid comes from the slit, according to the shape of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract the wound with all one piece of flannel placed between your two fingers at the edge, and turn your hand to the right and to the left until it is spread; and guard that you do not touch in the opening, that you do not come to the entire space until the eye, that you do not injure it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the extract does not open at the beginning of the opening, widen the opening slightly until it opens; then extract as we have said, then moisten flannel in oil and water, and place over the wound, and extract with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if such people who grind grain and put it on to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat until he is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess hot comes to the site, apply soothing plasters until it is healed.
des poilz des papieres	of the hairs of papers
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When papers grow hairs other than those natural, and they become mature, these are harmful to the eyes, and cause diseases similar to accustomed tears, softening of the papers, and albugine, to such an extent that it is a cause for the destruction of the eyes; and the treatment follows four methods: by fire cautery with all kinds of fire, or by medicine in water as described in the previous chapter on cautery, and is done either by incision and缝合，或由小刀处理，根据我将要说的。
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	It must be that you place the head of the patient in your hand, then turn the skin around the eye with your left hand; if it is turned, it is good; if not, insert a needle along the thread above; and let this be on the edge of the paper or where the hair grows among these hairs, and pull the thread above all over the paper, and cut it with scissors; then make a hole under the paper, under the added hair, to the copa spatumile from the large tearer to the small; then extract the thread, and place underneath the paper a small tent of cotton and silk, then sprinkle on the paper an image of an enche, as the laurel leaf, and always it must be that the figure is according to the quantity you see to lift the paper which is divided for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if there is one who needs much of the paper according to how the paper becomes softened; then make all the spatumile on the two lines that you have signed, and start from the large lacrimal gland until small; and let it be one of the cracks near the natural hairs in the thickness of a root, then pour an ounce at one of the two angles of the keur, then scorch all; then assemble the two lips with a stitch using a fine needle through all the thin thread of wool, and wipe away the blood, and make the superfluous threads on the two sorcilz above any sticky things if you wish to do this; and if not, take no care of it, then leave the stitch and the threads for three or four days; then cure the wound without a stitch with drying and constraining things, for the paper revives suddenly from the wound and the assembly of them, but the stitch is weakened (as the ancients say), and this is work without fear; and in another manner: and it is that you mark the paper with a figure which is as like the leaf of laurel as we have recounted, at three inches severed according to the form which is here.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then cover those that overlie the small forces equally according to the form which is given here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the forceps, and the things are not equal, take an awl or a thread, and put one thread through the figure; and place the other thread near the large artery, and the second thread near the small one, and assemble between your two hands the threads equally; then withdraw your hand equally, and withdraw all the skin above which you have signed, as we have recounted, then assemble the two lips of the wound by suture, and treat it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes from your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar soothing ointment; and any time the hair of the paper turns: then use what we said about the incision; but the suturing in one and in the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The cure of wounds is according to this form: and it is that you turn the paper and cut it inside according to what I have said, and then make two wounds by art, and two fine threads as long as the paper and as wide as the space is; and tie at the heads of both sides where you hold the threads; then assemble one over the other delicately above what rises from the paper of the eye, and strain the two threads from the parts formed; and leave it so for some days, and the skin which was restrained will die and nerve itself out and rot, until it falls by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it delays healing, and you need to apply force, then cure it until it is healed; and when the wound is sewn up, and the paper is lifted, and no longer will hairs grow; and this is the form of the two threads that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The operations are such that you take a fine needle, and insert the thread of silk thin and fine; then assemble the heads and tie one to another carefully, and let the length of the threads be one palm long; then arrange on the skin the other fine silk thread briefly, and tie the ends of the thread; then put the patient's head into your healthy hand; and keep away from the sun so that the operations be clear, for it is a delicate and small work, then insert the needle throughout the groove at the root of the added hair, and make it pierce through the parchment quickly as long as you pull over the natural hair; then draw out the hair up to the groove, and put into the groove that hair if there be one or two or three or more; then withdraw your hand so that all the hairs come forth from throughout the groove with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come out with it, you shall pull the chase out through all the thread that you have ordered, until the chase comes out from below and that you see it with the vision of the eye; then you shall pull the chase and the thread, and close the wound for two or three days, until the hairs grow in their place and flesh arises above; and if the hairs are small, you shall accompany one long hair of natural hair, and lift it along with that or leave it, until it is elongated and then remove it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the corruption of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease, which is called "alecrati" or corruption, comes into the oil, it does so in two ways: one natural and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or a surgical cut, or by similar means.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the manner of the work in it is that you cut the suture, and separate the lips of it, and put within tents of linen, and tie it until it is healed; and it is not meet that you use in the treatment of it things that dry and restrain.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the disease will return worse than the first; but use works of things that soften, such as fenugreek; and the rinse with water or decocted linen seed, and unguents melted in any oil, and wrap it in a tent, and treat it with these.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your treatment is that you take care that it does not heal completely according to the form it was before; and these works that we have said are nothing other than directions for this disease, so that it does not return according to the form it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes into the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is truly called "acracie", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wounds, splits, and fire cautery, and similar things; and the way of the work in this is that you take a needle with a double thread, insert it into the flesh, and make a piercing from left to right so that the threads come out at both heads of the flesh; then the flesh is above all the needle, and the cloth at the spatumile large.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the paper returns according to what it should, that is good; but if not, take papyrus and place it in the fissure, and turn the paper, making two fissures or cuts within the paper; and let the heads of the two fissures be at the angles of the incision you have made, and make angles such that when they are assembled, the figure is as the figure of a letter which has no "I griesche"; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its sides are agape from, from what follows the paper, then join the two separated parts with threads of linen; then apply the cure of those medicines we have said, of bandages, until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a fissure or suture or cautery, it is necessary that you make a full fissure beneath the hairs of the papyrus, and according to what is said above; then separate between the two leaves of a tent, as I have said; and one must perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form. The master surgeons devise means with all their power how they may make the figure return to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what needs to be done and instruments in various dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	suddenly from the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this suturing occurs in a human hand in such a manner that the paper above is hardened with the white of an egg and cannot move or perform its natural work, then you must insert the point of a razor beneath the paper and lift it up; and stretch it with tongs until you cut what is airy at the fine spatumile, which should not be too sharp or too cutting so that the patient does not suffer from the spatumile being too sharp and bleaching the eye; and your incision, in which you burnish the assembled area lightly, so that the paper returns according to its natural form; and all of this is healed, and there is no scarring in an aiguate-salée (saltwater) or colère (anger) eye; then place a linen tent between the paper and the eye, and put on the eye a moistened wool cloth soaked in abundant egg; and after three days use bandages and other soothing things until it is healed.
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	The nail of the eye is according to two manners: it is nervous and resembling hard skin, and another which is not nervous but resembles white moist matter congealed, such that when one touches it with iron and tends it apart with forceps, one cannot hold it; and both resemble beginning near the large lacrimal gland, and grow little by little until they cover all sight and all light and the movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is that the patient places their head on your lap, then you close their eyes; lift the paper with your hand, then clamp the nail with small forceps and hold it above; then take a needle, and insert the horsehair, or goat's hair, or ox's hair, and strong thread; double the tip of the needle slightly and pierce through the nail completely, securing the nail with a thread and holding it above, then scrape along the side of the nail which contains the prunelle and silk to the root of the lacrimal gland with all fine forces, leaving the natural skin or lacrimal gland, so that no tears arise in the incision as usual; sometimes clamp the nail only at the oncine and with the thread, as we have said; then scrape along the entire fine edge which forms the shape:
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And beware that the spatule does not touch the fleshy membrane and tear it, and that the needle is not pierced; after incision, pour a little ground salt into the eye, and a collar made of litharge, and leave it until another day; then treat with what is needed until it is healed.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nerveous, and you cannot pierce it with a needle, and the lancets cannot enter, often this semblance of a nail is treated with medicines; it heals as I have described in the division, and if you see it copulate, work on the eye of the patient, and take the spatule slightly pointed according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And refine the nail delicately from above, and if you see that it diminishes slightly and the reason presses in, distill into the eye a collar of litharge and a red collar and salt ground, and stop up the eye until another day; then restart the other work according to this same method until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary in the eye, as with a hot abscess, then let it alone, and first treat the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh near the gland causes great harm to the eye, suspend it with a needle, and excise part but not all, so that no more tears arise; then instill in the eye red distillate made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that arises near the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Some men's eyes once produce red flesh, which covers the pupil and is held on paper and turned upside down, seeming like a water-lily; and the work is such that the patient places his head in your direction, then you move the eyes, and all that flesh is excised with suitable needles and held by force. Then remove the first layer of flesh, cutting it down to the surface gradually until the end, and be careful not to injure the eye during the work; and for the incision of the spatumile, as we said in the incision of the nail and with small forces from which one removes the sebel, as the form shows after this chapter. And when the incision is completed and all flesh removed, apply brine oil or distill red colloid and similar corrosive medicines, placing a sponge soaked in egg white over the eye to ensure it remains hot; if nothing remains and the abscess does not rise, and you doubt it is a hot abscess, leave the eye alone and treat the abscess with things that pacify a hot abscess; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do for any flesh that is added to the eye by this resemblance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But still it must be that you adjust the treatment for each weak eye from the natural way; and from the accidental way, in the work of iron; and not put your hand in any of these works until you see that this limb is suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	If the veins around the eyes are red and cover the eye, they tolerate the work for vision and weaken the eye throughout the day.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Therefore, for the first step, you must examine whether the eye is red and if it is, determine that there is no other disease except the redness; then proceed as follows: instruct the patient to place their head on your healthy hand, then suspend those veins for one-tenth of an ounce according to your wisdom, and let the ounces be twice as fine in this manner:
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two ounces per degree in the body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	Then, having identified those veins subtly, wipe the blood hour after hour until you see the veins remove themselves from the eye; and guard that you do not damage the eye with the points of the spatumiles, and perform this work at noon before the sun, and be most fervent in your work so that you do not harm any vein; and when you have done this, distill colriere green and red into the eye to corrupt what remains of the swelling.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you do not have the power to coil all of those in that hour, apply a poultice to the eye with things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pains are soothed and you are assured of the warm abscess, then resume according to this manner which is before until it is healed; and this is the form of the forces.
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	They are called "arissati" fistula: when you cure it with cautery and medicine using hot aqueous substances as I have previously said, and if it is not healed, then you cut into the abscess, where it should come to an end, and drain all the moisture that is in it, until the bone is revealed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is revealed, and you see the corruption and the blackness, then scrape out with all the instrument of which this is the form; and it is called "aspre chief," and be made of iron to fit the shape of the head, and be pointed like a rasp as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place on the bone of the corrupted area, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a little so that you know that the corruption has stopped; do this once, then restore the layer of medicinal powders.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the wound is closed and flesh arises, and the core of the bone is closed, and remains so for 40 days, and it does not change or become an abscess, and no bad accident occurs, know that it is healed; if this is not the case, there is another method to bring the fistula back to the perforation of the neck according to this form: and you must uncover the bone a second time with a铁，和药物浸泡，当它揭开后，取一根木棍按此形状，铁钉应有三个角，木棍应该削尖至你所见的样子。
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	place it on the delated bone of the shoulder, and keep your hand away from the eye a little, then turn to all the parts until it penetrates the bone, and let the patient feel with his hand where the veins are if he keeps his hand near his nose; and then restore the head of the shoulder with medicines dry as I have taught you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the bones, the matter goes to the nose; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	from the issue of the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are completely open and there is no need to disembed or reduce swelling, it is necessary to bind the patient; then heal them, then place suction cups or catgut without cutting to extract fluid. Place on the eye the ligature made of aloe, acacia, incense, and sarcocolla, and then apply pressure to the eye, and cover with bandages and cloths; the method of the cloths is that you take soft enough cloths, fold each into four parts, and place one over the other according to the amount needed by the eyes. Then apply a hard form bandage from above, and repeat the suction cups without cutting to extract fluid. Remove the suction cups and let the eye be pressed day and night; if the ligature loosens, it is necessary to tighten it much. Remove the ligature after day and night, and if you see the eye healing, it is good; if not, repeat the bandaging, cloths, and ligatures and suction cups until they are healed.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	of the tearing of woollen fabric or vein
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions come in the woollen fabric or vein, then opened, and comes through the papieres like the grain of resins, and is terrifying to see; then if you see it copered, the works are such that you put an needle into the root of the part below until it reaches that above, then put another needle where there be a double thread from the part of the eyelid; and make them pierce, and leave the first needle according to the disposition; then cop the leaf of the double thread and tie a part of the vein around, and hold it tight, then take out the needle and set upon the eye wool moistened in abundance of egg; and let it be until the threads adhere with the vein, then cure the eye with things comforting until the wound is healed; and any time the wound is restrained by the vein through a circle of cloth around each part, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes appear greatly swollen, pierce them with a sharp needle that comes from the back of the eye, and drain the moist white substance, then let them enter quickly; then extract them until they are healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the bow of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease called "alcunnati" arises from the bow of the eye that assembles in the eye, seeming like water flowing down, and it is not water. The manner of its appearance is such that you make the patient sit on a suitable chair straight, then take the head between your hands from one side, and move the eyelids until you see the bow come above your eyes; then prick it, and do not let it flow out, and remove the light, and see the patient's things as they should be; and if it does not flow out, know that it is water, and if the flowing of the bow does not appear as we have said, know that it is water.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	Place the patient between your hands, then take the fine spatula and make a cut on the corneal membrane near the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal membrane and the crown, as long as the bow is out; and when it has come out, distill into the eye hot watery honeyed or boiled fenugreek water or honey, then cure with other ointments until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	of the eye's waters
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have placed the appearances of the eye's waters in the division, and those that it is appropriate to pierce; then proceed according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It must be that you place the patient between your crossed hands, away from the sunlight, and bind the healthy eye very tightly; then put the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eyes are left-handed, or in your right hand if they are right-handed; then take with your right hand, if the eyes are left-handed, the instrument called "almagda," or in your left hand, if the eyes are right-handed; then place the tip of the instrument near the cornea at the thickness of a thread along that yellow part of the eye to the lower part of the tear duct, and push the instrument called "almagda" forcefully, and turn your hand so that it pierces through the yellow part of the eye, feeling when almagda enters the empty space; and the measure of the way almagda should be is precisely the measure from the pupil to the end of the blackness; this is the cornea of the eye. You will see the bone in that paper due to the clarity of the corneal membrane, and then place the instrument where the aqueous humor is, and express it through one way after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	if the liquid flows now, the patient sees it before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting for a while, and if the liquid rises again by the second way, put force with the instrument, and when it is well inserted and it does not rise, then extract almagda gently by turning your hand little by little; and then put a bit of silk gemme in it, remove this from his eye.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put something to plug the eye, such as a piece of wet wool soaked in rose oil and abundant egg, and secure it with healthy eye tissue.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Now, and those of our time, put on a warm cloth with abundant egg.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if it hardens to the extent that it cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are people whose eyes are too hard, then you must use the instrument called "alberit", of which the form is as follows:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And pierce only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deep, but make it subtle, then pour in the hardening substance as we have said; and for the completion of the work, prepare for the patient a draught to induce sleep, in which he sleeps on his back in the dark place; and let him be free from all movements, and give light meals, and do not move his head either to the right or left, and bind him according to his disposition until the third day; then release him in that same dark place, and test his vision, and have him show some things, and then put back the bandage until the seventh day; and it is not fitting that you do this during the time of treatment or after incision now, but you must loosen it, because the fluid rises rapidly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	if abscesses arise, you release the eye before the seventh day, following the treatment for those who alleviate an abscess; and when it is pacified, you release the vision and place over its face a small cover to protect any day, and let it be attached in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then leave the house little by little, and recover as it can; and know that no disciple should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And some came to us who were from the Yrach, who told us that in their country they made aagda pierced, which they succeeded with water, but truly I never saw one such in our land, nor did I ever read of them in the books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the signs of the forms of almagda, for those who do not know them will see; and they be of lead properly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the head of aus be of this same subtlety, and the last in three acute angles.
de la char sor le neis	from the cheek below the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes cheeks with missing parts appear different. Some of these seem like scorpions with feet; and there are those where the cheek has an embedded black part, and another where the cheek has a well-colored sore.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	For those cheeks that are a sore and not embedded, you must seat the patient between your hands against the sun; work his nostrils, and sprinkle an ounce on those sores, and draw them out. Then cover what you can support with a fine sharp spatumile from one side, until you know that the sore is entirely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains any thing that one cannot cope with, open it completely with all the subtle instruments gently, so that nothing remains; and if without surmounts or an abscessed foot, give him the help as it should be; and if it is malign abscesses, hasten and cauterize them until the pus is drained and all the flesh be removed, then pour in or sprinkle oil and vinegar or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the oil works and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is cured; and if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, know that there is new flesh grown on the bone above, which the instruments cannot reach for cutting: then you must put a slightly thick piece of linen thread, knotted by hand, with each knot about an inch or less apart; and place the patient's head where the thread exits into its nostril as much as possible, and pull it gently until it comes out through the nostril into the mouth; and many times children do this at school, and it is a light matter for one who knows how to do it; then hold the end of the head that comes through the nostril with one hand, and the other end that comes through the mouth with the other hand, and pull alternately as we are here with the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this as much as you know that the root has spoiled that flesh, then draw the thread, wipe the blood, soften the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back to the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointments corrupt all that remains of flesh; and then put into the nose a cane of plonc for some days until it is healed, and if it needs drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the head, to which one distills the eyes and medicines or plonc.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let it be of silver or brass, resembling an open lamp, like a cane, and lead it there; and if you see, make a closed cane, and let the instrument be full to purge the head; and have one hand on the head to hold it when heating the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	from the cheek below the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	many times a disease arises at the top of the nose which is called "telul" and grows and becomes large; when it is seen with the eye; therefore, you must cut in the beginning, and remove all of it, then place the cautery or burning medicine over it; if one delays cutting until it becomes large, one must observe whether it is hard, of runny color, or of poor sense: do not touch it with iron at all because it is an embedded abscess, for when one cuts it once, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscess is from pus contact, not of runny color, and you see that one can cut it completely, empty the patient and cut carefully without fear, and cure it thoroughly with drying and constricting things.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut and sutured
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	When solutions of continuation come to one of these cartilaginous works, it profits little, for in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, when this happens to anyone, examine if the wound is fresh with all its blood; then approximate the two edges with a stitch, and treat it until it heals. And if the edges are already dry on both sides, you must cauterize all parts of their edges until they heal, then approximate the two edges with a stitch, and bind them. Sprinkle with powder of dragon's blood powder, and incense powder; then place a piece of plaster of strong or another binding plaster, and leave it until it dries by itself, then treat with ointment until it heals.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of suturing is such that you assemble the wound: either with needles, as we have said in suturing the belly; or with thread, as I have made known to you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of the lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	By hand, abscesses appear in the lips hard, resembling grains of wheat, small and large; then it must be that you turn the lips, incise on each side, and remove with forceps and apply to each part; then cover with vitriol powder after the incision, until the wound is cleansed; and then apply linen, and dry the wound until it heals.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times a sore arises on the gums, which the ancients call "albulus"; you must hold it with tongs and cut at its root, allowing the pus or blood to flow; then place on the head vitriol powder, or other shrinking and drying powders; and if that flesh returns after incision, as often happens, cut a second time and cauterize: it will not return after the cauterization; and these are the forms of instruments for cutting.
des sordens	of sores
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes there are gathered at the head of the teeth, inside the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and harsh; and sometimes the tooth is black and yellowish and worm-eaten, as decay comes to the gum, and the tooth stinks; you must place the patient in your hands, and his head on your lap, and clean the teeth or the scabs until there remains nothing; and thus cleanse the blackness and the greenness, and the yellowness and other stains until they are all removed; and if what is to be removed according to the first reason is good, it is well; but if not, begin again from the second day and the third, until you have cleaned everything; and know that teeth require various forms of instruments for cleaning, according to what the work shows, because those who clean between the teeth have other forms than those who clean the teeth directly; and these forms and others should be with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When you treat the tooth in its pain, you must delay the treatment as much as you can, for it should not be done at all; for it is a very delicate matter so that one may have no excuse for cutting.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is constrained to undergo treatment, it must be certain that the tooth is decayed.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain afflicts the patient, and they think it is a good tooth, and have the sound tooth treated; yet all the while the pain does not depart because the bad tooth has not been extracted, for we have already found that to be the case with these patients. And when you are well certain that the tooth is decayed, it must be that you scrape around the entire tooth with a sharp implement to protect the gum from all sides; then pull it out bit by bit using fine forceps or pliers at the first sign of looseness, until it is thoroughly loosened, then secure the forceps well. And place the head of the patient on your thigh between your knees, and hold them tightly so they do not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, if it does not come out, take any of these instruments and insert it gently into each part, and agitate it as you have done first.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and broken, you must fill it with wads of cotton, lint, or similar; and you should gently extract it with forceps so that it does not break during extraction; and you must carefully work around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And take great care that you do not break it and leave a part of it, as this can cause the patient greater pain than the initial pain due to the malice of the root.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And take care that you do not act as the ignorant healer does, who, through their haste and boldness, break the cavity once and do not provide what we have recounted; but they bring about great illness one time through the incision due to the roots remaining or the cavity they break, as we often wish; and when the tooth is extracted, wash the cavity with wine or oil and salt; and if bleeding occurs, which often happens, fill the cavity with vitriol powder; and if that does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The shapes of the instruments, which one must adjust the teeth on first, be long-pointed and with thick handles, so that they do not bend when you extract the tooth; and these are their shapes:
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them have thick handles so that they do not bend when extracting, and let them be well-made of iron, and let them have teeth to hold tightly.
de la racine des dens	from the root of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains during extraction, you must place wet cotton soaked in butter on the wound for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	Until the wound is healed, use pliers called "algefri," which appear like a doctor's bill; and let them be made similarly to a rasp, and these are their shapes:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not wish to come out all around these forceps, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh completely around the root, and place the instrument called "althali", that is, pincers, of which see the form:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be strong and large so that it does not break at all, and if the root jumps out through this, that is good; if not, you aid with all the instruments, of which the forms come after:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you aid with this instrument that has two claws, of which see the form:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are in front by the reason of the teeth, and from this instrument which seems a pair of large forceps, of which see the form:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let it be that this instrument cannot break, and know that few instruments of teeth are; and also other instruments, which are not counted; and the master surgeons themselves find their instrument subtley by themselves, according to those they perform and the disease shows them, for there are such diseases where the old ones did not teach an instrument because of the diversity of bones and if one breaks in the flesh or another bone, or rots, so it seeks the instruments that it must have, which I have said, and helps with gestures, of which here is the form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be large and well-fitting to hold the bone, so it does not escape but can be held and removed; then restore the place with medicines appropriate for this, and if there is decay in the bone and it is small, remove it with this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear not in accordance with the natural order, and the form is ugly, especially in virgin women, you must know whether the tooth was born after the others and is not in its proper place, and cannot be adjusted or filed: then extract it; and if it is out of alignment with the other teeth, take this instrument whose shape is as that of a small beak, and made of sharp iron.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And gently move it day by day with your hand due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you cannot move the others, and if it is apparent that it can be filed, then file it with a small file as its shape is.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like the file used for making needles; and gently file the tooth day by day with your hand lightly, so that it does not move until it chieces; then in the end flatten it with a plane, using any razor. If the tooth is too sharp and blanches the tongue, you must file away its sharpness until it is equal, so that it does not blanche the tongue nor corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the teeth chatter
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	when the front teeth chatter due to percussion or falling, and the patient cannot hold food in their mouth without dropping it, and you treat them with restrictive medicines, it is ineffective; so you must restrain them with a gold thread, for silver threads turn green and rot, but gold never changes; and let the threads be of medium thickness neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth; and if you wish to realign the teeth, take the thread and pass it double between two healthy teeth, then place the ends between the thinner teeth, whether one or more, until you can clearly reach the other healthy tooth; then continue the wrapping until you return to the part where you started, and withdraw your hand gently and firmly, so that they do not move at all; and let your knot be close to the root of the tooth so that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then cut the head of the tooth with a needle and assemble them, and reposition between the healthy teeth, and place it so as not to irritate the tongue; and then leave it so tight as it can remain, and if it loosens or the threads break, bind it with another thread; if it remains and serves thus for all its time, and this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the alignment of the two healthy teeth and the two molar teeth, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, one puts it back in its place, fresh as possible, as we have said; and one must not do this except by those who are wise and suffer, and once a form of an osseous tooth of a deer is made, one places it in the spot where the tooth is missing, and binds it as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cover the wound of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	no wound from the tongue or naturally, that one is born thus; or by accident of a stitched wound; and the works are such that you work the mouth of the patient, and have his head in your hands, and lift the tongue; then cover the nervous ligament widely, so that the tongue is dislocated from its place, and if there is hardness or knots, and it is suddenly from a wound, then use the lancet and cut wide that ligament; and take care that the incision not be too perfect, for the artery is beneath; and when you have done, raise the head with rosewater and almond oil, or cold water, then put under the tongue a linen pad; and let the patient rest each night so that the poultice may heal.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if the bleeding comes, put on the head of the wound powdered vitriol; and if the wound weeps, cauterize with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for this; then treat with other dressings until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it is of a red or black or hard color, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it, for it is a chancre; and if it is turning white and there is moisture, throw in a pinch, and make a small incision with a sharp spatule, and relieve it on both sides; and if the wound weeps during your work, put powdered vitriol on it until it dries up, then return to your work until you have treated all parts; then remove the flax and salt, and treat with other dressings until it heals.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the abscesses in the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes abscesses in the throat appear, which are called "godath," and properly speaking, they are the two almond glands. And when you treat them as we have said in the division, if they are hard, small in size, and of a fleshy color, be careful not to touch them with iron at all.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if they are red and the root is large, do not touch them with iron at all, also for the discharge of blood; but leave them until they are healed, and then you can remove them, or they would break on their own. And if they are whitish in color and the root is fine, have prepared the instrument for cutting, but first see if the abscess has cooled and calmed down.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Therefore, seat the patient facing the sun, and his head in your care, and let him close his mouth, and the sergeant hold the instrument between his hands, pressing the tongue under the entire instrument, of which this is the form; and it should be made of fine silver or brass as thin as a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	And press the tongue with this instrument entirely, and you see the abscess, take an ounce and the tip in the almond, and draw force above more than you can; and do not pull anything from the threads with it, then cover the instrument, of which this is the form, that resembles strong forces; and all ways the heads are bent, one next the other, and are very sharp, and is made of iron or steel.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument at hand, use tongs, of which here is the form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And let it be sharp on one side, and the other named; and when you have cut one of the almonds, cut the other in the same manner. After the incision, gargle the patient with hot, strong water, or warm and mild water, and if bleeding occurs, gargle the patient with water, or cooked pomegranate peel, or myrtle leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stanched; then cure it as long as it is healed. And sometimes other abscesses arise in the throat besides the two almonds, so you should cut them accordingly, just as you did the two almonds equally.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman who had an abscess that was born within her throat, that is to say, the small abscess; and I nearly closed up all of her throat, so that the woman could not breathe because the passage was blocked, and neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained in such a state for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so large that it required two fingers to be placed through the two openings of the neck.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I hastened then soon, and inserted the cautery into one opening, then withdrew it, and removed a large portion of the flesh; afterwards, I inserted the cautery into the other neck opening, and forced her mouth open and pressed her tongue; after that, I inserted the cautery into these abscesses, and extracted much of the pus, and only a little blood came out; thus was the passage of the throat unclogged for the woman, and she began now to drink water and then wine, and did not stop cutting into this abscess for a long time; and the abscesses recurred, and filled the space that I had vacated until it grew very large; then I cauterized it inside the throat: thus it remained without growing further; and I left those parts, and let God decide what would happen to her from then on.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When rheum gathers in the eye, and it swells and becomes long, it is called "perpendicular"; and when it is large and round, it is called "uve.
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the swelling of the abscesses is alleviated and it is fine, then it is appropriate to cut it; and that which is round gathered and not long, and is either bloody or of flax color or black, it is appropriate to avoid cutting it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger for the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it in the manner I have said, according to its blenchor and length, you should make the patient sit in front of the sun, and press the tongue with the instrument we mentioned earlier. Then, insert the oncine into the eye, draw it out, and cut with the two instruments I spoke of in the incision of the two almond-shaped areas.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you must not apply too much heat that exceeds the natural limit; for if you apply more, it will harm the voice and speech. After the incision, use what we have said about the treatment after cutting the almonds, and continue the care until it is healed.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient is afraid of applying heat, you must use an instrument for the cautery to alleviate their fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is with hot water.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient should place their head on your hand, and then press their tongue with the instrument we have mentioned or the cautery chapter. Use fresh hot water that is neither too thick nor too clear; and fill the instrument with this water, as described below:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let there be one hair or hole where the medicine is placed, like the hairs of a spoon, and place the instrument over all the medicine on the eye; and the patient lie on his side, so that the saliva and muscle fluid run from his mouth into the medicine, so that it does not descend to the throat, and the blepharitis; then hold your hand over all the medicine and press it on the eye, for half an hour of time, until you see it infused and the bites of the medicine are pacified; and if you see this, take cotton and wrap it around any instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument into the cotton above, so that the cotton wicks up on the eye; and do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and after four or five days. And if you need to reapply the medicine for the cautery, do so, and after the cautery wash around the eye with cotton wrapped in butter, and cleanse what is around the medicine; and be washed with cold water, and be cleaned with gargles until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision or cautery; if it is treated by fumigation in this manner, take a reed and hyssop and origanum and rue and chamomile and violets and similar herbs, and gather all of them or some of them in one pot, and pour oil into it, and cause it to boil; and the pot be well sealed with strong clay, and among the pot let there be the instrument wrapped according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And may be of silver or iron, and may one of the heads be inserted in the mouth of the patient until the vapor rises to the eye through the tube, until the eye is numbed; after that, renew often, until the eye dries up, and guard that you do not do this at the beginning of the appearance of a hot abscess, for many things occur; and do not do so when the hot abscess is declining.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put an eggshell inside the shoulder of the patient so that it does not become too hot for the patient; for the eggshell does not allow the vapor to weigh down on the mouth, and this is a good cure overall for healing.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times it happens to the throat os or spiny fish bone, or some other thing; therefore, you should treat what you can see, and press the tongue with all the instrument under the sun so that you see the thing move; and what does not appear to you and is lodged in the throat, you must make the patient vomit as if the meat were cooked in the stomach; by chance it might be expelled by vomiting; or the patient might swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of navel, or a root of lettuce, or a morsel of dry bread; and tie the sponge with a thread, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will break open, and then you can pull out the force. And if it does not come out as we have said, take the plunger instrument according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the probe enter the throat more easily at the head, with the head held high; and be sure not to touch the epiglottis, lest it swell or the bone be pushed in; and when the patient moves, have them blow the probe, for this will either cause them to swallow or pull it out completely with equal force.
de la sansue de la gorge	from the throat juice
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	No juice of the throat is medicated as I have said in the division through the treatment with medicines; and when this does not help, then look at the throat of the patient in the sunlight, after you press the tongue with the probe that I have told you.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the blood, draw it off with a very small lancet, or with fine forceps that are suitable for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if that does not work, take a live cane, insert it into the throat of the patient, then blow hot air from the cane, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient is sick with fever all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full glass of cold water, pour it into the mouth, and give it to swallow, moving it with his hand often; and as soon as the blood tastes the water, let him spit it out.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not spit out as we have said, submerge the patient with asafetida, using the instrument I mentioned in the eye fumigation; do this many times, for it will fall without difficulty.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the manner of fumigation is that you take a pot which has charcoal visible in it, and let the position be covered by a perforated cover, and into that perforation put the head of the instrument; then throw your fumigation in, and the patient put the end of the cane in his mouth, and close the mouth, so that the smoke does not come out but goes to the pus; and the pus will fall now, and if it does not fall, you must repeat the fumigation many times; and allow the patient thirst, and eat salty and sour things, and do not drink water; and then it is necessary for it to be forced out by this governance.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument with which one treats the pus, is such that when one can see it, it resembles curved tongs to enter into the throat; and it has the appearance of a doctor's beak, and it has roughness like sandpaper, so that what it takes, it cannot let go. See here its form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapters on abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	much of the similarities of abscesses are, according to what the memory brings forth in this book from one to another, and they differ in perforation and incision; and there are two ways of which one is in its very likeness and of that which it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for those lues where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	for abscesses of the head are different from those in the body, and abscesses of fatty tissue are different from those that come in joints, and each has its own judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And for abscesses one must not perforate them until the bowels are dead according to their completion; and there are such that it is necessary to perforate them when they are ripe, even if they do not die according to their completion, as abscesses that are near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come from joints, and one lets them be until they are rotten within, by chance the ligaments and nerve of the joint may be corrupted, which is the cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Or when the abscess is within the principal member, and if you delay the perforation until it is dead, it will harm the principal member; or if it is within the foundation, then pierce it in the same way once it is dead. It does not matter that you perforate an abscess that has no sense of digestion completed, except when that which is within the foundation may rot completely and lengthen within, and become a fistula; and cannot heal in great time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you must know the time for perforating the abscess that is dead according to completion, and this is when the pain is alleviated, and the departure of fever, and the diminution of pain and redness, and the movement and sharpening at the head of the abscess, and other signs; and you should make the perforation where the abscess depends more upon the body, and where it moves most. And let the perforation be as long as the body allows, and if the abscesses are in the hands or feet, or joints and nerves and arteries, and everywhere equally without any folds.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those that bend, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in living flesh, it is best to leave the perforation until its digestion is completed, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you perforate before it is fully digested, the body will be lengthened by the venom of it, and it will be full of much filth; and by chance, the edges and depths may harden.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if for any abscess that is perforated according to the size of the body, as the member requires.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And you must use small punctures for small abscesses and large punctures for large abscesses, as well as many cuts according to the size of the abscess. And for such abscesses where it is necessary to lance the heart and cover; when it has become hard like a flax seed and softened, you must do so as with boils: and for those that are cut into three angles, and for those from which one covers like the leaf of juniper, as with angry abscesses; and for those where a round incision is made, and other cuts and similar coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Who have no head, as with a superficial abscess or carbuncle, it is necessary that you pierce them completely; and when the abscess is large, and has gathered much pus, if you pierce it, do not draw out all the pus at once in that hour, but only part of it; then plug the abscess until the next day, and again draw something from it; do this many times, gradually, until the pus is completely gone; similarly, if the patient has weak virtue, or a woman in childbirth, or small children, or old and decrepit people.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For if the patient shudders several times with the discharge of the pus, that by chance kills the patient, and you are not to blame.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, beware of this chapter with great caution, and when you perceive your abscess, cleanse the wound, and observe whether the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is a clean cut, administer tents of linen or old cotton; and if it is a large abscess, and there are many perforations, it must be that in each one you put a tent so they come against each other; and if you have incised part of the skin and covered it over, it must be filled with old cotton or shredded linen without moisture, and bind it until the third day; then remove it, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if the bleeding occurs during your work, administer cold water and ease it, and place a soft cloth over the area bleeding many times.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bleeding persists, and it is managed and treated, and the powders that I have said in this book are applied to their wounds, and if it is or seems winter, and the veins or abscesses are very nervous, then you must place wet cloths on tents and blankets soaked in wine and hot oil; and if it is summer, and the flesh is soft, then you must place wet cloths on blankets soaked in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, up to the third day, as we have said; and then remove the abscess and dress and treat it as necessary until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this must be known universally in the treatment of abscesses: for you have already been told how one should proceed before the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	from the shoulder
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	When small abscesses appear on the head, and their appearance is like little bags, as with the strings of a berry, and there are many that resemble them.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	Some are fatty and such with moisture like grapes; and some are hard and stony to the touch, and there is no doubt if the artery does not cause contrary effects.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the operations of the flank are such that you test with any instrument called "entromissoire," from which the form follows, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, let it out through the top for a long time.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is removed, scar him without leaving the skin that contains that moisture, for it will repeatedly dislocate if nothing is left; then dip cotton in Egyptian ointment if present; otherwise, in water and salt, and apply to the wound, leaving it until the next day; and let those things that remain from the night drain.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then repeat the cotton application as before on the second day, and the third, until you know well that nothing remains from the night; then treat the wound with ointment as appropriate until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds on to fatty matter, shape the cut according to this form, longwise; and throw in your pinchers, and cauterize from all sides, and put all your effort into drawing out the pus where it lies; and if the artery acts contrary, do as I have said after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And also do so for the abscess if it is stony, and for cutting and treating as I have said.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And when you cut into the stony abscess and the moisture, it is less dangerous, because they contain little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if some of these abscesses or heads have no moisture, and among those I treated were abscesses from an old woman; and found the abscess as hard as a smooth, rough, and white stone, and could not be broken; and if any had been cut open, it would have resulted in a wound just like a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming or heads, those that come to the heads of children and the roots of the ears, the opening should always be at the lowest part, so that the pus can exit; and treat them as they should be treated.
des scrophules	of the scrofulous swellings
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times such an abscess occurs in the neck, beneath the armpits, and in the groin, and sometimes comes from other parts or organs, and are hard, and are joined together with one another.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofulous swelling is properly within its own region, like the knot and abscess of the head, as we have said; and the appearances of these scrofulous swellings are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	Some contain moisture, and some are malignant and will not obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In those that you see in good condition upon touch, and resemble the color of the skin, move in all parts and are not eroded near the neck nor the artery nor the vein, and are not deep; it is necessary that you scrape from above, and burn each part, sew the two lips of the wound with needles if needed, as we have said for abscesses of the head. Drain a little at a time, and be sure that you do not damage the nerve or the vein, nor the spinal fluid nor the cutting nerves, lest your hand slip and go too far, so that you do not scrape what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you pierce the vein or the artery, and it does not allow you to continue, put vitriol powder or any other powders that stop bleeding into the wound, and hold the wound; and let it be until the abscesses are pacified, and the wound softens and begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound is stopped bleeding, return to your work until you complete it; then rest according to your proper indication if there remain any small scrofulous swellings, treat and cleanse them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofulous swelling, it is not fitting that you pierce that swelling at its root, but tie it with a double strong thread, and let it fall by itself without harm; then dress the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and treat it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you cut the entire scrofula, it is necessary that you bring together the two edges of the wound, and suture them now, since there has been no excess due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	it is necessary that you cut the root of it, and extract it forcefully, and suture it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrofula that have excess, pierce it where it opens naturally; and pierce it as was said before, depending on the location, then apply lint with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what remains of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleansed, continue the treatment with ointments promoting healing until it is healed.
de squinance	of scrophula
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke and wrote of the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen it done in our land, and this is their written word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those who have scrophula, it is necessary that the cutting of the throat which is called "epiglote" be performed; and one should not seek help through this, because all the veins and the tumour in the patient are hot in the mouth, or in the throat or in the glands.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the jugular vein, it is necessary to cut the epiglote to avoid the loss that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It must therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, be cut over three or four small cuts through, between the two circles or by the size of the cut as from the skin, and not in the cartilage; and those thus are suitable for the cutting of the epiglottis so that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long enough.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, it must be stretched from the entire inch of the throat, then cut the vein until it comes to the thread; and avoid the vessels of blood if you see any thing, and then cope the skin as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the fluid of the thread which leaps forth through the broken part, and by the loss of voice; and leave the wound open for a while.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed from which strangulation is doubted, bring together the two edges of the wound in the heart, and suture it well over the cartilage; then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow until he is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim said that one should not do this until the throat is completely numbed, and the patient is judged to be dying, and then the defect is addressed.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then cut the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and thus is kept from dying; and for this, the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease passes, and it passes in three or four days. Then they commanded to suture and treat the wound until it heals; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I saw that a maiden took the knife and stabbed it into her throat, cutting part of the windpipe; and I was called to perform the cure, and found her as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound and found the blood issuing from it. I knew that she had not pierced a vein or artery, but the windpipe was injured by the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hastened,缝合了伤口，并尽我所能治愈她； maiden did not suffer from hoarseness, and recovered her voice; for this reason, I say that in the treatment of the epiglottis there is no cause for fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the main windpipe
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called "hernia of the throat," and it is a large abscess in color like that of a hazel, and it is very common in women; and it occurs according to two manners: natural and accident; or naturally it has no artifice.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accident occurs in two manners, of which one is similar to fatty lumps, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from within the artery; and there is fear, and it should not be treated by making openings except in that which is small, and prove and search through all the intervening areas: if you find it as fatty and cannot be distinguished from a vein, cut it out as one cuts fatty lumps, and draw it to its head if there is any; and seek quickly, and cure it as it should be until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	from us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many methods we have, of which I will speak all the similarities; and now it is fitting that I say all the difference there is between us and issue.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that issue is heat and fever lasting until the boiling has passed, and putrefaction is completed; then the fever and heat cease.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	When the issue has neither heat nor fever nor pain, and contains the syphacia, which is its own sac and according to the color of the body, it begins like a sore and becomes large; and they are according to two similarities, or grease, or moisture, and much of its color as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It must be, when you come to the treatment of the new wound, that you first examine and inquire about all the instrument called "entromissoire", according to what its form will come or chapter which is after.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of inquiring about abscesses and new wounds is that you probe or more moist part that you find in the abscess, and turn thy two poles little by little, until thou knowest that the instruments have reached the core; then do it according to the size of the abscess; then extract the entromissoire, and take care in this that if it should fail.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If moisture comes out clear or of any color, cut it as I have said for other abscesses; and if after the entromissoire no moisture comes out, know that it is fatty, so cut it crosswise, and take it with forceps, and burn gently from each side. Guard the spot where it lies, and treat it soundly with the wound. And if you cannot treat it soundly, cut it into pieces so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if there is nothing left, it returns to us many times; and if there remains a little, and the pus grieves, fill the wound with some corrosive powders, bind the wound, and place warm abscess-pacifying things on it until it heals; and if the wound is large, suture the two edges of the wound, and treat as those who attend to flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	and if the vein beating is contrary to you or some other thing hastens it, use the juice of vitriol powdered, and let it lie for 2 or 3 days, until the wound rots, and rest the boiling of the blood; then return to the copper that has remained from the new.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of the interruptive instruments, and they are of three kinds: large, medium, and small. Among them are three square ones called "albaret," and one called "breb." These too are of three kinds: large, medium, and small, to encircle abscesses from fistulae; and they are like the needles used for stitches, made of yellow brass or iron or silver, with those that are yellow being more effective than black ones for encircling corruptions from fistulae. They come in three kinds: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the openings.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of the oncin are of similar semblances, as you see here: great, medium, and small; and among these, there are oncin with two corners in three manners also; and among them, there are oncin with three corners, and they are of three manners also; and among them, there are oncin with two corners, and oncin with only one corner, and they are of three manners; and all of this are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The chief of these that one makes is sharp, and among them are those that cut only half-way, for which one cauterizes the nostrils, because one does not cut the vein nor the nerve; and from these intruments are the alemeles placed in palms, so that the patient does not perceive at the opening of abscesses; and they are of three manners: great, small, and medium, as you see; and one uses none but in fleshy places, such as legs, arms, mamels, and in similar places; and sometimes one makes another instrument small, resembling shells of almonds, according to this form, for which one stops the bleeding.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is placed once in its place which heals by copulation of veins and arteries, and again they do so according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Sometimes the breasts of some men swell when they begin to腐烂，直到看起来像女人的乳房；并且留着难看且肿胀的状态，看到需要治疗的人应根据这一行的规定进行处理 .b. 到 .g.：
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	then cauterize the fat, and apply medicine to the wound with astringent properties, then suture the two edges of the wound, and treat until it heals; and if the breast hangs down and becomes soft due to its size as in women, cut into the rib above, by similar incisions; so that one is attached to the other at the end of each, such that the larger line contains the menses according to this form, from this line .b. to the line .g.; then cauterize the skin between the two edges, remove the fat, and administer what we have said about suturing and powders, and what is necessary in the treatment until it is healed; and if it is not healed or the incision is not entirely complete, because the patient does not want to rest, or due to the corruption of blood, it is necessary to fill the wound with moist cotton soaked in corrosive ointment; and leave it until it eats away the remaining flesh and fat, then treat until it is healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses of arrow wounds
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses that come from arrow wounds are like hardened scrofula, or have lumps, and if they contain moisture, they do.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be cut according to this form, from the line .b. to the line .g.:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bowe that is in the abscess is evacuated, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment appropriate for this until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscess resembles scrofula, cut it as we have said for cuts in scrofula, and if the wound contains bowe, apply a fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is ruptured and the skin above is sewn shut, many abscesses often occur; similarly, it happens with a swollen vein and an abscess. If one recognizes this due to the artery, the abscesses are long and well-formed; and when you feel it with your hand, you sense the constriction; and when it is due to the vein, it appears as swelling and a pulsation; and it is foolish to attempt to treat such an abscess, especially when it is under the armpits, at the groin, or near the neck and many other places, and is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, one should avoid the iron cure. For those in chief, it is also advisable to avoid it. In the case of swelling from an artery, make a cut through the skin longwise; then operate on the size with pins, and carefully separate the artery from the tissues until it is fully exposed; then insert a needle under it, and pierce it all the way to the other side, and hold the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have shown you in extracting the two arteries in the temples; then move the skin between the two threads so that what is inside comes out, and thus separate the abscess; then administer the cure according to bowe's method until the threads dissolve; afterwards, apply ointment suitable for this condition until it heals; if the abscess is due to the swelling of a vein, you should dye your hand with as much of the abscess as possible onto the skin, then insert the needle under the thread you hold in your hand and pierce it, keeping the double thread so that it passes through to the other side; then tie the abscess as I have said, or bind one part of the threads around both shoulders; if you doubt whether the threads are secure, take another needle and pierce all over the abscess from the incision of the first needle, holding the threads in three places; then drain the abscess until the excess comes out, then drain the excess from the skin and leave what is tied; finally, place a moist cloth on vinegar and oil, and continue with bandages and ointments until it heals.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As abscesses coming to the artery and vein, abscesses of the nerves when they are injured, or through too great exertion, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more frequently in joints and in all places where there are joints, and it is the grief of abscesses, and its color resembles the color of the flesh, and is in many dispositions with pain; and when one restrains it forcefully, the patient feels great pain, and not just from the flesh, but beneath the heart; and it moves well in all directions, neither forward nor backward, neither below nor above, and that which is in joints should not be treated with iron: by chance it might cause contraction; and that which is on the head or forehead cuts through the skin to the bone.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, hold it with forceps and lance at its base; and if it is large, suspend it by a thread, cauterize it, then extract it and suture the wound, and continue the treatment until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	If the large boils are hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Sometimes it occurs in the belly and nowhere else; it is a disease called "fungus" by similarity to mushrooms, and it has fine roots and large heads. In them there are both small and very large ones. I have seen men who had two bellies that were more like fungi than anything else, with no difference, and they were white, had fine roots, and were split in half, and in them always remains moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I copied them and found in one XVIII ounces weighing, and in the other VI drachms, and the work in incision is that you look if the patient is moist, and the color of the artelul is white and moist and of fine root; so you cop it at the spatillum large, and let the cautery be at fire in your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For in sawing there often come great hemorrhages, and if the vein breaks, then you must hasten to cauterize; and if you see the patient fainting and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-made plucking thread, and place it on the artelul as we have said, and let it be for two days; and then restrain it, and do not cease to strain the plucking thread until it copes the artelul, and work each by itself; and if the roots are large, you must fear to cope immediately for the belly, but you may well cope half of it, then cauterize that it not return; then treat the wound, and guard that you do not cope the thule which is of fugue color and of poor sense and let regart.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an embedded abscess, and I will come to the treatment of the chancre after this.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil is hot
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the boil comes from a fire cautery on a wound or a cut in the skin, and is on the abdomen with some of the boils, as happens in other ruptures, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what was mentioned before, or from windiness; and if it is by the rupture of the skin and the issue of the boil, then the color of the abscess resembles the color of the body, and is a light thing without pain, and obvious from various issues.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the issue of the intestines, then it is more varied, and when pressed at its base, it rises and then returns, and sometimes becomes swollen, and greatly increases at the entry to the bath and through strong labor.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and clearly apparent when you press with your hand; it does not constrain. And if it is due to blood, it is clearly shown by these signs: the abscesses are large and hard, and are placed according to quantity; and if it is due to pneuma, it is swollen upon touch, and the work is that you look to see whether the appearance is of arterial or venous blood, or pneuma.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	Then you must let the treatment continue.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the boil, then you must instruct the patient to extend his arm, and stretch it fully out straight; then pierce all around the armpit; then command him to lie quietly between your hands, then go around the limb that you have pierced with all the spatumile, then place half of the abscess above at the large uncine; then tie it tightly with a strong thread or a cord of strong silk, and let it be fastened well; then work on the other half of the abscess extended over the thread, and use your index finger to press the intestine; if you find it caught by the thread, release it, and return the intestine to its place in the abdomen; and if you find the boil, take it with the uncine and drain the excess; and if the artery acts contrary or the vein, go right through, then return to your work and take two needles, and put two threads, and insert the needles into the cross that you made by piercing; then extract the abscess in four parts over the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the limb until it rots, and bury the dead flesh on its own; or you drain it when it is fine and rotten, then treat the limb as needed, and cover the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture that you find, then treat the limb as needed, and suture the limb.
dou chancre	of the chancre
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division of the signs of chancre, and how one should treat it with medicines, and how one should avoid the iron cure; and we say that chancres arise in the groin, and great caution is needed in the treatment. The ancients said that when chancres are in a place where they can be scraped away, as those on the sameles, thigh, and similar places, you must remove them all when they are at the beginning; but when they are large and old, it is not fitting to approach them, for I have never seen any healed by this method, nor has anyone been healed before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operations, when it is in a place where one can remove it, as we have said, are that you purge the patient once of black bile; then make him sanious if he has evident fullness, then prepare the patient well by letting him lie on his back for the operation; then throw out the tumor or chancre, and all the hair from all parts, removing everything without leaving anything behind; and let the blood flow freely, hold the place well in your hand or with some object, and if the hemorrhage contradicts the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize it until the bleeding stops; then treat with another cure until he is healed.
de ydropisie	of dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have already spoken of the symptoms of dropsy, and how the assembly of the water is made, and the signs of each symptom, and the cure through medicines, and that cured by iron: it is only clarified; and one must not use iron in these two symptoms: namely, tympanites and yposarche, because they are deadly things; therefore, when you treat this symptom of dropsy called "eclites" with medicines, and the cure does not help, see if the patient is weak or has another disease besides dropsy, such as an immediate solution of the belly and similar things; then do not use iron, for there is doubt; and if you see the patient in good health, and he only has dropsy, and is neither too thin nor too old, then proceed thus: lift the patient upright on your hands, and the attendants press the belly by directing the water to the lowest part of the foot, then take the spatumile thorn according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let it be cut into two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	A point, and in any way let it not be too deep that it can come as far as the intestines when inserted, and cannot be withdrawn; then see if the hydrocele is near the intestines: so you must cut underneath the scrotum three incisions directly over the knife. And if the hydrocele is due to liver disease, so let your incision be on the left side of the scrotum three incisions; and if it is due to the mesentery, so let it be on the right, and it must not be that the patient lies with the incision such that the superfluities do not flow to that weak side; then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and push out, and lift your hand away from all the serous fluid between the skin and the surface as if scraping in quantity of a nail or a little more. Then pierce the surface until the serous fluid comes to the right place, and these are the outlets for the water, then remove the instrument with the form given here:
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a thin silver pin, and it is made of light brass or iron, and it is placed below the small hole; and on one side, three holes; and two on another side, and one on another; and the head is cut like a quill, and this is the shape of the incision that writers cut the quill:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	On the head above is the alemele, such that when the instrument comes to the edge, it should be placed slightly above the instrument now; fill it then with half or a third part, for if you empty more than necessary in that hour, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit due to the weapon, or he may faint, or he approaches death; but empty according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient signify, and his pulse; then remove the instrument and hold the edge, and it is held now for the key which stops the hole which is above the syphax, of which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then repeat the instrument on another day, if you see the patient suffering from it, and draw a small quantity of fluid; do this any day, and beware of following too much until it remains but a little fluid.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the patient, and leave much water in him, cure with warm earth or sand, and by much sweating or bath and in the sun, and let him drink; cure with medicines desiccative until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the water, as I said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping up of the urethra
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born who does not have pores in the penis, or the pores are small, or they are not in their proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary to act quickly before the semen becomes very subtle according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	then place or pierce a small hole in the plonc, and seal it and keep it thus for 3 or 4 days, and when it is ready to urinate, remove the plug, and allow urination, then replace it; and by chance it may not be necessary, for the urine that comes forth does not leave the plug closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the hole is small, it should be treated with a plug of plonc, as we have said, and it will expand.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the hole in their place are bledder, for none are born with the hole at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they lift their penis upwards; and they cannot ejaculate because the matter cannot reach the gland, and this is a bad illness.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the work is such that the patient lies often on his back, then the head of the verge and the cope are made as the size of a feather's shaft, so that the punctures are made in the middle, as it should; and beware of the outflow of blood which comes many times, and if it happens, stop it with what stops blood, and cure the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the pustules of the verge
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these sores come in the verge, and they are an appearance of foul flesh; and among them there are both benign and malignant; so you must treat them with a sharp lancet, cut and cleanse all of them, then place soft cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; then cure them with diafinicon ointment until they are healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ulcer is malignant, of putrid color and foul-smelling, you must apply a fire cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	And when you have excised it, and if the ulcer is in the verge, and has part within the skin and part without, you must first remove the ulcer that is within; and when it is dressed, treat it without.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you dress it all together, it is not assured that the head of the verge will not be pierced, and black corruption comes into the verge and where it coagulates; you must cut out all that is black and corrupted, then bind with a plaster made of apple peel and flour from pomegranate seeds, then dress with other plasters until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if bleeding occurs, apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cautery aids in two dispositions together: namely, in bleeding and in corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, then you must insert a string of flax into the penis and let the patient urinate through it; and when the hair grows at the head of the penis that affects those who have not been circumcised, or where there is a wound or abscess, then you must therefore cauterize with a heated instrument just enough to loosen the ligaments, freeing the head of the penis from all sides; and if it is a serious matter to describe this, then you must cauterize with a spatulum for a small part at the head of the penis and the skin; then separate well between them, and apply a fine linen cloth moistened in cold water, so that the hair does not grow again.
de la circoncision	of the circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not a dislocation of continuity like other wounds; nevertheless, when we perform this work of our will, and properly for children, it is necessary that we do the best work and the most gentle for their health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcising their children, for they do not use it in their law, and we have none but what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the majority of masters and surgeons who performed circumcision using dilators, forceps, and with an entire pair of pincers; they found it difficult because there are two blades, and by accident one might close the upper one while the lower remains open.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the recovery is hindered by copper, and the pain is doubled, and in the purification which is from below, the points of the limb are not assured; and in the purification of the nail, by accident the iron escapes, and work runs amok, and many times they arise thus without needing purification and I have seen it so.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	From the purification which is done with forceps on all the strand of hair, I have found the virtue of the experiment, for the forceps cut just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, it cuts equally on all strands of hair; but that the hairs be very thin under the skin; and let the manner of the first work be such that you make the child think, if he hears it, that you only slightly tie the hair around the shaft, and let him see it in every possible way; then hold it straight between your hands, and place the forceps between your hands or under your feet so that the child does not see them, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand to the shaft and blow or kiss, and draw it up as high as the head of the shaft is in; then purify well from the filth that has gathered, then tie the root with a double thread, then tie under strand by strand; and hold it at two dohs by the second hour in pocket and on the index finger, and copulate between the two ties, then lift the keur hastily and draw the head of the shaft; then let the blood flow little by little, for it is the mudder; and sprinkle powder there and over the powder attach a moistened half of a hard-boiled egg with rose water, confected with rose oil well and fresh, and leave it on until another day, and cure from other cures until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forceps for reduction is as follows: the two heads should be tight and sharp, and the heads of the shoulders should be as large as the fingers are equal.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in reduction is when the heads inside come out at the incision; therefore, you must spread them with your finger, just as the fingers make an abscess; and hold them evenly, and if you cannot hold them with your finger, hold them with forceps, and then spread them.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if they penetrate for three days, and that which is beneath the scrotum is swollen, let it be left until the abscesses are calmed, and gently scar them; hold them as you can move, and take care not to touch the part of the scrotum, as this will not harm it.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Cure therefore the head of the sore wound with powder things, as we have said in treating powders, and if one copes too much from the heart, and it goes above, it will not harm; cure it therefore, as we have said, until it be healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	retainment of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	The retention of urine is due to the obstruction of a stone, or congealed blood, or bowels, or new flesh, or similar things, as we have said in the division. And if the urine is not relieved and you see that the retention is due to the stone which is in or near the neck of the bladder, it is necessary for the patient to bend his knees; and weights should be placed on the back, and he should extend his belly above the back, and restrain the patient as much as he can. Thus, the necks of the bladder are constrained to allow the passage of the stone above, so that the urine is relieved. And if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, it is necessary for you to administer an extraction with all the instrument called "syringe," of which here is the form: and it should be made of fine silver, light and thin like a bird's feather; and the tube should be one and a half palm long, and very thin at the end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie at its end a little wool or cotton, and put the head of the thread inside the syringe; and cut off the excess of the wool and fill it up to the head of the syringe; then grease the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and make the patient sit on the seat, and rub his bladder and penis with wet oil and olive oil and water; then gently insert the syringe into the penis until it comes to the root of the penis, then cover the penis from above towards the mouth; then fill the syringe before up to the bladder, and let the patient feel the urine coming to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order because the conductor where it goes is twisted; then draw out the thread little by little, and the urine follows the wool, then extract it, and make the urine flow; and continue with the syringe until the bladder is emptied, and bind up the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When burns or blood come into the bladder, or putrefaction is present, and you see it discharge acidic fluids and medications, then use an instrument called "clepsydra," and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and has three holes: two on one side, and one on the other, as you can see; the leaves are fixed in place so that the medicines come out clearly, ensuring they anesthetize well the urethra. Thus, when moisture needs to be removed or added, place the head of the tube in the moisture and pull out the tube slowly; by pulling the tube out, you remove the moisture from it, and then push it back in forcefully; this way, the moisture enters and reaches the bladder, allowing the patient to feel its effects. This is the form of the fine catheter used to treat the bladder: as follows:
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is made of silver or steel, and the head is higher; and below on the chest where the threads fall; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture you see to moisten the bladder, then tie between the two breasts forming a single double thread, and heat that bit of moisture over the fire; then insert the tip of the catheter into the urethra, then draw your hand on the bladder until all the moisture is applied appropriately, so that the patient feels that this moisture has come to the bladder; and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce roundly through it; then insert the strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles the frame, and put inside what you wish of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; do so as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture flows to the bladder.
de la piere	of the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already discussed in the division the ways of stone, and their extraction along with medicines; and we have said the difference between a stone in the bladder and all the signs, and in which stone one should operate for its size; and in the bladder, and in the vein; and I will tell you clearly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is embedded in the bladder happens more often in children, and this is a sign that the urine has left the bladder seeming like urine in its subtlety; and it openly hardens, and grieves the patient's vein, and pierces many times, and then grows rigid; and most of these jumps are fundamental; and the cure is light for children until they are four years old, and is very grievous in the elderly, and is intermediate for those between childhood and old age; and the treatment is lighter for those who have a large stone than for those who have a small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to the treatment, it must first be cleansed by enema to draw all the filth from the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it obstructs at times in seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, and unbend and move them out of place, so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder and exits once from above; then have him sit between your prepared hands, and his hands be below his thighs, so that the bladder hangs entirely downward; then hold it and touch it internally; if you feel the stone in the space, now hasten to incise over the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not fall on touching from above, soften your index finger of the left hand, if the patient is fat, or your middle finger, if the patient is thin; then bend inwards and hold the stone, and when you feel it with your finger, pinch at the neck of the bladder; then press near your finger and incise where you wish to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And command the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend the thorns in his right hand upwards, and remove the skin which is beneath the thorns in the part where the incision is made; then pour in the spatumile copant, of which this is its form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And make the incision between what is between the thorns and the fundament, not in the middle but at the side of the left navel; and be straight above the stone, and your two hands should be near the fundament, and make the incision through so that it is wide on the outside and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large; by chance, pressing hard where your hand is at the fundament, she may burst without effort; and know that there are stones with angles and margins: they are easier to remove; and some are under, resembling a glans and round, from which the release is gentle.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	For those who have angles and margins, make the incision larger; and if it does not open, you must clamp with pincers that are as sharp as a file on the head, to draw the stone so that it does not escape; or you insert under the instrument a thin curved probe into the head; and if you cannot manage this way, widen the hole slightly, and if it is uncoursed, draw it out with vitriol; and if there are more than one stone, first insert the larger one at the neck of the bladder, then cover up, then pull forcefully, and the smaller ones afterward if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is very large, you must sew it up, and make a larger wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine comes out through it so that the wounds cannot be sutured; but nonetheless, you must strive to treat it or dismember with pincers until you sew it in pieces. When you have completed your work, apply the wound with incense and aloes and dragon's blood, and draw it, and place a moist cloth covered in oil and wine, or oil and rose water and cold water, to cool the abscess; then rebandage the patient on the third day, and do not remove the bandage until the third day.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you dislocate it, arise much well the place of oil and water, then treat with ointment of deflacion and basilicon until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses, corrosion, and coagulation of blood in the bladder cause urine retention, which is known to occur in such a manner that it moves with the urine: pour therefore your thumb into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will corrupt the bladder; then wash the wound with water and oil and salt, and aid it in all ways until it is healed; and you must bind both thighs whenever you treat it, and apply the medicines to the place.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is lodged in the urethra, and urine cannot pass; you should cut as I said before, many times, and this cutting due to the treatment is excused.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have experienced this thusly.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take three iron forks according to this form and fix them in the coals:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	Then take a thread and tie it around the urethra below the stone, so that it cannot move back into the bladder; then insert the fork gently into the urethra until it reaches the stone; and turn the fork in the stone little by little, as much as you can pierce the stone from another side; urine will come forth soon, then press your hand above what remains of the stone inside the urethra.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is broken soon, and urinates with it, the patient recovers. And if you cannot do this for any reason, tie a thread under the stone and another above, then make a cut next to the stone between the two threads, extract it, untie one of the threads, and cleanse the congealed blood in the wound; and cure until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	from the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	When a stone becomes incarcerated in women, and if it happens even once, the patient should be treated carefully, and it is forbidden for three reasons: the first is that by chance the woman may be a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a well-informed woman who will reveal herself to the mirrors, especially when she is pregnant.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third way is that by chance one cannot find a woman well knowing this art of hands; and the fourth way is that the stones of the woman are more imperfect than those of the man, which is why it requires a deeper incision, and great fear arises. And if necessity demands this from you, then you must seek a midwife well knowing, and often find her among the women. If you do not find one, you may resort to a very subtle instrument; and present a safe woman in the lives of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to perform what you command concerning the inquiry of the stone; and closely observe if the woman is a virgin: then she must place her foundation or base and seek the stone; and if she finds it, constrain her under her foundation, and recommend that she place her foundation or in the patient, and feel and press her left hand on the bladder firmly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, it must be moved gradually from the entrance of the bladder down to below, until it comes to the root of the thigh; then incise on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the groin, let that part appear, and feel the stone in that area; do not move your hand over or under the stone, and make the cut first small; then insert the forceps into the cut, if you feel the stone increase the wound until the stone can exit fully, and know that there are many kinds of stones: namely, small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and those with grooves.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know the signs to know the issue.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the stone wanes, put vitriol in its place and keep it there for an hour until the stone is extinguished; then return to your work as long as the stone remains. Have with you the instruments I said for the extraction of stones when helping you with your task. And if the stone wanes, and this is from the artery that has been incised, put powder on its place and use linen and bandages, and do not repeat this, and leave the stone alone and do not treat it further, lest by chance the patient dies; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is appeased, and the strength returns, then return to your work until the stones are healed.
de hernie carnouse	of fatty hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Aqueous humor is nothing but a collection of moisture or white fluid, which comes from the heart of the yolk, containing the egg; and it is called "syphac" and sometimes properly in the membrane of the egg if one thinks it is another egg. And it is the skin of the yolk between the white fluid we have said; and this does not happen often.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this fluid is due to weakness that comes from the yolk, and this matter is spread out.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: either it is a color inclining to jaundice, or it is without redness, or black, or watery white, and this happens more; and these are the signs to know this gathering, for if it is as white as we have said, it is an abscess, just barely long like the figure of an egg, and does not open the joints, for it has moisture all around.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if it has moisture in the proper membrane, it is an abscess with part of the egg, and because of this one thinks it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the joint and the white as it should be, then one feels it well; therefore when you wish to know the color of the moisture, you prove it by introducing a square probe, of which the form is described above.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the introductory part, judge of what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we cauterize with iron, the patient must be bled according to our power and the filling of his body; then place the sponge on his back, on one thing somewhat high, and put much wool under him; sit on his left side, and command the minister to sit on his right, and extend the rod to one of the two ribs near the heart; then take the clean spatheum and scrape the skin between them long until close to the edge of the knife, and make a straight cut in the skin of the ribs up to the white, and burn it subtly according to our power; then puncture the white full of water with large holes, and drain all the water, and then put on the pins, and elevate the white; and do not touch the heart of the ribs, but only the white; cut all or in pieces exactly the side of him subtly, that if you do not scrape well, the water will return; and if the egg has failed in your work, reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the white; then sew the two flaps of the heart of the ribs with a seam, and cure it as other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it must be that you bind the vessels that are suspensive, doubting the outflow of blood; then cut around the entire suspensive area, and extract the egg, and treat it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if an abscess is gathered into two parts joined together, know that these are two branches; then cut the other part as you have done the first equally, afterwards wipe away the blood, and put in the wound moistened wool in rose oil; and place another moistened wool in wine and oil, and set above the two incisions, and cover with doubled cloth, and bind it all according to this form.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths, and fold them with torn wool according to this likeness, and sew them together at the waist of the breeches. One head of the shoulder is placed from behind up to the back, and the other to the part below the armpit; and the other two heads above the two angles, and all the binding is gathered in the loop of the breeches; and this branch is often treated with a fire cautery instead of iron branding, and you should take the sharp cautery needle, and incise the skin at the points, and sear it with this hot sharp cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And the cope in all manners that you can, until you dry all out; and keep that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more saved; and use guarding against the flow of blood, and know the works of cutting; and if nothing makes thee contrary, or abscesses, or flows of blood, or other things, so cure what makes thee contrary, according to those who are before said.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to wait for this work because of its horror, then administer perforation as I have said. This is when you are certain by the signs we have mentioned that an abscessed lump is present, so make the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess in the lower part, making the incision wide and long along the length of the body; let the openings be large so that all the fluid can drain out. Then place cotton over the area and tie it, allowing the remaining fluid to drain, and continue to treat until the wound heals. If the white cloth does not allow the fluid to exit through the opening in the wound, then you must insert a pin or the instrument used for draining dropsy fluids, as described before; widen the hole in the wound, and know that the fluid will return and gather after about six months or so. When it has gathered as described before, then the patient's days will pass peacefully.
de l’aposteme des coions	from the abscess at its base
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	In this section of the branch there is fear in many dispositions, which makes it seem to me that movement would be better if we leave it alone; and I will tell you the work and similar things regarding the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say therefore that many abscesses come from wounds, and especially from the shoulders; and this happens by chance.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is to say that abscesses come from excess of sour and cold humor, which spreads to the shoulders, or from percussion; and the color of the abscess depends on the color of the body; and it does not find any pain, and is a grievous abscess; and by chance it may be painful and stony abscesses, with fugitive color, and sometimes comes from an artery, or swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is from an artery, it is known by the arrangement of the hot abscess, when you press with your thumb; and you must not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	That which is caused by venous swelling is known by its arrangement upon touch with the thumbs, and can well be cut from this appearance and from other marks; and you must turn the heart of the cord upwards, and make the thread of the white firm, and release the suspender from all sides of the egg.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the egg is already seated with these marks, then you must incise the egg and the cord; and if it is firm at the bottom or within the vessels, then you must release all the vein completely, and roundly cut the cord.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birthplace of the flesh is open behind, it must be cut entirely, and the egg extracted as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is accomplished, dress the wound with moistened wool in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other salves until it heals.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess from the thigh
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping similar to a borjon, with the thigh softened. The patient moves painfully; and the treatment for this disease is well prepared similarly to the one mentioned before, and we will detail the work of it according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It must be that you seat the patient on an elevated chair, then place the suspensory ligament of the testicles below your knees, at all the vessels near the groin, and tie them tightly and extend them; then cut with a sharp spatula along the path through the vessels until they are uncovered, and then scrape from each part as we have said in the extraction of arteries in temples; then insert a needle where it has the double thread, and attach it to the first place where the vein came, and again attach it to the other end; then bandage in the middle straightly, according to the length of the body, and draw out the corrupted moistures; then treat the wound as with others where fluid is drained, so that no vessel breaks that nourishes one of the testicles; for by this there comes no harm, and if it happens in all the vessels that veins break, it must be that you take out the veins from all the vessels; so that the testicle does not lose its nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and dry up and cannot be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the tendon
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The events of this injury occur through sectioning that comes from the tendon or from extension in the abdomen in the part of the inguinal region, for which reason the intestines descend due to that rupture to one of the groins; and this rupture is either from the tendon or from its extension, and come about in two manners of causes: from percussion, or jumping, or shouting, or lifting a heavy load, and similar things; and the signs when it is from the extension of the tendon are that it happens little by little, over a long time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are equal until near the surface, because the tendon presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	And the signs are when it is from the section of the tendon, which causes an sudden onset of pain, and the abscesses appear varied and beneath the skin, because of the discharge of the intestines and the core below the tendon.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes the circles with the intestines, and are retained within, and cause great suffering to the patient, especially when they are pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments with iron, for which it is advisable to avoid.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the manner of this work is that you command or instruct the patient to remove the intestines with his hand inside the wound if they can enter; then wrap them around his neck, and lieve the thighs; then place the keur above, and scrape all the skin from the long coions; then insert the leivers of the tail uncines according to what you need to open the wound, and let them be such that the oes could issue forth; then scar the syface that is beneath the skin of the coions, until the white syface is uncovered on all sides; then place your index finger in what follows the coion, between the white syface which is beneath the skin of the egg, and between the second syface, and depart what is behind the egg, and between the second syface; and then move with your right hand inside the keur of the coions, and let the white syface be on top with your left hand, and lieve the egg towards the tail; and command the minister to extend the egg upwards, and release what is behind the ligament; and rest your fingers if there is any intestine enveloped or hard white syface, and if you find anything of this sort, put it back into the belly beneath; then take an awl with a thick thread made of ten threads, and place it in the rear part of the syface, which is after the skin of the coions; behind the tail, then scrape off the heads that appear from the threads, until there are four threads; then assemble them one above the other in the shape of a cross, and attach the syface, which we said is beneath the skin of the coions, with a strong thread of two parts; then wrap the heads of the threads, and tie firmly with two parts, so that no vessels that nourish them can enter out, that the abscess may not come again; and place the thread according to the first long thread over two fingers, and after these two threads leave the syface which is beneath the keur of the coions the size of a finger's breadth; then according to the roundness that the egg carries; then scrape in the part which is beneath the skin of the coions, as we have said before; then apply moistened wool, and put it on the wounds, and give the thread as we have said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the whites of the eyes are cauterized to prevent excessive bleeding after incision due to doubt.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens many times, and leave the thread until it falls by itself; and if it delays in falling, so soak it in hot water, and apply what we have said until it falls; then treat the wound with other dressings until it is perfectly healed.
de hernie carnouse	of fatty hernia
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this case, I have never known anyone who dared to treat it with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is made like the wire that is twisted together into a vis, in such a manner that you tie the vessels after lightly incising them. Then cut it open in half, and treat the abscess as one who works on it until the vessels constrict; and continue to treat it as we have said until it is perfectly healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Sometimes there is a rupture in the veins, as we have said, and it becomes apparent; and no parts of the intestines are revealed at the incision, and if any do reveal, it is little, and heals every hour; and yet if it remains too long in this point, the wound or syphax forms because the intestines do reveal; and this happens due to the extension of the syphax which is in the veins, as we have said, for it is extended, then softened and swollen the veins and become apparent; and the cure is by cautery, as we have said before; and sometimes the wound is cured by a iron in this manner: and that is when the patient lies prone on their back between your hands, then cut out the vein from the large swelling according to the quantity of three fingers; and then extract the syphax which is under the skin that ensues, then take the rag and place it over the apparent vein; and press it thoroughly over the abdomen, then suture the two veins appearing over the head of the rag, and suture one and the other; then extract the head of the rag, and neither cover the syphax nor extend the swelling or anything else, as I have told you in the cure of the ramification of the intestines; then cure it by the method of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, cleanse and treat the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The swelling is constrained, and shows no sign in the rupture, and the cauteries are moistened in this place, and closer to healing.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin around the knees
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Often the skin around the knees is softened in some individuals, because the flesh within is softened, and it can be seen; and when one wishes to treat it, the patient should lie on their back, and the soft skin is cut away from the natural skin. Then the two edges are sewn together with one stitch, and if necessary, the excess soft skin should be sown with three or four stitches firmly. After sewing between the stitches, the wound should be treated as other wounds until it heals, and then cut the thread.
dou chastrement	by due chastisement
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	By due chastisement is esteemed in our law, and for this reason it pleases me that I not speak of it in this book; and it is necessary for two reasons: one, that the eyes know how to answer when asked about it and know its treatment; and the other, because we often have need to chastise some beasts to aid us, as with goats, sheep, dogs, and other beasts.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say then that chastisement is done in two ways: either by attraction or by cutting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the method we do by attraction, place the beast in hot water until the joints become soft and remain so. Then grasp them with your hand while they are still flexible and you no longer feel resistance.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Of castrating the tail: You must dye the beast, and press the skin of the scrotum with your left hand, then tie the suspender, and cut each testicle one by one when you have well scorched them; and leave a little bit of the thick fat which is under the vessels; and this way of castration is better than that made by suction, because in suction something from the scrotum remains by chance, which causes the beast to desire lust; then treat the wound until it heals.
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphrodites are according to two manners in men: one is that between the two testicles it appears as the figure of a woman's nature, or it has hair, and sometimes in them urination occurs.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other method is for women, and it is done with a knife as with a rod and two fingers.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the care of the man and woman is that you clean all the wounds thoroughly, and treat them as other wounds; in the second manner, for those whose urine leaks through the skin of the fingers, there is no need to treat.
de la tentigene	of the wart
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	A wart is a wound that has displaced on the natural part, to the extent that it is too ugly to see; and some women have them as large as a hand, and this is how they are treated.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	You must dye the excess of the wart with your hand or fingers and clean it lightly; and do not perfume it too much, so that no bleeding occurs. Then treat it with other treatments until it heals. And for a wound that arises at the mouth of the vein, cover it and perhaps it will heal on its own, resembling the shape of a cow, which is why the ancients called it the "cow disease.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary to apply it, as we have said regarding the texture and treatment until it is healed.
de erratique	If it is necessary to apply it, as we have said regarding the texture and treatment until it is healed.
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic if it is when the nature of the woman is not known, or the perforation is small; and it is natural by birth, or an accident caused by illness that came about; or it is due to a foreign body, or a thick or thin fluid, and is made perfect in the thighs, or flanks, or below, or anywhere; and it prevents conception, and childbirth, and sometimes the flowers to have; and the knowledge of this is through the sight of the midwife.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the swellings are nearby and apparent, feel with your fingers or touch them.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is a thin blister and it is near the two flanks, hasten, and treat it thus: bring your two thumbs together, and let the woman be on her back, spreading her legs; then form the two flaps, so that the thin blister may be removed, and over the stumps; then take wool, and fat in oil, and place it on the wound, and lie with the woman each day, so that it does not heal over.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the blister is hard and thick, it is necessary to cut it with a scalpel resembling a bay leaf.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the stumps are of new flesh, suspend them with a needle and thread; and have the止血药物, such as myrrh, dragon's blood, incense, and plenty of egg yolk; then apply a broad bandage, so that the wound does not heal over; and thus keep it long. Then give him linen bandages until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when carbuncles bring forth pus, one must treat it according to this manner, unless it is an embedded abscess.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the embedded abscess in the carbuncle, one must not touch it to incise.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are dilatations of veins that, without intervention, often occur. And when hemorrhoids are old, they become thrombosed; and we have already described similar cases, their signs, and symptoms, and I will now describe those that can be cured.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and thrombosed veins, when fully inflamed in the carbuncle, do not appear by touch; only those cured with iron can be seen.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the boil, which one can feel, are those one can treat.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore, you should place the woman in a cold room, then put the altarul in the tongs, and the root in its roots, then sprinkle medicines that restrain blood, such as ice, dragon's blood, and incense, and similar things; then place her feet against the wall for an hour, then immerse her in cold water; and if bleeding begins, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and bark of pomegranate peel and galls and similar things, and then take barley flour, and congeal it with honey and garlic, and apply it to her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops bleeding, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, if you cause suction cups to be applied to the back and breasts without injury; then take wool, and mix it with the juice of plantain or of agrimony with old wine, and apply to the area.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess has come to a head, cure the area with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a bitter almond, so you should cut it as I have said for the thul; and then cure it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses from the armpit
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscesses occur in the armpit, such as chancre, stone abscess, herpes, cysts, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscess, and many other diseases as I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	It must therefore be said in this treatise on the hot abscess that comes from the liver, which is not among those abscesses that hurt when touched; and if you wish to know the process of making iron, then observe whether the abscess appears at the beginning of its coming, and full of heat and fever, and becomes red if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore, do not hasten to puncture it but let it die until the pain is alleviated; and then place the patient on a seat, and have two small seats or cushions for him to recline, supporting his back and aligning his feet with the parts below the leg; and spread his thighs, and place his arms beneath his knees, and tie them well with a good bandage; then apply the ball towards the right side, and bring it to the instrument through which one works on the mouth of the liver, from which the form will come later; and it must be that when you see the instrument being applied, you insert the point first in order to know the depth of the liver, so that what enters into the instrument does not go more profound than it should, and does not injure the patient; and if the instruments are larger, it must cover the depth of the liver with cloths, so that the instrument does not press upon it; and it must place the trumpet of the instrument above, and touch the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess is open, and it is made soft by hand, you must treat it at the head, with leit spatumile; and when the bowe is emptied, you must put in the wound softened cloths in rose oil, or in green sec oil; and place the cloth out of the wound at the base of the sore, and put above the sore and above the knife a clean wet cloth in water or honey be cooked; then cure after two days of ointment fitting to this, until it is healed; and sometimes raise the sore and the wound by cistere of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lily and arisologe long be cooked; then return to the ointment.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is placed at the sore, you must guard against using iron, but treat it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	Mestier is first at the birth when she knows the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman pressing down and desiring to bear: then hasten the child to come forth; know that this childbirth is according to its natural figure, and comes with its head, and the second follows it; and when you see these signs, press lightly on her abdomen so that the child comes quickly; for when it senses above its head, the second follows it, and is cleansed of its impurities by good cleansing; and who comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it comes none other times above its feet, and comes forth in the body or the hips, and the hands, or it comes above the abdomen or sides, and is turned by chance over the neck, and by other evil figures; it is needful for the midwife that she be wise and subtle in these things, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the figures how one must aid them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes down upon his head through natural birth, and the woman delivers easily, and the strength of her body is weak, then place her on a saddle, or let the women hold her; and from its nature, with oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, then pour the balm between her two thighs using a small spoon whose form it has.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and cut the secondine, and scrape away the moist substance that is within; and press her abdomen until the child descends. If it does not descend, then cleanse the woman with a mixture of fenugreek and safflower oil; then have her drink and sneeze condisi, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: now extract the child.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands are fractured, you must reset them gently little by little; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a seat, and lift her feet high; then take the seat away from the ground, and support the woman so she does not cry out during the resetting; and if the hands cannot be set and the child dies, cut off the hands with the knife mentioned earlier, extract the child, and set them evenly.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	from the extraction of the child from her feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes from her feet, it is necessary to lift it up; then turn it little by little until it is even; then straighten the feet and stretch them little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps as far as the knees, then one must take hold of it, and cause it to sneeze by pressing; if it is worse, if God wills.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not worse as we have said, turn it little by little, until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is lightly.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come worse as we have said, take musk of almond, oil of sesamum, and melted gum, and grind them all in a mortar; and put the nature of the woman inside and underneath this ointment, then make her sit in warm water until under her ribs; and when she is softened under, give her myrrh to drink, and put it under, and let her have it for an hour; then make her sit on a chair, then cause her to sneeze and press her mouth and nose, and gently rub her abdomen, for the child now jumps.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	from the issue of the child above his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, place your hands on him little by little; then bind his neck, and hang his feet down, and lie on the bed; bend his arms little by little, and then put his hands on his stomach, and remove the cushions under him until she is positioned down; and if the child does not jump, take his feet and move them into shape, then move his stomach upward, then place your hands; and draw the child little by little; and command the woman to hold herself tightly so that the child emerges.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	from the issue of the child who comes with one hand wide open
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I must devise to bring back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, make lift the woman and go; if she cannot go, make her lie on the bed, and prop up her legs; then administer the ligature as I have recounted; and if she does not give birth, make her sit on the chair, then study to bring back the hand; and withdraw the child according to its natural position, and make her sneeze, and command her to grip until the infant is issued.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	of the issue of the child from its neck, and let her spread her hands, and her face turned towards her mother's back
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I must have the woman grip her hand, then turn it little by little, and gently; and when it is equal, put on the natural ligature of flax and oil, as we have said, then command her to move it little by little; and when you have done this, make her sit on the chair, and command her to grip; and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in this same manner for all the secondine
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to all the secondine in this manner, cut the secondine with your nail until the moieties are evacuated; and if the pains can be on its face and on its neck, cut from the mouth, do not hold back, and end the pains; then put the child inside, as soon as you have placed it properly, and instruct the woman to bear none again: then gently extract.
de l’issue des gemelz	of the issue of the twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins often are born, and sometimes three or four are born; and this is not strange nor happens seldom.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are extracted things, and do not live, if few named; I know those, that they be multiplied, and are deprived by the syphilis which devises them, which is linked to the blood; and sometimes sent also naturally as from under the earth, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they are sent well, the cure as we have said, and be the baths subtle, and make quickly and lightly what she does; and make thus as it avails to the health.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the womb I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to fifteen, and are all formed in the form of a child by the measurement of the glorious sage, and it should be that the bath know all this, for similar things may happen; do so according to what is appropriate.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman who has lost a dead child or is in labor, as I have said in the division, and no discharge comes forth, and you are constrained to perform manual work; it must be that you know whether the woman is of sound health and does not have any symptoms or fear of death. It must be that the woman is well supported on her back, with her head inclined downward, and her legs elevated; and the minister places the body on two parts, tying her to the bed so she cannot be moved downwards for the child's descent. Then, rub the inside of the vagina with moist oil mixed with muscilagium of althea and fenugreek, and flaxseed. Next, anoint her hands with these oils and muscilagiums; then gently insert them into the vagina, ensuring that the amount is suitable for this purpose. Be sure to observe whether the child is positioned to descend on its head; if it is, place the oncine in her eyes or neck or mouth or palate or under the beard or in the forceps or near the sides, and if the descent is through the feet, insert it at mid-back. The minister should insert the oncine into his right hand and place the cord between his left thumb and forefinger, then gently insert them into any of the locations we have mentioned until the thing is empty; this is the form of the oncine.
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	then pierce against the other pin, or the third if you need it, so that the extractions be equal; and then stretch equally by moving back and forth, to facilitate coming out, and let the pins have teeth to hold them, as is formed here:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part remains, open with any of his eye teeth, and push them into that part, and cut the other part; and if there remains none, set this pin or higher up, and do this until it all comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back by squeezing, then you must wrap it with a cloth, until it all comes out; then cut the cloth at the sole joint or on the side, and thus you must do in the other hand, and for both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the head of the child is large and the outlet is narrow, or it has an acute swelling gathered together, you must place the spatumile spine between your fingers, make a hole in the swelling, and extract the acute; or you can roll it with the instrument called "almidach", which comes from the forms with tools or chapter after this one; and thus similarly do if the child has a large natural swelling; and then pull the bones with the tongs, and if the head suddenly frees itself and is restrained by force, split it until the moist substances that are worse issue out; and if they cannot issue, cut them into pieces as you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or under the back, you must pierce it so that the moist substances flow.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the injury is on his feet, the traction is light, and the direction to the mouth of the artery is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is narrow in the belly or the breast, it is fitting that you extract it with a silken thread wrapped around the hand; and cut the belly or the breast, as much as the moist parts are contained; and if the other limb is removed, and the head remains, she should hold her hand from the mouth of the artery until it reaches the mouth of the artery; then she should put in one or two drops, and draw forcefully; and if the mouth of the artery is narrowed by a hot abscess that has come there, it is not fitting to work on it, but it is fitting to administer moist and greasy things; and she should apply poultices, and sitz baths in warm, softening, and moistening substances.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the injury is on his side, and you can place it equal, administer what we have said about the living child; and if one has power, split the wound, and do not leave anything of the secondary.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, administer what we have said for abscesses that come in the thigh, and if bleeding occurs, it should be placed in cold water restraining, and administer other treatments.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly an infant had died, then sutured the other [one] above it, and caused the death of the other.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After long time, an abscess formed in the buttock, and swelled so much that it opened, and caused great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called for the treatment, and I thought long, and could not hold the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a plaster of strong吸引力，并从中取出了一些骨头，几天后又取出了其他一些。
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marvelled greatly, for the abdomen has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that these were the bones of a dead infant.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I treated the wound, and found bones there, so that the woman was much improved; and the woman lay there for a long time like this, and there was still a bit of blood from it; and I did not remember this chapter only because when the master finds an unusual thing, he should know how to provide aid.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring back the marrow to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	After comes the form of the presser, to which the books refer; and to the two turns of the two shoulders.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Firstly, the horns should be finer than the restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood; and let the mouth be two fingers wide, and the margin one finger in thickness, and long a palm and a half; between the two links there should be two adjustments of the same wood, firmly attached on both sides, each half a palm long or a little more; these two adjustments are inserted into the mouth of the marrow to open it when turning the two horns.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, finer and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, according to the shape of tweezers; it should have two adjustments at the shoulders, as you see, each a palm long and two fingers wide. When you wish to open the marrow with this entire instrument, place the woman on the bed, her feet hanging and legs spread apart. Then insert the two adjustments together into the marrow, and hold the head of the instrument between her thighs. Then work your hand on the entire instrument as you did with the tweezers equally, according to the amount you wish to open the mouth of the marrow until the woman does what she desires.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This instrument is entirely surmounted, and its likenesses are multiplied; and when the user has prepared them, the work becomes more rapid, and higher in quantity for the people.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not use the instrument without having prepared it, because its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the secondine is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to seize her abdomen, and then make her snort forcefully, and hold her hands at her mouth and nose; and if she passes it through these means, well and good.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If this does not work, take a pot and make a hole or cover it. Put herbs that can open the mouth of the mare inside, such as calamus, rue, anise, chamomile, cassia, and centaury; all these herbs, or any of them, be they cooked or steeped in water on fire. Then place a stick or hole in the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the mare, and hold it until the vapors enter the mare. Then make her snort as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second joint moves hastily.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this treatment, and is not cured, command the maid to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or in almond fat, and then place it in nature, and seek the second joint; and when she has found it, take it and extend it little by little straight, so that the bones do not crack during extraction; but it must be moved lightly from right to left, and then cut; it will come and dry out.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the joint of the bone is slightly contracted, we have said the treatment for sneezing and fumigation with herbs; and if it is not cured by all that we have said, then guard that you do not proceed to cut; but it must be that what is at the joint of the bone, you ligate it to the thigh of the woman, then cleanse it with a tetrafarmakon ointment enema; she will take it and put it back in place, and it will become cured; but still, when she takes it, if there comes an不良气味 to the stomach and head, and sickens the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If therefore suitable fumigations are to be used for this: some of the ancients have tested the fumigation of cress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman for the retention of flowers and the secondine is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is made of glass resembling a cane, and one places the thin end in the nature, and the broad heads above the fire; and let the fumigations be on the coals, and the scab until it is corrupted, and begins another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the fundament
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not have their fundament pierced, but have it stuffed with a subtle syfac: then the bailiff must pierce that syfac in its proper place, and not pierce the child with a sharp spatule, and be careful the lancet does not touch; then put on moistened wool in wine and oil, and cure with ointment until healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will close up again, place or keep a bandage of lint, and let it remain for a while, and be removed when the child seems ready to go into rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this stoppage comes suddenly from a wound or abscess; then it must be dealt with suddenly: it should be treated as we have said for the lint bandage.
de la fistule dou fondement	of the fistula from the fundament
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from the fundament are nodules, and grow larger than those coming from the fundament discharge, or in the space between two parts, either one or multiple; and when this nodule is old, it works, and exudes moisture, white pus, or fine granular matter. Sometimes these fistulas are Persian; they are known by those who have them through evacuation or flatulence when the patient evacuates, and by chance during a bowel movement.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if abscesses penetrate to the bladder, and to half the length of the penis; and reach to the joint of the thigh, and to the knee.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows whether the abscess is penetrating to the fundament and not: it is that you place your index finger or fundament, and insert a subtle needle of iron or brass into the abscess when there is no tortuosity.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is tortuosity, insert a fine probe or horsehair, as far as you can feel the probe or hair with your finger; and if you do not feel it, and there is no discharge from the fistula nor windiness nor vermin, as we have said: know that it does not penetrate; haste to cure.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is infected up to the bladder or up to the urinary duct, then the urine jumps out, and cannot be healed by medications.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	And if it is pierced up to the joint of the thigh, then the tent comes from just above the place; if there are no twists and the source of pain is inside, then it is only a superficial condition, and neither medicine nor immediate ointment curing is effective; in these infected fistulas, there is no cure other than labor and the vanity of foolish people who attempt to treat them.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	And in those that are neither infected nor ancient, with hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and where the patient lies on their back; lift the legs up to the thighs, and incline the thighs towards the abdomen; then place a tent of wampum or plonc if there are twists, as long as you know where the tent comes from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain deep in the fundament, you must place your index finger there; if you then sense that the tendons have been pierced, know that it is penetrated; and if you can discover this between your fingers, whether it be the sphincter or the flesh, know that it is serious; do not attempt to treat it unless you can heal it.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One can properly treat some cases, but this happens rarely. The aid we apply, one must heat the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula as previously said; then insert it hot into the fistula until it comes from the fundament; do this two or three times, until you know that these moistened chars are burned, which resemble a bird's feather; then dress with ointment moistened in grease until the char is gone, and then dress with healing ointment.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is thus healed, that is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If it is thus healed and cannot be otherwise healed; and if the tent begins to form but does not penetrate to the depth which is the foundation, and has entered between your finger and the tent a thick covering of flesh or fat, and you see the fistula at that which covers from the beginning of the fistula; cut away from the beginning of the fistula, and apply it before the tent, and cauterize after, until it comes to the head of the tent; then the tent will be delivered, and fall; then debride those fleshy parts that seem like a bird's feather, leaving none remaining.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the healing fails, and cuts between you and the work, cauterize with fire or medicinal water.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the cautery of fire, it comprises two good things: that is to say, the burning of these charred pieces, and the stopping of blood and drying out of moisture; then the treatment of wet bandages in butter or ground grease, until the eyes expel the burned matter in mucus; then cure the wound with ointments thick and hardening tough flesh, and are the dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return again.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes just to the point of the foundation and is distant from the body, set a bone or foundation, and inquire about it.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	If you feel the tissue, and between them is cloth or skin or charred matter, or it is ready to pierce, there should be no outlets other than a way of hope and faith, by administering one of the three methods: or you cauterize as we have said, or you cut deep down, or if you can, place bandages and treat as first; do not go too far to the point, lest you cut through the tissue that holds the foundation, and let the discharges come out willingly; then treat as we have said; by chance it will be healed, or you remove that covering and clean it since it is cut away from the foundation, or with a tent or another pointed instrument; then cleanse the needed char which is in the wound, as much as you can; then study to restore the wound, and stop the fistula above the foundation: this will be a lighter matter for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are treated in this manner: and it is when you puncture the fistula, and it is located next to the foundation beneath the skin, so take a needle pierced through the head according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And you wind the thread twice around it, and insert the needle with the thread into the fistula until it reaches the head.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is a Persian fistula in the margin of the foundation within, then extract the thread from that punctured area, as you would insert your finger or probe; and pull the head of the thread out, and join the two heads together, and hold them tightly against each other, and let them be for one or two days; and hold them once more until the threads close the gaps between them and heal; then treat the wound until it is sewn and healed.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not perforate, make it puncture in all the ways that you can, provided it is not too deep.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not fitting to cauterize for the ligature if too deep, and then treat it as we have said until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spinal fistula is very painful on one side and sharp; and not on the other, for that which should not be cauterized, you do not cauterize, as you see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: some are within the fundament, like grains of resin, and they can be small or large, with blood oozing from them, and there may be one or many, protruding from the fundament and around its edge; but those that are external have little moisture, and only a bit of yellow water or a bit of blood, and their color matches the body. The treatment for those within the fundament is to instruct the patient to rest to expel them, so they can be seen in chambers; when the fundament eases up, and the threads appear, you should act quickly, using tongs or your finger to remove them, then cauterize at their roots. If the uncinus cannot hold them due to their moisture, use a pledget of wool, a cotton swab, or a piece of chamomile cloth; extract them with your fingers, then cauterize and apply warm powders instead of a cautery; or cauterize them as described in the chapter on cauterization, and treat them with other remedies until they are healed. If the fundament cannot expel them, administer purgative enemas to wash out what is within the fundament, allowing it to come out clearly. When the patient presents, and the threads have fully exited from the fundament, the treatment should be gentle; you should extract them with your fingers or tongs, then cauterize and treat as we have said until they are healed, and prevent incision by metal instruments.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you administer the stitching in this manner: take a twisted thread, and put it through a needle, and then pull the thread over and make the needle pierce on the other side, and turn the two ends of the thread under the needle, and let it be wide; and tighten the thread firmly, then tie the thread, and withdraw the needle, and do so for all the others, leaving one to drain the excess blood; then place a moist cloth in oil of roses or cerote on the foundation, and place it, and command the patient to rest; and let him remain until he convalesces, and when they are healed, apply ointment and other care until he is cured.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	of dry the wound or foundation
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times, there is a dry fever in the intestines, and by constraint of nature, when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	You must reset it at the point of a spike or under your nail, which you should not leave moist; then cure it until it is dry as it should be; and if it cannot become dry, you must recommence the rasping more forcefully than before, until it heals, and let it become scorched; then cure it until it is healed.
dou fremit	of trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	Formice is a small false appearance on the body, and goes very quickly through it. Sometimes when one finds coldness and feels like dying from trembling, it comes throughout the body, more in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is such that you take a stick from a goose feather, or a very hard vultul feather, and place that stick on the spasm, so that the purple circles cover the entire spasm; then turn your hand with all the stick so that you treat the entire spasm completely, and drive out the spasm to its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, do it with a stick of spider web or iron according to this form, and make it thin underneath and drawing over:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Do not pierce it, for hold with both hands and press. And if you see, burn the spasm, as is described in the preceding chapter on cautery.
de la forme dou clistere	of the shape of the shoulder
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Any time the shoulder is dislocated, it is done with silver or iron, or molten brass or bronze; and at any time these instruments are made small and large, according to those to whom they are applied.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those that are used in the treatment of children and who are weak and painful, are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the shoulder, whether small or large, is such that the joints are fastened in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And it should have a separation or the joints should be fastened as you see, and the head of the shoulder should be pierced through; and it should have two holes on one side and one hole on the other; and place the medicines inside with a bladder of an animal or parchment, and pierce all around with small holes. Place one digit of space between each hole, then insert a strong thread of raw silk in X or about ten places around, and join the joints as if they were a sheep's head; when the medicine is inside, tie it tightly with a strong thread in front of the instrument, then reset it; and this is the shape of the circle.
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine neither be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the blister with oil or yolk of egg, or something similar, then prick it lightly; then withdraw the ministers' hands together when it is all dry, then extract the blister, and lift the patient's legs to the wall, and if the medicine seems to come out, so much as it can; and if he sleeps all night, it will be greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you blisterize in sickness of stomach discharge, and the medicine hastens to come out, then renew it until it is healed.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoid is or foundation, or abscess, then let the blister be as subtle as for a child; and this is the form of the subtle blister where the skin is strained.
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already spoken of the treatment of wounds in the division of wound care; now we will speak of hand treatments and medicines according to the procedure.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the parts or places where they are made, and from what they are made.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are through the impact of a stone, or a sword cut, or an axe cut, or a spear, or a javelin, or similar things; or they are made according to the parts of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or on the head, or the shoulder, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs; and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, starting with simple wounds of the head, because their chapter will come later.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes or a head injury, and the bone is not broken, then take care if it is due to a stone impact or similar things, and the skin is entirely torn and the wound large, and you slightly doubt an abscess hot: so make it soon sanguineous from the cephalic immediately if little blood comes from the wound, and let the sanguineous be on the contrary at the broken part; and avoid the patient's repletion with wine and large foods.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it does not turn sanguineous, let the flesh be diminished, and do not drink wine nor eat meat; and place on the wound, if a hot abscess comes, only moist cotton in rose oil or tinctured wine; and if there is no hot abscess, place on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and has not dried by air or powder, the powder I will say a little later; and if the fire has dried it, place some ointments until it heals.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like from a sword cut and similar, and the edges cannot be brought together by stretching, stitch them together, as I will say for wounds of the belly, regarding stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to bone, painful, and holds together only with difficulty, suture it; then treat the wound with medicine, and restore firm flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat large meats, such as heads and cooked wheat, like meatballs, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find rotten skin, and it does not reach the bone, suture it completely, apply powder, then treat the wound. And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, cut without cutting deep, and since it cannot be stopped with medicines, tie the artery with a thread; and if this does not help, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the cure is light: it is that you put in this powder which heals as though the mercury had moistened it.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; live wax three parts, and grind them finely, and apply the powder to the wound, binding it firmly until it dries well and joins with all its blood; then clean it well, and leave it unbound unless it swells; for the medicine is not removed until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one does this with just wax, when one does not have incense nor dragon's blood, but lets the mercury moisten the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the surgeon has cauterized the wound while it was still fresh, one should not put this powder there; but apply some digested ointments, or pulses of flour of barley made with water and honey until they exude whey; then continue to treat with other remedies until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, extract it with fine forceps; and I will tell you later about the fractures of the head.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound is at the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between this and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerves, there is no other remedy but to leave the treatment, and not put anything constricting, for it harms the nerves and makes them retract; and do not put anything cold on the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation is with the brain, which is the highest member; but use medicines boiled, such as wax washed in sweet water and mixed with rose oil, and cucumber washed likewise in sweet water, and other mine stones in this manner, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, stitch and bind it with bandages, then treat until it heals.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and infected with worms, pierce or open them lower down. And if an artery is cut, and a bleeding continues, sew it up and cauterize where necessary; and if the spinal cord of the throat is cut, or the vessels, and the channel through which the flesh flows is guarded, then stitch the vessel over the throat bone, and do not touch the throat but set it according to its natural shape. Then bind it properly, let it rest for some days, and treat with dry ointments until it heals; and if the wound has made an impression on the bone, set it; and if there are pieces of bone, remove all that you can, and leave the rest until the wound rots, and be removed when healed. And if the wound is fresh, powder it with the powder as I have said.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is a sinus, the treatment should be as I have said in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a spear or刀伤
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from a spear or sword, and the wound is deep, examine if from the wound there is any sign that the patient will die: then you know that the wound is fatal; and if it is not deep, but fresh with all its blood, do not apply powder at the first hour, nor let it dry completely for the blood to not demerge into the heart and kill the patient; but apply an attractive ointment, and bandage it 2 times a day; and if you have no ointment, put old cotton in the wound to drain the moisture, and let the patient sleep on the wound for 3 days, or 4, or more; so there will be no convulsion, nor male tremor of the heart or any other signs of death; and when you see good disposition, then you know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Cure therefore the sores and other treatments until he is healed; and if it cannot heal, operate, then you know there is a fistula; treat the wound as we should.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple or worse on the back, treat the part in front; if it is large, stitch it; and if it is small, treat with powder; and if it is close to the bone and has cut pieces, clean the wound, remove any loose threads; and if they are not loose, let the wound drain, which will ease the extraction; and for other wounds on other limbs, judge them as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	for the rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The ruptures of the abdomen are great and medium and small; from a great wound sometimes the intestines or nerves of the intestines protrude; and the suturing is more difficult, and sometimes a smaller wound is worse than a larger one, because we cannot place the intestines back in without heating them; for when they feel cold, they shrink back in, and for this reason, the medium-sized wound is better, as we reheat the intestines to their proper place. And know that the rupture of the abdomen occurs in four ways: the two common sutures happen in the suture of the abdomen, and the suture of other wounds on the body and two other specific sutures are common to other wounds; however, they are more appropriate with the suture of the abdomen, and I will say each one and clarify.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and no internal thing is injured, and it is easy to remedy, this can be done by one of two methods: either because of the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in a proper manner: moisten a sponge or a cloth in warm water only, or you can cook it in warm water with quince and cypress and spice, and apply it to the intestine until the swelling is removed; and once this astringent wine has been applied, let it dry for deswelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water or cooked hellebore and malva, for by these it is alleviated at the entrance of a small thing; and if nothing can enter, make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used to remove hemorrhoids; and let the first cure be dry before cutting, as we should not cut without great necessity; and this is the instrument to cut: so slice internally along the curve and do not go too deep, and see here the form.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestines have protruded, replace them backward according to their natural form in their proper place if you can, for this is correct.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And when the wound is large, and it is in the area below the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the area above the abdomen, raise the head and buttocks higher than the other parts. And similarly, if the abdominal rupture is in one of the two areas, place them so that the severed part is higher than the other; and thus you should treat as I say for large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, use what is provided to you. Have the minister of pitoys (a type of herbal medicine) at hand who can cover the entire wound with their hand and close its edges; this is a common method of suturing, where you take an needle or several needles according to the width of the wound. Leave a finger's breadth from the edge of the wound, insert one needle with strong thread into it; pierce both sides of the skin with two needles, which are inside the skin, until the part is fully pierced, then assemble the three ends of the siphac (a type of ligature). Next, pass a double thread through the needle from both sides, and assemble the edges of the wound accordingly. Then leave a finger's breadth again, insert another needle; join the thread as you did with the first needle, without ceasing to do so according to your need for needles until the entire wound is sutured. Use medium-sized needles, neither too fine nor too large, because very fine needles may cut all the flesh, and those that are too large cannot easily enter: therefore, they should be medium-sized. Do not insert the needles too far into the flesh and skin so as to avoid cutting the wound before suturing. Afterward, remove the ends of the needles to prevent them from irritating the patient during sleep, and cover the needle ends with a small cloth or bandage for better holding, leaving them until the wound is healed; this method of suturing with needles is more suitable for smaller wounds as one needle suffices for a second suture. And you should assemble the two skin sides and the two siphac (ligature) on one needle with strong medium thread; when you have pierced these ends all four together, reduce the needle to the part where you began, in the manner of threading cloth; keep a distance between each suture equal to a finger's breadth. This type of suture can be seen by others, and I once sewed a wound on someone who had been cut with a knife, where the wound was more than a palm wide, and contained intestines twice as large, located in the abdomen.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I restored his intestines after twenty-four hours, and the wound healed in fifteen days, and I treated it, and he recovered.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the midwife had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicines; and placed old cloth on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he recovered.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you the two proper methods of sewing: take the needle, and thread it from the outer part to the inner; when it has pierced through the core straight on, leave the head of the siphon or stitch or where you threaded the needle, and make it pierce again from the inner part to the outer. The understanding of this stitching is that you sew as a tailor would sew fur, leaving the siphon on one side once, and coming back to it from another direction until the sewing is completely done.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of suturing, as Galen stated precisely, is such that no one does not perform it, who brings together the two parts naturally and applies one chief of silk thread to the other chief, in this manner: place an awl or chief of needle near, and make a single piercing through that side, and leave the two ends of the silk; then turn the awl, and make it pierce from the part from below until within, at the two ends of the silk; and this is the better method of suturing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen said this word, and no one testifies against it, that one should sew the abdomen with two needles, each having thread; and one should cast one needle from one part, and the other from another, in the manner of those who sew corruptions; and know that when the wound is within the abdomen, the suturing is more grievous than on other parts of the abdomen.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgments of other wounds: and it is that when you find the fresh wound full of blood, as the surgeon has made it bleed, so you return the intestines, and the gut. Then put on the powder promoting flesh, and if the surgeon has made it bleed, then put on any ointment that is present until the wound heals; bind the threads, let the sutures, and the catgut be sewn up; then cure the wound as with others until it is healed; and if you have no medicines, put on old cotton immediately when it begins to run pus, and change it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you have no need of any other medicine in many cases where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound does not communicate with the principal members, then it is fitting that you moisten linen lightly in tempered heat oil or in rose oil, and put it between the layers, and under the flaps; and if it feels pain or corruption in blisters, and often happens, so cleanse with black wine enemas, and especially if the corruption comes to the intestines; and puncture internally, and know that when it is the large intestine, it is easier to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine which is called "jejunum" cannot heal when it is torn, and this is due to the veins that are in it, and the subtlety of the whole body, and the proximity of its nature to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the spleen jumps from the wound, reset it behind in the same way as the intestine, while it is fresh; and if it is old and turned brown or black, then you must tie the part that is black, to prevent blood from flowing, because there are veins and arteries there; then cut what is between the ties, and place both shoulders below the part beneath the wound until over to facilitate the extraction when the spleens fall, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the bowel
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestines are torn, and the wound is small, one can restore it in some people, for I saw a man who was wounded by a lance in his right side of the stomach; the wound became ulcerated and turned into a fistula, from which emissions and wind issues; I treated it as best as I could, and continued to cauterize until it healed, and the wounds were stitched.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it heal, I doubted that the patient would have pain in his stomach; and there was no pain at all, but he remained in better condition, eating and drinking well; and some experimentors said that for a small wound in the intestines, it must be bound in such a manner: take a piece of cloth with large holes, then gather the edges of the wound, and when the cloth has opened the mouth, put it on the two edges, so that it clings to the mouth; then close the top, and this holds so that it cannot be undone, then put another piece of cloth in the same manner as before, until the wound is completely covered; then suture the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the head is burned in the intestine, and causes no harm to the patient, one can ligate the intestine with a fine thread made from the intestine of an animal in this manner: take the head of this thread of intestine that is most undamaged, then tie it at the head of this thread with a thin linen thread twisted, then put the thread on the needle and suture the intestine, and secure it at the rupture; and this way of suturing for straining is only according to hope and faith; and there is no remedy if the wound is large and wide, especially in one of the large intestines.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	of fistula or it be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it heals over time, is universally called a "fistula," and especially when it is closed and grows back.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And fistula is according to the true nodation hard and white, where one does not feel pain, and it is also hairy like a bird's feather; sometimes clear hollow, and at other times thick; sometimes little, and at other times enough; and I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that every wound which is not healed, and there is no flesh, it is only forth by one of the nine causes: namely, due to the smallness of the blood or corruption; or for its malice; or because there is hard flesh within, and over the edges, which does not allow flesh to grow; or there is too much pus; or the bones are rotten, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because the corruption is like a pestilence; or due to the nature of the region, digestion is delayed, health is late, and swelled by nature; or there are veins or bone: and I have already shown all these causes, and the signs, and the treatments with medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or it must be that I tell you about the treatment of fistula which is done by hand.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that fistula can occur in all members of the body; for there are fistulas that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or the throat, or the intestines, or the bladder, or some of the ribs, or the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; and so it is such that it affects the primary property of the body part.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all fistulas of this kind are of serious concern for health, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance; and if there is any fistula that does not come to the surface until it reaches what I have said, and you trust in its cure, and you can recognize it, take a tent of copper or iron, if the fistula is straight, hold it against it; and if the fistula is crooked, seek it with a fine tent of linen, for the linen will fold around the curvature. And if the fistula has openings and you cannot thoroughly examine it with tents, cleanse it by enema through one of the openings, for moisture conducts easily from one opening to another and cleanses them; then firmly press it with your hand that you may know if there is bone or nerve, and whether it is well healed, and ask the patient where he feels pain when pressed, and locate the exact place; and when you truly know its location, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or any of the places I have mentioned, treat it as I have said, and remove the false tissue and decayed flesh that are within; and then continue to treat it until it is healed. And if the fistula is deeply seated in the right place, you must thoroughly cauterize it as much as you can, and then insert moist cloths medicated with water, placing them up to the head of the fistula until the medicine erodes the excess that remains at the bottom; and afterward apply healing ointments containing healthy flesh until it is healed; and if it is not healed by this means, cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is decayed due to the fistula, treat it.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If a vein or nerve is not injured or the principal limbs, as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then let the king (the wound) be cleaned until all the corruption is removed, then cure the flesh around the wound until it is healed; and if it is not healed, return to binding as before: know that you have not yet reached the root of the matter. So uncover and clean thoroughly until you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then set the bone right; and if it is thus healed, that is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If the corruption is too deep, you cannot remedy it; then there is no other means but to leave it to nature. And if there is a small corrupted bone that you can extract with forceps, do so with an appropriate instrument. And if there are many bones, extract them all, leaving none behind. And if moisture opposes this, and there is neither error nor fear, cut away the moisture and flesh, and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if thou canst not remove them within an hour, put upon the wound something that corrupts pus, and let it remain until the flesh is corrupted throughout the bone, and then the bones will be easier to reset; and if it is a large bone, such as of the leg or thigh, reset only the corruption until the blackness is entirely removed, then restore the wound; and if there is much corrupt part, reaching the marrow of the bone; thou must scrape and cut all down to the corruption, and then cure until it be joined. And I will tell thee of a fistula that happened in a man's leg, so that thou mayest take example and help in thy work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was a young man around XXX years of age, who had pain in his leg from a cause within the body, such that the matter came to the leg and it swelled with a large abscess. There was no clear reason to open it; but the monks, out of their folly, opened it so much that the abscesses were opened, and much matter flowed out, and became a fistula. Many wounds appeared from which great amounts of pus and moisture came from the body; and many monks applied treatments for over two years, and there was no wise man in the art of hands until I was called. I saw his leg and the medicines with which he was treated, and what flowed from the holes caused a great stench; and the skin of the young man turned red, and had a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these holes, and then searched all the holes, and found that one went against the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hastened then, and cut into one of the holes enough to discover a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and perforated, with corruption extending to the inner bone; I saw what appeared from the corrupted bone, and thought there was no other corruption, but what I removed; and began to restore the wound with medicines for a long time, but could not heal it; then I began again, and exposed the bone as before, and found the corruption continuing in the bone, and sawed it out, and pondered how to mend the place; but I could not do so until I cut into about a palm's breadth of the bone, which was completely removed, then restored with medicines; and it was healed and quickly sewn, and there was no need to restart the work except for the weakness of the patient, who could not bear it, and out of fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the bleeding often occurs during evacuation, but it was completely healed, and in the place of the bone a hard scar formed, and it was well disposed and had no harm or adverse effect at all, neither externally nor internally.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this manner: take a ligature, and draw it tightly around the end of the bone that protrudes, and command someone to extend it upwards; place another larger ligature of linen over the scar above the bone, and tighten the ends, so that you pull the corrupt flesh away from the bone, and uncover the flesh at the site where you wish to operate without letting the bone blacken the flesh; put a stick or board under the bone to help remove the corruption; it should be done as much as can be seen and felt of the corruption, and also again another time.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or part thereof, uncover the flesh completely; then place a hot coal under it, and afterwards stretch the corruption from one part to another with strips of skin as long as the corruption, as we have said; and if the corruption is at the joint, cut out the corrupted joint, and replace the bone on the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, there is no old custom but to use copper; and if the corruption is near the knife of the hand or the knife of the foot, it is very strong, but still you must inquire about that corruption as to how it appears; and cleanse it in all ways possible, but so that the vein or nerve does not oppose you; and know that the incisor and skin strips for coppering these bones are many, according to the alignment of the bones and their appearance, and their size and subtlety, and their strength and weakness; and for this reason, it is necessary to prepare an instrument appropriate to each form of work; and know that the work will show you the tool you need, according to the knowledge of this art and the testimony of the methods of diseases; so consider the tool you need according to what is fitting.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The shoulder dislocates either internally or externally; and when you have medicated the corruption by cleaning with medicines, and it does not improve, then you must treat that limb until the site where the corruption arises, so that the patient escapes from death, or from the greater malice of the limb's defect; and the signs are that the limb turns black, seeming as if it were burned by fire, and after the blackness comes, the corruption spreads from limb to limb throughout the body; so hasten the treatment, and if it is due to the sting of certain venomous beasts, such as sea scorpion and viper and similar, and the corruption is at the head of the arm, then treat it, and do not give it space to spread to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes as far as the hand, fix at the joint, so that the corruption does not come as far as the arm; and if it comes to the arm, cut at the elbow; and if it passes the elbow, it is death, and there is no remedy except according to its quantity of virtue; and thus do when the corrosion comes or pierces: if it comes to the first joint, fix after the other joint; and if it pierces, fix the whole piercing; and if it rises in the leg, fix at the joint below the knee; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other means but to let the patient die; and the manner of fixing or healing the limb is that you tie it above and below, extend some ministers one line down, and others ministers one line up, and you cut the flesh which is between the two lines at a spathe width, so that the bone be uncovered; then fix or heal, and put a linen bandage on each side, so that the sinew does not touch the healthy bone, and cause another lesion and abscess to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if the bleeding comes when you work, cauterize the limb hastily, or apply some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is completed, and bind the injured member with an adequate bandage, and cure it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man: he had a dark spot that seemed like fire burn, and this corrosion came first on his big toe of the foot, so much so that it encompassed all the foot; and when the doctor saw the corruption, he hastened to treat the foot, and was healed; soon after, the same corrosion returned on his toe of the hand, and he came to me, and I placed reflectors after purifying the body, but the corrosion did not cease; he asked that I amputate his hand, and I refused, for I had hope of reflecting the matter; I also feared that if I cut his hand, he would die, since the strength of a man was weak; he became desperate and returned to his land, hastening to treat his hand, and was healed; and I did not recount this story except for when one needs another such thing.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Sometimes an abscess arises in the flesh, and stays so long that it gathers great masses of pus; then it rots and perforates, and the pus leaps out, leaving the bones visible, as if they were vessels; the skin above is as delicate as torn silk, and does not reach to the bone, nor to the nerve, and such a disease is called "sain" and is not called "fistula"; but if it extends so far that it reaches the bone in full length, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is such that you peel away all of this skin, especially when it is delicate, as if it were torn silk; and it does not rupture because of its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you find that the skin is peeling and the corruption is not deep, and the skin is thick with flesh, cure it with a medicated enema in this way: first, observe whether the swelling is large and the pus has a foul smell; then prepare an Egyptian medicine as follows: take aloe, oil of roses, and litharge, equal parts, and boil them together in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey; then use it according to your need, mixing it with water and honey, and apply it to the swelling, pressing on the abscess; let the medicine remain for two hours, then express and remove it. Do this repeatedly until the swelling is reduced and the pus is removed. If such medicine is not available, you can use an enema of ash water; take ashes from vine branches, pour water over them, strain the liquid, and apply it as an enema. Continue until you see that the swelling has been thoroughly cleansed. If the patient cannot tolerate this or if neither the Egyptian nor the ash water medicine works, prepare a honey and vinegar enema with some litharge; or use honey and wine, where the honey has properties to cleanse and wash, and the wine helps the abscess rupture. After doing this, if you find that the swelling is thoroughly cleansed, apply a plaster that promotes flesh growth in it, using rose oil and wine for preparation. Or apply other medicines and ointments whose properties I have mentioned when discussing ointments; if the opening of the breast is small and the enema cannot enter, enlarge it slightly with a sharp object, and insert a tent of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it fits properly. If the wound is too large, close it off so that only enough space remains for the enema to pass through. And if the opening from which pus comes is on top, apply the ointment or more below where it is located.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	When the bow is fully drawn, do not allow it to release any flesh; and if you cannot cut through the skin as you see fit, arrange it in such a way that the bow runs as low as possible where it is. For when the bow is fully drawn, do not allow it to release any flesh and if you cannot cut through the skin as you see fit, arrange it in such a manner: that the bow runs lightly downward, and leave nothing of the bow; and take consolidative medicines to put over the sound part, and keep them under a linen cloth that covers all the sound part; then cut with force toward the hole in the chest slightly wider than the first, for ointment should be applied underneath the other cloth according to the size of the hole, and place it over the hole in the healthy part to ease the bow, and do not remove the large cloth outside until after many days once; and that which is beneath the hole in the chest, often remove to release the bow, and know what flows from the bow, whether it is venom or little or enough, or digested or undigested; and take care if the patient feels pain or numbness, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in such a manner and you see the nature that stands over the hole in the healthy part, know that the breasts are now expanding, and approach health; and then loosen it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you open the wound, change the other cloth, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast expels undigested bow (a term likely referring to a kind of food or substance) after many days, know that the breast does not decay.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons cut after long time, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	For it is in men who have delayed healing of their wounds for a long time, and in those who do the opposite; and if undigested food suddenly comes from the breast after many days, know that the breast does not decay; and if the breast delays healing and is far away, apply drying medicines in substance and dry in virtue, such as anointing diaphoretic, for there is a large part of vitriol, and it is the last medicine; take diaphoretic ointment, and make it with rose oil, and pour it with equal wine in substance; then let it infuse and use it; and the same thing works better when cooked grease is used instead, when diaphoretic ointment is not present, or you take myrrh and frankincense, and grind them on honey while they are on fire; and then wrap them in a cloth, and place them on the breast, and sometimes administer long-liver roots, which are as fine as flour of wheat and centory; and use simples or compound remedies: grind them, make powder, and put it on the honey as I have said, and use it; and if the cure is prolonged and not cured by this treatment, know that the corruption is complete and affects the bone, or hard members, or ligaments; so treat the fistula of the cure, as we have said before.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	of the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Pannaritis is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the finger or foot, or sometimes it may arise in other toes; and when it becomes matured and is not attended to, it comes to a head, boils, and pours out pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and sometimes even all of it; and causes corrosion extending to the bone, causing painful inflammation of the finger, with the color turning foul.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, then you must cut away all the remaining nail, then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauteries are much great help if the bone is sound, and the nail is sound; and if the nail presses upon the flesh and begins to prick it, and the blisters, then you must put a cloth under the nail that does not touch the flesh, and let the blisters rise up, and cut away that subtle and light flesh, and apply medicines burning and corrosive for removing all of it; then cure with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut it out forcefully, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal; and if you see the bone decayed, cut it away as previously mentioned, then cure it until it is healed; and if it is infected and swells up, and it feels great pain, you must first cleanse it; then trim the nail with a sharp spatule cutting across, making sure the cuts do not come to the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if this happens, apply something above that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain comes from the ear of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	Li must adjust those that arise in the hands of some men by accident and are either all fleshy, or have a division or bones, and sometimes an nail, and none of them arise at the root of the joint, or the birth is in some of our bones.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	That which arises in any bone of the hand does not move, and that which arises at the joint of the hand, by accident, may move; the size of that which is fleshy is light, in a manner such: cut it at its root with a broad scalpel.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	That which arises at the root of the joint is grievous to treat: if you hold it with copper.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In that which is born or must be done last, it is necessary that you cut the flesh roundly until the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate tool, and cure it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The symptoms that arise from these injuries come either by birth, or suddenly from a wound, or by burning with fire, or similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	It is necessary that you cut that sore, so that it heals according to its natural form; then place between two moist cloths or soft drapes in olive oil, preventing them from adhering; or you place between two fine pieces of linen, until the edges are sewn as they should be.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If the symptoms come with either of these two using the palm [of the hand], cut that sore as necessary.
des vils	of the wretched
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	When his veins are swollen enveloped with excessive melancholic humours, coming from many members of the body; and more occurs in legs of those who walk and work and carry burdens than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you must administer one time purgation of colic, and then heal him with the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The iron cure is according to two methods: one is where they cauterize and cut or let the black blood flow; and the other method is that you open the vein and let it bleed completely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The cutting is done in this manner: first, heat the leg with hot water greatly, until the flesh becomes tender. Then, stretch the patient's leg from below the knee to the part just above the kneecap; next, incise the vein at one place, or two, or three, making a wide cut. Then lift and let the black blood flow by hand from one end to the other, until as much blood has flowed as the virtues of the patient can bear; then bind it, and instruct the patient to dye his skin with meat juices that seep black colic. And repeat the evacuation and healing when the veins are full, and benefit the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The treatment is conducted in this manner: realign the leg of the patient, if there is much hair, then immerse it in a bath. Then raise the leg with warm water until it turns red and the veins swell; and if you do not have a bath, heat it by fire, and place a cloth along the length of the vein from the lower part of the knee to just above the ankle; then open the skin inch by inch, and burn the vein on each side until it appears when touched; and it will appear red and black, and when it enters or exits the skin it seems like a white cord; then place a cloth underneath, until it is lifted from the skin, and then let it down gently, then place another cloth above three fingers; then burn the skin over the vein until it appears, then lift it to the cloth as you did before, and let it down on another inch, just like you did first; then cut a different size, or more if needed, then lift it, and cut at the toe part, then draw and lift until reaching the second size; then remove by size in size until it is all out, then cut; and if you cannot pull and lift it, place a needle with a strong double thread underneath, and tie and draw, and place underneath the cloth, and turn your hand from side to side until it comes out; and keep it from cutting, for if it cuts, you cannot pull or lift it, and this harms the patient; and when you have treated all of it, then put moistened wool soaked in wine and rose oil over the area of the wound, and treat until it heals.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the vein is twisted and tangled together, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly, but do not cut through it completely; and pull it as we have previously said.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The form of iron with which one cuts the vein is curved, and does not cut completely, so as not to cut the vein; and it is of large curvature, for if it were fine, it would cut the vein, but it is large as we have said, and this is its form.
de la voinne civile	of the common vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is interwoven in the legs, in warm parts where no herbs or trees grow, and in earth where there is no moisture; and by chance it may arise elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens from putrefaction that comes beneath the skin, as serpents and worms come within the body, intertwining between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that there comes a very great inflammation in the leg, then change the eyes, and begin the vein to issue forth, as one root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the shoulder is opened, it covines that you envelop around a piece of lint one and a half to two inches long, and the wick, and leave the lint hanging on the leg, and every time there is none at the end, you envelop around the lint and the wick; and if it is too long, you cut a part of it, and envelop the remainder, and do not cut it near its root, so that it remains entirely issued; for if you cut it, it returns to the flesh, and causes an abscess, putrefaction, or tumor; because of this matter, it covines that it be treated little by little until full, and nothing remain or core; and sometimes this vein, when it is treated from five inches long, or ten, and a rod's length, came to me, from which it issued ten inches long, and when you cut it, you insert one raisin or pertus, and pierce it thoroughly so that all issues out; and let the matter inside be drained, and administer on the tumor medicines preventing putrefaction any day, then cure it as the abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes there are small wounds, and especially when they appear in the joint of the foot or hand, and it comes much from punctures; cure them therefore as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	vers which arise between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "cattle boil," because it often happens to cattle, and it is a small worm which arises between skin and flesh, and goes upward and downward throughout the body, and one feels it well as it travels from limb to limb, until it reaches the skin where it goes, and exits forcefully; and it is nourished by putrefaction of some humors, such as come from serpents and worms and ascarids or intestines; and doubt arises about its malice, for when it goes through the body, and it climbs to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens often.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it being treated and drained, one cannot force it when it goes: therefore, you must tie the limb above and below with a strong thread tightly, then cover over and drain it out, and if the pus is fully present in the flesh, and you do not find it, cauterize it with fire until it dies; and the greatest harm it does is that it will run into the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming or close to the eye, restrain strongly beneath it, then cover over, and drain it out; and the patient must use cleansing of the body with medicinal solutions for foul humors, and beware of meats causing putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from windiness
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and is a pain that comes into some members, and then moves from member to member; and I have seen those whom I tell this.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was called to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and shortly after, I saw it rise as if a worm on the shoulder, faster than anything, like live silver when it is cut from another; the pain left that one and sank into the shoulder, and then a little later spread throughout the body until it came to the other arm; then she told me that it returned repeatedly within her body, as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I wondered greatly how it moved in this manner from member to member, for I had never seen this disease in such a way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Firstly, I had wished that they truly wanted to move their pain away from the head to another part of the body, but I did not wish it as much as I saw in the woman; and I thought that this was because the woman had a solid body, with veins uncovered, and because these winds were constrained and appeared not according to this reason to those who have soft bodies and moist veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see the treatment of this disease, and the patient feels this pain, if it appears to you as we have said, scrape away the pus above and below hastily, and then clean until those constrained winds at the site are gone; and cauterize the area. And if you do not see it with your own eyes, treat it with substances that expel winds, such as bitter pills and blistering herbs, and others like them.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows come in various types, according to their shapes and the parts of the body where they lodge.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of their shape is that some have large points, and small ones, and feathery ones, and those fused together; and some have two angles, and those with tongues, and some with pieces. Those which lodge in any limb do so in different ways: sometimes in a principal member such as the brain, heart, liver, lungs, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it lodges in any part of these limbs, and the signs of death, which I will tell you later, appear: then you must be wary of extracting this arrow, for death often follows such dispositions; and when none of these bad signs are apparent, and the arrow is not fully embedded, you should extract it and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the head when the arrow strikes and pierces the bone, and starts a swelling which is above the head, is when there is scotomia and stiffness and vertigo and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasms and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and sometimes it is without force from the nostrils or ears; and sometimes affects speech and voice; and starts a wound with moist white discharge seeming like a pulse, and also as if boiled flesh; and if this sign appears to you, keep from treatment, and extract the arrow if it is there.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the arrow when it strikes or pierces the heart is that it is near the left nipple, and feels as if it were embedded in something hard, not empty; sometimes the arrow moves like a pulse, and brings dark blood, and coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: then know without doubt that death ensues.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of the arrow that never left the body is that without any drops of pus it jumps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and breathes loudly and warms up.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow falls into the cover of the foot, it affects the small bones; it causes great pain and breathlessness; and all the limbs from the shoulders move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow falls on the stomach, by chance it jumps from the wound with some undigested meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow falls on the belly, and it jumps out leaving no hay along the intestinal tract, there is no hope in the treatment, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine sprays out and stops flowing, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is mortal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, as the face and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the humerus and the thigh and the legs, and similar limbs, are safe according to many dispositions.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or the artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because you would do otherwise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to a man that an arrow fell into the nose at its root: I drew it out, and pulled it from the other side under the ear's fat, and he was cured without any difficulty.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And draw out an arrow that fell into the grease of the eye beneath the paper, and the arrow was embedded, and could not be reached except by the point toward the wood, and the arrow was as large as a Turkish bow, light as iron without ears; the wound healed, and no bad accidents befell him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And drew out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arab with ears: I extracted the barbs, and drew it out carefully, and the Christian healed.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And drew out an arrow from the man, who was either in his chest or abdomen, and thought he would die; and after thirty days had passed, his condition did not change. I incised the arrow, treated it, and extracted it, and suffered no bad accidents.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you wish to treat a man who has an arrow fall or hit him, and the wound was sewn up; and the arrow remained inside, and did not change its natural position, nor caused any harm in any of its natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And if you wish to treat another man, who had an arrow fall into his face, and the wound was sewn up; and remained thus suffering great pain; and many other similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And treat an arrow that fell upon a man of the king's household, which struck among the joints, and was slightly inclined to the right side; and the arrow was completely pierced. I was called for the treatment after it fell three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	If I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I treated it with a fine thread, and did not feel it; yet there was a puncture and pain beside his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the tip of the arrow. I applied a plaster of atratifactive and digestive ingredients on his eye, because the eyes did not swell; and the eye appeared to be affected by the arrow.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I applied the plaster for several days, and redressed the wound again. The patient remained in this state for a long time, until he felt the arrow within his nose on the following day; and he told me this.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied a corrosive medicine to the wound for several days until it was open. I tested it and felt the head of the arrow decaying in the eye; then I continued to treat the opening of the wound with that corrosive medicine until the head of the arrow became clearly visible; and passed through well within four months, and then cleared the wound so that I could use forceps to extract it from both sides, but it would not come out. Then I continued to experiment and devise methods with various instruments until I successfully extracted it using properly made forceps on one day, as described in the form at the end of this chapter, as I treated it and restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the surgeon judges that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored: I will restore it, and the wound was sutured, and the patient was completely healed.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or have I told you about the quality of extracting certain arrows, so that you apply your cure to what I do not say, for books cannot take in everything; but wise masters compare on very little, and on what is present and lacking, find nine operations, and nine instruments, for the removal of foreign things that occur in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows are in the members where they are stuck in two ways: either by the place where they enter, or from another side; and the one that enters through the place where it enters is an arrow piercing the flesh, and is not stuck more than once now.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not come out now, let it stay until the flesh rots away entirely, and then the issue will come out; and also if it is embedded in the bone and cannot come out, let it stay for some days, changing it each day; and then it will come out, and if it does not come out, pierce through to all the innermost parts with a fine needle, until the flesh inside is widened, and then draw it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is embedded in the bone of the head and goes just to one of the brain's ventricles, or any of the conditions I have said to the patient: do not treat it at all, but let it be until it becomes equal after some days, for if the arrow comes just to the syrinx, it is death.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is pierced only into the bone and not to the surface, and the patient remains without any bad accidents for several days, then the means of extracting it should be used.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is deeply pierced and cannot be withdrawn forcefully, then I administer tar externally, as I have said; then treat the wound until it heals.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is embedded in the flesh so that it cannot be seen, then seek it thoroughly throughout the body; and if you feel it, extract it with an appropriate instrument; and if you cannot due to the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is no bone, nerve, or vein, then enlarge the wound until it is large enough; and extract the arrow if possible, and if there are feathers attached to the arrow that it holds, remove the flesh embedded on both sides up to the part you can reach, and then break or bend the feathers of the arrow so you can extract it; and take great care not to break the arrow, as you would extract it more easily.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, let it be until the flesh between the bones becomes rotten, then remove it, for the extraction is inflammation.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the bleeding contrary to your expectation makes you do otherwise, follow what we have said about the treatment in this chapter; and guard against incising the nerve or the vein, and move it as you can to extract the arrow without peril, either quickly or slowly, firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow fell upon him, for this is the greatest help that can be given, and if you cannot do so, then place him according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another direction, or where it penetrates something, or the skin is swollen so one can see or feel it: incise there, as deep as the forceps can grasp, and then extract it: if it is now stuck.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand roundly until it enters the bone, and enlarge the bone, then pull it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, leave it for now, and then restart the extraction until it comes out; and if the shaft of the arrow is there, push the entire shaft; and if the shaft falls, and you see need to administer a thrust, then apply the tool point entering in, so that the tip of the arrow enters into the tool; and then push, and if the arrow is stuck, then push the tool with the point entering in, to facilitate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is stuck, you must cut all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as necessary.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow falls or pierces in the belly or bladder or side, and it is near, and you can reach it, then extract it; and guard against reaching the vein or the nerve, and then extract it, and then suture the wound if necessary; and treat until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tweezers used for extracting arrows is similar to the beak of a bird, and here is its form:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And there are many kinds of them: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the needle used for piercing is also similar to the feather of a bird, to push at the tip of the arrow, as shown in its form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the form of the tongs for putting out and for knowing so is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of the common veins of the body
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	The veins through which one is cured are thirty-one, of which sixteen are principal, namely: two jugulars which are behind the ears and called "herbech"; and the two arteries which are in the temples and visible; and the veins that are in the lacrimal glands of the eyes, called "aspires"; and the vein that runs along the forehead; and the vein that is on the nose; and the two subclavian veins which are at the neck; and the two veins that are on the upper lips above the mouth, these are the veins called "augeherich"; and the veins that are beneath the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins from which one draws blood commonly are: in each arm: one is the cephalic vein, and it lies on the left side, and they call it "vein of the head"; and the median is called "fase," and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic veins, and they call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic is on the right side, and they call it "vein of the belly," and it lies over the flexile, and it is this one from which bloodletting is done, which clearly appears above the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	The savattel vein is the vein that lies between the auricular and annular spaces, and it has two veins; in the leg and foot are three veins: one of them is below the curve of the pouch on the left side, and the second sophene vein which is at the ankle on the right side; and the vein called "nese" that is in the ankle on the other side; and in the other leg are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The treatment of veins that are behind the ears helps with old catarrhs and migraines; and the quality of the vein, as I say, is that you reset the patient's head, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then fix the patient's neck to a screw so that the two veins appear behind the ears in two loops dependent on the head: hold them with your thumb, and where you feel the pulse under your thumb, prick it; then take the lancet, put it beneath the vein until the bone, lift your hand up the entire vein, cut and remove the skin and the vein very deeply twice through, and let the blood flow out until you see it; then close it up tightly until it is healed; and I have already said the incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, is good for migraines from old age, stiffness, and long-term eye strain, and for the body's watery tears in the eyes; and the quality of this treatment is as I say: and it is that the patient clenches his neck so much that the two veins are clearly visible; and feels a pulse under your thumb, then sighs deeply; then lift the heart above the vein to the top with your index finger, insert the lancet underneath, lift the vein upwards, and the cloth, as you did in the other veins, and let the blood flow according to your need; then release the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, then put on a cotton pad; and then form it properly, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken of them regarding their tying and extraction, or the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The health of the vein on the forehead is as important as that of the cephalic for ancient diseases of the face, and for migraines, and for redness; and its quality is such that diseases draw their cord by twisting, until the vein appears; then take the instrument called "fosseur", whose form is described here:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point on the vein, and press with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you see; then release the disease from its hold, and bind the vein until it is sound, and never work with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	In all ways, it is not fitting that the flames be too hot; and let the vein be transversely positioned, for the bone is nearby, and by chance the flame might break when it is fine.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The health of the two veins that are in the eyelids helps with the eyes, and with hives, and with redness, and with the inner part of the eye, and with diseases of the face; and the qualities of their health are such that the patient draws his coltis (a kind of worm or louse) out by twisting at some point, as was said before; then the savior, and let the savior through the traverse be a bit long like a flame a bit wide, for there is no flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flame is subtle, by chance it breaks; then cause the blood to flow as much as you need, and then tie with cotton, and tie well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The health of the vein of the nose is good for water and soda frostbite, and diseases of the face, such as migraines and redness that come to the face, especially when it is old; and the qualities of the health are such that the patient draws his coltis (a kind of worm or louse) out by twisting at some point with his left hand, and takes a subtle long flame, and sticks it between the lip in the space which is between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well initially, and the blood will begin to flow now; and do not go too far to perfection, and cause the blood to flow as much as your need requires, then tie it for a night, because it is very quickly restored; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The health of the two glands aids in narrowing the larynx, and in the beginning of mixture, and much disease, and pettiness, and corrosion, and herpes, and estiomenes; and the quality of the health is that the patient expels his throat from under one and the other, as we have said; and let the master be above the patient's head, and the patient lie on the seat, then make a cut along the vein somewhat widely, then draw off the blood moderately, or as need requires; then do the same elsewhere in another vein, then untie the bandage, and press moderately all the veins, so that the patient does not strangle; and leave it until morning, that the wound may heal.
de la sainie des leivres	Of the health of the glands
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The veins of the lips above help in swelling in the mouth, and to corruption of gums, and fissures of lips, and around the nose and between the lips.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the qualities of the vein are such that they make the patient sit facing you, and press his lip as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left, and you recognize them by their blackness, and by the fact that around them are fine black veins: cut both of them, and if you do not recognize them, and you are in doubt, cut the largest from each side, and similarly treat the two veins above and below, for they are of the same manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the health beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The health of the veins that are beneath the tongue helps after the health of the cephalic vein, and this is in narrowing the throat, and diseases of the uvea, and diseases of the mouth; and the quality of the sainie is that the patient's pain subsides before your eyes in the sunlight, and it eases the tongue, and you look beneath on each side a black vein: therefore both are healthy, and do not go too much for perfect health, because beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the tongue that are commonly treated can be healed in two ways: either by pricking with a sharp thorn or with a fine olive stick, which is called "anesil"; and they are large and fine according to the size and narrowing of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the flint flame is much renowned, and is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it has need to open veins filled with large amounts of apparent blood, and contain large amounts of thick blood; and this is the form of the olive flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	and is more pointed subtle, and is for cleansing subtle veins, or where there is thin yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The cleansing of the basilica vein, which is one of these veins, helps diseases that are below the throat, and in the collarbone, and in the ribs, and in the abdomen; and it is suitable for the surgeon who needs to bleed and avoid the artery beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if it cuts the artery, and bleeding comes, then it must be stopped as I have said; and one should not press with fire, but cut as with a knife.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilica does not open clearly, then you must extract it and replace another; or if you want any hair from it, or you wish to insert a vein into the arm: it opens clearly; and cut with the fire knife as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you wish to know the place of the wound, then you must extract the arm, touching the place until you feel the pulse; then mark the place with a needle, and then tie the arm, and incise the vein with the fire knife; and beware that you do not wound the artery when you see the place swollen, for this is the artery: avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see bulging upwards as urine from a child, and the veins are red and thin, know that it is blood vessels: then hasten, and place your finger lengthwise, then remove your finger when the veins have stopped, for this often happens; if the patient's arm is injured, leave it thus, and do not move the patient until he is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the veins are not stopped, and it hurts you, and the medicines are not at hand, cut the artery if it appears, for the head of the arrow is there; stop the veins.
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a bark from the fig tree, split it, and take one half and tie it well just until the other day; if the veins stop, that is good; if not, treat the wound as we have said, using powders to stop bleeding; but the dressings are not grievous for many conditions of the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The vein in the middle helps to draw blood from above the head and below the body, because it is composed of basilique and cephalique, as we have said; and for the patient it is necessary to guard against the nerve beneath, and if too closely punctured, and he finds the nerve, and it swells and the health is damaged, and by chance cannot heal; and this nerve often appears, and if it does not appear in some people due to its subtlety, it is fitting that you anesthetize the part with the instrument before puncturing; and avoid the nerve as much as possible.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, cut along its length.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The cephalique vein helps, drawing blood from the head and aiding the eyes; it is necessary to puncture with olive oil flame or myrtle oil flame, for this is the safest of all veins, as it does not have any nerve or artery beneath it.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	Firstly, you should seek the lightest weight stone, and do not harm anything if it does not work the first time, and then repeat; and by chance, the stones swell in some people, when it does not work the first time, but it does not cause any harm.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the sinew is according to your thought.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about sinew is that sinew should be drawn only to preserve health and to avoid future diseases; and the sinew should be taken from one of the three veins: namely, cephalic, femoral, and basilic; and it should be done at the beginning of prayers on bended knees, and in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear; and it should be done on the first or third day after two or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The medicine that is administered for diseases has no fixed hour determined, but when need is of day or nourishment, at all hours and in all times; and it is not fitting to medicate children up to fourteen years, nor women with child from four months up to seven.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Old people who have passed sixty years should not be medicated.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when any wish to be medicated, in whatever manner it may be, it is fitting that he purge the intestines with a light enema if there is much fluid retained, so that the veins do not attract from the intestines the superfluous putrid matter harmful to the principal limbs; nor should one medicate those who are too much salted by meat, nor those who are drunk, whether they be strong in drink, nor those who are dropsy cases. And if one wishes to medicate after colic attack, vomiting, and evacuation of the belly, or increase of frequency of intercourse, work, staying awake, fasting, or those who have lost much of their strength by arm or body injury; then with subtlety of the humors, if the vein is large, due to meat, drink, and medicines, if you have the power; then before an enema, if any such thing does not prevent it, for subtletizing the blood, and one medicates from the vein between the toes into the third toe, as we have said; and on that day avoid work, labor, and lust, and similar things. Be bound and joined, and let the medicator be higher than whom you are medicating, and rub your arm two or three times, then extract the thread moderately above the midpoint, for when it is too tight or loose, blood cannot flow; and then rub the vein with your hands until the veins swell, and feel them. Then anoint the medicator's finger with a little old oil, then place his left hand just below the vein over which he wishes to medicate, ensuring the vein does not get injured by the needle.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flow as strings in the veins, and some that are full of windiness, such that when one applies fire to them, they recoil from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus one belongs to those; and if he opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, for which reason the physicians must be cautious in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens the first time, that is good; but if not, he should attempt to open it again slightly below or above that place, if the limb is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the limb is swollen and the patient feels discomfort, let him rest for one or two days without binding his arm: perhaps abscesses will form. Do not enter a bath, but proceed with the operation if he wishes; and if the opening is small, or the skin is thin and you doubt whether there is as much blood as you see, apply the flame directly to that opening; work quickly, while the limb is swollen; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the joint swollen, do not begin the healing anew, and place a bit of oil-juice on it, for it lightens the body from blood, and makes the oil's juice move in this joint; thus administer oil-juice in each healing where you heal veins, to stop the course of blood; and the same is done with triacle and bovine gall when placed on the joint; so subtlely do the juices part when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there comes a large abscess, which happens often, even when it is not healed the first time or when the opening of the vein is small, you should hasten and place a wet sponge in cold water and warm salt on the joint for an hour; and you must do this after the blood from the vein has drained. And if any black or green color remains on the joint after several days, it does no harm; and if you see, place something of aloes or myrrh set in calamus, resin, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often an abscess and appearance on the flesh of the basilica: therefore place your hand there, and if you find the area soft under the pressure of the hand, that is the bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, do not apply anything of what we have said, for chance may cut into an artery; but make it a dry poultice to harden the area, and then treat with other remedies until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw from each of the humors according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is fitting for him who is full and strong, and has need of blood extraction, that one make a larger wound, and let the flints be wide; and for him who is weak, do the opposite, and let it heal little but often, and should heal by cutting across, not by pricking; and this manner of healing is saved from running of blood and compression of nerve, and is better than long or large wounds.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for him whose body requires nourishment during the healing, it is fitting to give soft bread soaked in pomegranate juice; if he is heated, draw off three or four times blood. And if he has a cold constitution, eat before the healing soft bread soaked in honey syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if it swells in the side, after the discharge of much blood, it is fitting that he inhales broth of flesh and fragrant subtle syrup, and uses the other things we have said in the division or chapter on syncope for the evacuation of vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if it sees fit to let the arm swell and swell again, when he is weakened by great swelling, it is fitting that he be made to swell a little and a little, according to the quantity of its virtue continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And who sees fit to let the arm swell after the first swelling, and if it has strong currents, he should be made to swell seven hours after the first swelling, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever is to be healed from another part, must be healed on the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	For there is much blood within the body which is already heated, and it brings fever; so it must be treated by drawing a great quantity, and widening the puncture until it chiefelems with pus; then when you reward all the conditions of healing, and place your hand on his pulse as he heals, that death not come in lieu of chiefelemling, and this happens many times, when the healers are negligent; and must not when you see release the arm, and make the blood issue the second time, and the puncture is closed, that you press firmly upon it; nor if it is crooked, that you extend the arm hastily, for that would be ill; but let it be until it heals the second time; or thou applyest at the point of the flame, until the one who is congealed to the puncture from the vein issues forth, and put there a little salt moistened in water, and press lightly upon it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not compress it until the abscess subsides.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if it is necessary to treat the blood a second time, let the vein be in that same place, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is treated in place of the vein on the hand because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the method of treating it is that the patient should hold their hand in hot water until the fingers turn red; then tie it moderately so that the vein is clearly visible, and now siphon the blood from the middle, neither from the wide part nor the long part; and make the punctures large, and siphon the blood close to the joint of the hand, and if there is no blood coming out, put the hand back in hot water and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough; and if it is in winter, do not repeatedly dip the hand in hot water, as it should be used more in winter than in summer; and siphoning from this vein is safer than from any other veins, for there are no arteries or nerves.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The health of the salvation of the right hand is good for all diseases of the liver, and this is the manner: stretch the hand, and pour in hot water, until the veins are swollen, if one sees them; and if the hand is crooked, and if you correct it completely, then you do not grieve anything; and do not go too fully perfect, for the nerve are beneath all naked of flesh, and then put the hand in hot water, if the hand is frozen in the wound, and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have drawn enough blood as needed, put a piece of oil-soaked cloth on the vein to seal it quickly, and do this for each finger.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The health of the thing in the left hand is good for the disease of the mouse (likely referring to a type of abscess or swelling), and do everything as I have said for the right hand.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The illnesses of the spleen are useful for all diseases that are beneath the body, such as liver diseases, retention of flowers, and disease of the reins, and thighs and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of its medicine are that diseases expel stones in hot water, and rub on the vein until it swells, and tie above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot much rain goes; therefore heal or a larger vein, or at the ankle, which moves well.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you heal it on the foot, beware of the nerves beneath, and heal through them as when cutting; let the flambes be asbestos.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the stone cannot come out, place the foot in the water, and let the vein drain well.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the stone is needed for the first time, begin again the second time slightly above it, because the leeches are salted; nor doubt of nerve, as we have said, and do the same with the sponge on the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The leech for the sciatic vein is at the ankle of the stronger side, and its stone is worth for the pain in the hip, when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its stone is such that the patient should enter the bath, and squeeze four times above the ankle, for otherwise the vein will not open; and if it opens, apply the stone in all ways you can, and by crossing it; and move it much as you can, for the leech is loose, and it is very responsive to manual application.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not find it, trace any vein from the front or back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves; and let the bleeding continue as much as you see, and then undo the bandage, and place a cotton pad and bind it; it is now healthy.
des sainies de ventouse	Of the suction cups
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Suction cups are made of horns, or of iron, or of glass; and suction is performed in two ways: either by piercing and drawing blood, or without piercing.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this suction without piercing is done in two ways: either by fire or without fire; and the suction performed by piercing and drawing blood is done at fourteen places on the body, of which one is placed at the neck; another is inserted into the armpit; two are placed on both sides of the neck; a suction cup below the chin; a suction cup on both shoulders; a suction cup on the hips; suction cups between both arms; suction cups on both legs; suction cups on both ankles; and fire suction does not draw blood, but only minor veins that are scattered in the flesh, and for this reason, it weakens none at all, as one would do with a vein from a vein puncture; nor is it appropriate to administer it by fire or without fire in any disease that comes from overfullness, until the entire body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if by necessity of diseases it is proper to bloodlet, or for custom, we will perform it each hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and between times; for there are such as, when they have need to bloodlet, have a heavy head; and there are such who find fullness and redness in their face, and on their head, and at the neck, and darkness before their eyes; and such as find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongue, and draw blood; and there are such who think, and see by vision of blood and pain and death and similar things.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially between the hours of the month, we command them to bloodlet after three hours of the day.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The sinew of the muscle aids in the weakening of the head’s chief... that comes to them, and it is not fitting that this be after the evacuation of all the body; and this ventilation is at the site of the sinew of the cephalic, and it is not fitting that those who are of cold complexion use it, or who have catarrh, for it does them much harm; because of this it is not fitting that the watchmen use it, nor those who have or chief cold diseases.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And he who often heals with it becomes forgetful, and because of this, it is necessary to place the suction cup a bit lower due to the forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventilation at the neck is at the site of the sinew of the head and the basilica, and because of this, it is effective for narrowing of the vein, and cutting of the channel of the subclavian, and soon, and for fullness; and it should be applied only briefly, for if it holds too firmly, it causes forgetfulness or stomach and heart issues.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The wind movements over the second ribs of the neck cause pain in the head, eye disease, and migraines, and stranglement, and pain at the roots of the teeth, and is located in the healthy part of the basilica; and you must instruct the surgeon that he should extend his hand when placing, not cut the artery, and avoid hemorrhages.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The wind movements around the chin cause mouth diseases, and gum decay, and similar illnesses that are in the mouth; and are located in the healthy parts of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The wind movements in the shoulders cause illness that comes from heat and congestion.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The wind movements in the groins are as significant as those of the three veins of the arm, because they draw blood from these large veins; and instruct the surgeon not to cut too closely to them, for the tissues are bare of flesh, and one can feel the nerves and arteries.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping device placed on the buttock treats hemorrhoids from below and internal diseases, and it should be large, made of iron, and well-treated; otherwise, if it were fine, it would break and cause great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The cupping on the legs heals openly, for they draw blood from the whole body, and are effective for old pains in the knees, hips, and bladder, and reduce swelling; and they are placed on the two ankles and the two calves, and in any case, they weaken the body after long use, and bring paralysis in many conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The manner of applying the cupping device is to first ensure it is empty and then gently warm it. Place it quickly and move it evenly without stopping until you see the area turn red and swell, indicating the appearance of blood color. Then remove it, reapply the cups, and be mindful of the body's disposition, for some have thicker skin with clearer pores; in such cases, you should only prick once, making large but shallow wounds. Suck gently if necessary.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the vein is large, it must be pricked twice: the first time to facilitate the passage of the large blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the vein is very full, it must be pricked three times; and when we wish to draw a little blood at a time, we prick only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we wish to draw much blood, we begin often; and if the vein is full, prick it thoroughly, and the points should be pierced suddenly, and for those with thick skin and hardness, and who have narrow pores, you should anoint the eyes of the suction cups with a pungent and dissolving oil: if it is in heat, use olive oil or sweet almond oil or pumpkin seed oil; and if it is in cold, use mustard oil, or lavender oil, or chamomile oil, or some other similar one.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the superfluity is large and cold, take bitter aloes, or balsam, or oil of anise, and similar.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the one who is to be healed has tight flesh and narrow pores, it is not necessary to put oil there, but it should be washed after ventilation with rose water, or cold water, or hawthorn water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or other similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And those who have much moisture, let them rise from almond, or hawthorn water, or sumach water, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have large superfluities rise from old wine, or puke water, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things; and it is not advisable to heal with suction cups before the bath nor during the bath, but after the bath one hour or two; and do not sleep after ventilation, and he should be wrapped when he is to be suctioned and when he has been suctioned.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And watch over those who are healing and are choleric, and if the blood is too hot and inflamed; then it must take cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces in vinegar, and similar things; and eats grubs, and flesh of capon, and moist meats.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And those who have a cold complexion, take syrup of honey, and moderately fragrant wine between evening and morning, and eats little, and eats grubs and small birds and pigeons; and on the day he will be cupped, he should drink more than eat; and it is fitting to give some men treacle or mace before or after cupping to support the principal members; and let the blood be subtle, but it is not fitting that those who are hot drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The suction cups that are placed without piercing are those placed on the liver, and on the thigh, and in gout, and on the abdomen and mouth and ribs and hip, for these parts do not endure being pierced at their roots, and one does this with fire only to draw blood from member to member, as we place them on nipples when a child is born; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we place suction cups on the abdomen and on the mouth to alleviate the member; and removes pain, when there is swelling or stone, it may remove the swelling or extract the stone from its place; thus does it when placed on the liver and on the thigh when there is retained windiness, and these suction cups are administered empty to suck solely; sometimes they are applied with fire, and sometimes filled with hot water, as in diseases of pleurisy, and in such manner we fill the cup with warm water or with water after cooking suitable herbs for this purpose.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the suction cup applied with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And let it be two inches wide and half a palm deep, and have or cut an inner hole near the middle small enough to insert a needle, as for pricking, and may it be of tin, with a wick in front so that it does not burn the patient when placed on the limb; and let there be one in the middle a crossbar of tin or iron to put a candle holder into, and they should be both large and small according to the diseases and the strength of those who use them; for the suction cups of children are different from those of adults, and of thin people from those of fat people.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And thus one should place this suction cup on the limb: take the candle of wax or resin, and put it into the suction cup through the crossbar that is in the suction cup, so that the flame is at the bottom of the suction cup to avoid burning the patient; then put it on the limb, and let your two fingers be above the hole as we have said, so that when you wish, the vapor goes out, and remove the suction cup; and around the hole place the resin as before, and repeat often if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the application of the suction cup for diseases of the pleura, in any acute condition, it has no needle or perforation, and is applied with force only when it is filled with fluid, and placed on the limb solely; and this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Suction cups are applied with force only to areas where it is impossible to place suction cups due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar parts; and in exposed flesh, such as that of a dove or swan, and others like them; and the quality of the suction must be such that when you find blisters in clear, sweet water without corruption, you take them; and place one nut in sweet water until they become familiar and have nothing inside; then bleed by vein and suction, afterwards rub the limb until it is red, and put on the blisters; and when they are full and fall off, if it is a place where a suction cup can be placed, then apply it, for this is very effective.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not so, lift the shoulder blade, and then with water, very well, and then drain it; and if the shoulder heals too late after the course of the veins, moisten a linen cloth in cold water and place on it until the flesh is infected; and if there are many wounds, place on it broken vitriol or gallstones, and similar things, until they are infected; or you may put over the shoulder half of peeled peas, and let them remain until they dry out at the shoulder, to stop bleeding now; and if you have more need of this, take other veins.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the veins do not wish to take, rub the shoulder with fresh blood, or stick a needle in it until the vein gives, and then place it on; as soon as they smell the blood, they will dry out; and when you see that they are ready, powder a little aloes and ground salt or ashes over them, and they will stop bleeding now.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine, and is for the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear friend, that the knowledge contained in this chapter did not appear in any of the ancient books or letters anyone read; and for this reason, the science has been excluded from our land, for I found no good use for it. I know nothing of it except through the science of ancient books, in which I have studied so much that I treated it, and by experiment, and by the custom of my life. And I have described here what is contained, summarized at the end, and shown clearly the forms of the instruments used, as I did in the two chapters before these.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	Therefore, we must say in the prologue of this book the summary of the word and the chapters where the wise men put their understanding, and remain on the truth, so that those who are proven may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twists or sprain comes to any person, it is necessary to hasten to heal the patient on both sides, if nothing else affects him, such as bodily weakness, or illness, or old age; or if his tendons are not very tight, or too cold; and he should consume cold herbs, that is to say cold jujubes, and meat of fowl and chervil, and not drink wine, nor consume any fatty meats, and do not fill himself too much with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of a hot abscess or spreading of matter in the limb; then the patient returns to his former governance as he has used it.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it is necessary to nourish the patient with meats that promote good healing or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, lentils, beef liver, oysters, fresh fish, and strong wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	And in good healing, the flesh regrows more quickly and the fractures heal faster.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that broken bones in the old and decrepit cannot heal or join well according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of small children; but do not worry, reset the broken bone and apply large bandages which will firm up and unite the limb together, until it strengthens as it was before; and do not completely restrict its movement, for this reason it is necessary to nourish with large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that the fractures are diverse in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot or the leg, and I will tell you all kinds of fractures in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that go round, and others that are jagged, like the cuts of a writing pen.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And there is fracture with wound, and fracture with just a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And each kind has its own method and proper tool for restoration, according to what memory brings to its place; and fractures of the bone are known by the deformity of the limb, and clearly by displacement, and a tapping with the hand; and when there is no deformation, nor pain on touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there may be no fracture; but it can well have deformation, or crack, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it does not suit you to move it by hand, but place medicines that follow here, and then hold it delicately now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the fracture that goes in length, and are the two parts disjoined, you must now put them back equally, as if abscesses were covered and came to life; and if abscesses hot come, let it remain for a day, until the abscesses be pacified; then set them equally upon the place where you can gently and safely fix them, and know that the restoration of this is lighter than the restoration of that which has pieces; then hold them as it suits hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, extend them on both sides, whether it is a hand or foot, by your hand if it is a small limb, by two strings, or one string and your hand; and place the member according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken member are separated, you must reduce them with all means at the place where you can fix them, and keep in mind that through your work no injury or pain come to the patient; and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well with the hand if it seems not quite right: dress it beautifully, and do not hold it too tightly, nor press it as those who bring about hot abscess and contraction to the limb through their work, as we have often desired.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is at point, well chastise the patient so he does not move it, neither while awake nor sleeping, nor turning, nor in any other manner; and see to it that the limb be so secured that no pain is felt.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, it is not yet at point, and it must be put in proper disposition so that no pain is felt; and see to it that it be placed correctly, so that no twists remain when it is restored; and the quality of the broken limb is as I have said.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken members are diverse in smallness and in largeness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For those with small members, such as wrists and thighs: it is necessary to wrap them in soft, fine linen cloths; and for the larger members, such as the thigh and leg, they should be wrapped in a wide and firm bandage, because the large bandages embrace the entire limb and restrain it equally from all sides, so that there is no gap; then tie around with light stoppers, three or four times according to the member, and gently tighten your hand on each bandage, then go above the break and restrain less, as the break can be moved a bit away from it; and gradually soften the bandage, until you perceive a large part of the healthy tissue, then take the other bandage, and wrap again around the broken area; then return to the part below the break, and restrain moderately, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first hour above; then place stoppers of linen or cloth evenly between the tied bandages, making them all equal, then tie everything over the bandage, and put your well-made pads on top if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, put a thing that calms the abscess and reduces swelling on it, and leave it for several days; then remove it with your needles, which should be half as wide as a thick cane, or of wood used to make nails, or from palm fronds, and be according to this figure:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it must be that the needles which one puts on the break are a bit thicker and wider than the others; and should be as long as necessary for the size or length of the limb. Then hold the needles in place just as you did at the first application, then tie a suitable thread over them, just as you did at the first treatment. Closer is tighter, further away less so; and it must be that the thread be medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft flax. For if the thread is thick, like I have seen in works done with leaves that make their rounds from twisted linen threads, and this is a great error, because the thread cannot be equal if it is too fine, and it does not suit that there be less than two fingers' breadth between each needle.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is injured by the shoulders of the stakes after the grip in their sound limbs, place over them linen stoppers or bandages of wool, so that it does not swell.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	When the wound is with the cauterizer, and the bones are broken, I will describe the treatment after this.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not fitting to grip all the broken limbs with stakes on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, it is not fitting to place strong stakes on them on the first day; rather, do this after 5 or 7 days, or more according to your certainty of a hot abscess occurring. And here is the method of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and torsions: take flour that stays on the walls of the mill, mix it with abundant egg, and apply this preparation, neither too thin nor too thick, and use it. This is a common method for using restorative plasters to treat fractures in various situations, especially for women and small children, as it is neither too harsh nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another plaster for restoring fractures and dislocations and twists: take 3 ounces of bear's grease and honey and oil of roses and gum arabic and myrrh, 10 drops; frankincense and aloes, 5 drops; and make it into powder, and mix with honey from an egg; if the person's complexion is warm, use this plaster, for it is of good composition, and quickly restores broken bones, and is worth many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another plaster for treating twists: take myrrh and visvalia, 10 drops; frankincense and aloes, 9 drops; acacia, 6 drops; armenian bark, 10 drops, and grind well, and mix with water or honey from an egg, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another method for plastering joints and the bones that are out of place from their sockets, and to soothe the pain that follows, and the cutting of the bone, and the breaking: take new wool, and the fat in oil cooked, and put on the skin.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not cure, but it is good for soothing hot abscesses, and properly removes pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another method for plastering to cure broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and ground ivy leaves, grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another method for plastering to restore the break in the bone and to reduce the swelling of the abscess.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of visvalve, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of vetches; from each, take one part; grind them and make a paste with wine. If the members are heated, make the paste with moist coriander water or just water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another way of plastering stronger than the first, when a hard abscess comes during the restoration of the member.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of visvalve, and seeds of flax, balsam, chamomile, and sarsaparilla, and flowers of violets and chamomile; from each, take one part; grind them and make a paste with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the member and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	Iphyscras states in his book that one should not place anything on the broken limb to restore strength that cerote made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and he says it should be between too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And Galen seems to say that one should place on the broken limb things dry and slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another plaster remedy for injury and pain: take mithah and ombrage leaves, or bird feathers, and vismale, and salt equally, and grind them, and make a plaster with them.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then loosen it after some time, and be careful that the patient does not feel any pain, nor has the bone moved from its place; if he does not feel pain in this area, do not remove it by hand. And if pain comes to this area, or itching without rest or swelling, you must hasten, and remove it, and take off the plaster now. And use a light cloth, and a moist sponge of sea water, and dip it in water, and lift the limb until the itching ceases, and the pain is soothed; then let the limb rest for an hour, then put on dry wool soaked in water or rose oil, and tie it with a bandage, until you are sure of the warm abscess. And subdue the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then resume the subtle wound care, and a little plaster, but do not bind so tightly as before; and continue this subtlety until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess is drained and redness and pain and swelling are gone from all of it, and you need to apply a plaster and a bandage, then renew them as you did first equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if nothing of what we have said comes to the member, and it is not dislocated after three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes let it remain for twenty days, according to what one sees, until the fracture dries up, and approaches the adjustment of the flesh above; then restrain it more than at first, and let it grow its flesh, as I said before; and if you see the place dry more than is needed, know that nourishment cannot come; apply a piece of hot cloth each time you dislocate it, and let it be every third day, and slightly loosen the bandage; by this work therefore, cut the nourishment to the member, and quickly mend what the foolish menders leave tortmented: it is bad, and such works are fearful, and I see nothing else but to leave it and do it properly.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various kinds of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many kinds of fractures are, and various shapes, and the causes are predetermined; for there are fractures made by the percussion of a sword, and the neck breaks all the bone down to the sypha which is beneath the bone, just as a hatchet or fust does; and because of this, this kind of fracture is called "hatchet fracture.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword cuts through the bone from above without piercing, and this kind of fracture is called "absolute"; and it includes both large and small wounds.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a compression fracture, or a crack from stone, or falling on stone, or other similar cases.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a fracture close to the tissue beneath the bone, or on the bone itself, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if there is a wound that penetrates into the bone as finely as hairs, and is a small crack, and because of this it is called this fracture "capillary"; and if the wound is made by striking with a stone, or falling, or some similar thing, and causes a piece of bone to enter below, and makes the eyes so as blacksmiths do when they strike on cauldrons; so the stones enter inside.
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more to those who have or have had moist bones, such as children's bones; and it happens in all these kinds of fracture where small pieces are dislodged like splinters; and I will speak of it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all manners of breaks through their subtraction, and through the inquiry of tests, and through the corrupt flesh that is there.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of the hair is discerned by this: when the bone is uncovered and one rubs over it, black breaks appear.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the break, take care of the patient's symptoms. If you see any bad symptoms, such as vomiting of bile, loss of consciousness, swelling, paralysis, or fever, and if the eyes become突出和红肿, and other similar things due to various conditions, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any terrifying symptoms, and you hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the fractures first come to you, and it is in winter, then you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the month.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, you must hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the flesh beneath the bone rots, and the accidents as we have said come about.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the bone fracture reaches to the tissue that covers the brain, you must split the fractured part in such a way: and you must probe the head of the injured person, and uncover above the bone in all ways you can, and more over the figure of the wound. And if bleeding occurs upon uncovering the bone, or an abscess forms, aid as necessary, and it is that you fill the head with moistened linen soaked in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the abscesses subside, and you are assured of no further bleeding; then begin under the bone to remove it, and this is done according to two methods of work: one method is that you cut before with a narrow blade, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then one cuts a larger incision than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second manner is that one has several different incisions, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed, and made of iron needle; and work lightly, so as not to wound the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and dense, it must be pierced through, as one administers incisions with tenons, not perfectly but in such a way that they do not penetrate beyond the bone at the top. Above the point, there should be a margin or circle, so that the point does not pass beyond the bone; and you must have several, so that each comes to its place according to the thickness of the bone, so that you have tenons for all tops. And this is the form of the three kinds of tenons:
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities for piercing through the broken bone are that you place the needle on the bone, turn to your two sides until you know that the bone is pierced; then remove the needle a little bit to another part, and do this throughout, then cut with the incisors the space of the bone which is between the pertsu [a type of surgical tool], and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, so that you bring the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments you have such as forceps, pinchers; and guard that you do not touch the brain nor the syface.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and treated the bone, it is necessary that you reset the delay which has remained of the bone to all other similar instruments, but it must be more tense and more subtle than the other incisors; and if there remains any small bones or no scales, you must remove them gently with the instruments; then cure the wound with cloths and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And another method of treatment is that which Galien said, which is safer; and it is strong, and these are his words.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, where the break is open and moves, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place under the head of this incisor a lens-like object, of which its form is as follows:
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side, and let the broken part be on two sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you gently tap the bone all around, and take great care of the membrane beneath; if it is rough against the bone, remove it lightly, for it can be removed too easily and with fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the bone break does not pierce to the membrane, and the bone is cut only from above, and there are small pieces, then you must treat under that roughness, and remove scales with a fine razor of which you should have various quantities, in order to administer in each place what is most suitable, according to the work and the shape of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you use large razors first and then finer ones, and do not stop until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other small incisions and fine breaks, you must administer care according to its need; and this is a matter that is not left to one who has devoted his study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the side is uncovered, it must be that you take a linen cloth, according to the size of the wound, and apply oil of rosemary, placing it on the wound; then take another doubled cloth twice or three times over, with oil of wine and rosemary, placing it over the first cloth; and do this as lightly as you can so as not to burden the side, then cover it with a bandage from above, and do not bind it too tightly that it presses on the wound only; and leave it for one or two days, until the abscesses are calmed, then remove it, and administer medicines such as lily roots, flour of vermillion, incense powder, and aromatic substances; and make a powder from these things and apply it to the wound, and continue administering bandages without causing irritation; and see that the wound remains clean, not leaving the ointment out nor allowing it to assemble bowen, for when bowen assembles on the brain cloth, it will flow and harm, bringing great mischief to the patient; for when anything biting is placed on the side, nerves will be inflamed above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, take heed, if no bad accident happens to the patient, as we have said, it is doubtful without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if darkness does not come forth only because of the medicine we have put on, that it has some virtue, then you should take a part of honey, and three parts of rose oil, and in glue one cloth, and put it on the sore; then cure it in the manner of cures that it should be healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts above the neck are broken, or only one of them, for these are two bones; and the one below is cartilaginous, and neither breaks nor causes pain by bowing or twisting, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, you must set your little finger or the thumb from birth, and place the break equally within your index finger, and the knuckle pouch by opening, so that the bone heals according to its natural figure; and do this gently, and ensure that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is above the thumb and your finger cannot reach the place, you must put it equally on the head of a needle about as large.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is on both sides, do the same for the other side, and hasten to restore the first day, if you can; otherwise, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscess has subsided, then place a needle at the thumb's head with linen thread, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or you place the other from another side, if the fracture is there; and let the tents be so large that they fill the pores of the navel.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And any restorer said that we should moisten the tents with butter and change each day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem to me to be well done, but the tents should be moistened with a preparation of egg white and powder of mill flour. Then leave the tent until the bone is firm and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes we use goose feathers in lieu of tents, and wrap the area with a bandage, and if the fracture remains, blow on it with the patient. Do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses arise in the nose while you are working on it, you should apply a poultice or wet cloth in rose oil, or with a little dyakin.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses do not arise in the nose, apply an ointment externally, made of silk powder and incense powder, cooked with egg yolk. Then place it with light stoppers, and do not bind the nose; and if the break in the nose is small, and broken into small pieces, extract it with instruments suitable for this, then stitch the wound, treating things that affect flesh and healing, as ointments and remedies suitable for this; and if there is no wound inside the nose, treat it with cotton, until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the rupture of the jaw
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jaw is ruptured but there is no wound visible, and the fracture is open only, not broken into pieces but rather like hinges inside, one can recognize it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	If the fracture is in the right part of the jaw, you should place your index finger in the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is in the left mandible, you should place your right hand's index finger on the fracture gently, and complete it with the other hand by making an opening.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jaw is separated into two parts, it is necessary to apply an extension to both parts equally.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if movement of the teeth occurs or a rupture, strain them with a gold, silver, or silk thread, then place on the broken jaw a poultice, and place over it a double layer; and place over this a large well-made pad, or a piece of leather equal in size to the jaw, long and wide according to the jaw, and tie it securely around the mouth as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the swelling changes, release it on the third day, and then reposition what has changed; and apply a poultice with flour from the mill mixed with abundant egg or sinew flour after you have removed the poultice; and place over the poultice light cloth, and if the poultice dries out and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until he is healed; many times it is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses remain, administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, note if any piece of the bone has been removed; so subtle that it can be extracted with suitable instruments.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, enlarge it with a flame according to your need.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and none remain, close the wound if it is large, and apply suitable poultices to promote healing until it is healed.
de la forcele	by force
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The forceful break happens many times in front of the shoulder, and the break is according to three ways: either it is broken and separated into two parts, and has pieces, which is the most轻微的复位；或者其中有断裂伴有伤口。
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the procedure is when the break has no wound, that you have two assistants, so that one feels the injured part where the forceful break occurred; and the other extends the neck towards the affected area. Then place the break equally between your two hands, so that the form be as it should, and there be neither appearance nor movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend more, place a round pad of cloth or wool under the shoulder of the patient, and make it as large as necessary; then gently stretch the affected area, and hold the pad with your hand, so that you can place the break equally, as it should.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot pull the head of the shoulder downward, because it comes from below, then it is necessary that the patient lie often on his side, and place a medium pillow under the shoulder, and make the attendants support the shoulder downwards, until the bone of the shoulder is lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then treat the break carefully. If you find pieces detached, you must cut them out; and pull the pieces gently. And if the bone cannot join for any protrusion, use one of your forceps; but place this instrument over the shoulder to prevent leakage.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it resembles a spoon, and is not misplaced, and should be as wide as necessary, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and it has two heads, as you can see, with one broad and the other narrow, similar to the wound you made when treating the bones. And when you are certain of a hot abscess, drain the wound, but if the opening is small or you doubt a hot abscess, cover the wound with bandages and tents, according to their quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if blisters appear when it comes, soak them in rose oil and vinegar, and apply.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The tightening of the bone, when it is felt by wounds and by cuts, is that you put over the bone the poultice of flour powder and egg yolk, and place light stops above, and put a sphere underneath if needed; then take a very large bandage one palm wide, then put the folded cloth over the stops and the poultice; then take a thin stick three fingers wide and long, and wrap it around that bandage so that the ends of the bandage hang down; and place the stick on the splint, and turn the bandage up to the neck, under the sphere and under the healthy side; and tighten each part, and when you see that the ties hold the splint properly, and clearly see that the stick does not move over the broken bone, then reward each day, and when the stitches loosen, release them; and have the patient lie on their back, and put a small pillow under the sphere to lift the helper up; so it will lighten the injury from the shoulder by the support of the shoulder, or you tie the arm at the neck, and do not untie it until bad accidents occur, until twenty days; then reapply the poultice if needed, and keep it tight and let it be thus until it is restored; and it is fully restored in twenty-eight days, and in less time for some people.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the breaking of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	that often happens when the shoulder breaks or is wide off at either end, and cannot be moved except by touch; arrange the parts according to the figure of the break, and reset them according to their natural form in all ways that you can; then put over the limb powder of flour with abundant egg, and light stops, and place a double flag above; then place a large and subtle strip, slightly wider than the shoulder, and where there are movements anywhere in the shoulder, fill those areas with linen stops so that the strip stays even; and then tightly wrap it with a large bandage, so that the strip does not move from its place, and check the ligature each day; whenever it loosens, rewrap it, and adjust the strip if it is out of place, and have the patient lie on their side; and the shoulder will be restored in twenty or二十五天，或者二十五天。当这些数字完成时，解开绷带，确保无误，因为骨头不能轻易复位。
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of the bone tents out and is not over the heart, incise it, remove the bone, and do what we have said in the breaking of the strong ligament to cool the abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The foot is often broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; it breaks frequently at the ankle.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it declines outward, and the patient feels great pain, along with swelling. Immediately, and by accident, they may vomit blood, and the movements in the broken bones become apparent, and everyone can see this well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that the patient lies mostly on their back, and they place a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and join the ribs together with your hands, placing them in perfect alignment as you can. Then apply plasters and ointments over the fine saline or light bandage, wrap it in a cloth, and tie it tightly to the broken bone so it does not move; turn the knot roundly on the back and adjust it suitably, tightening it every hour. If it gets loose, tighten it again. And if it needs to be untied for corrosion or itching at the site, or pain or abscess, you must act quickly, untie it, remove the plaster, and treat the area as in other treatments; then reapply the plaster and bandage until it heals fully.
de la brisure des costes	of the breaking of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	The breaking of the ribs comes from force only behind the shoulders and at the top within, and they bend due to being slippery; and one feels it well in the examination with the fingers.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And the restoration is that you align the break as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the plaster, and bind it with a bandage if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the break of the ribs is turning inward, the patient feels great pain and prickling, similar to tears, because the bone punctures the membrane; they writhe in pain, and immediately vomit much blood, which is a serious health issue. The ancients used great skill to treat this.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if some say it is necessary to give foods that swell the belly to counteract the heat.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make such incisions into abscesses that there should not be pus if it has not come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if pus has come, then drain it.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And some say that we should apply suction cups to the shoulder to draw out the poison strongly, and this seems reasonable; nevertheless, there is doubt that the suction cup will draw out the excess toxins due to the weakness of the condition.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And some say that we should cover the shoulder with wetted wool in hot oil, and place tents between the ribs to equalize the treatment inside, then it should be treated with a pleurisy cure, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain that he cannot bear because the bone touches the membrane, and there is doubt for the patient, then it is necessary to incise above the rib of the broken side, and it is necessary to place something under the instrument to protect the heart; and then one must cut the bone, and draw lightly, and then suture the two edges of the wound if it is large, and treat with plasters until he is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses continue to come, put moist cloths in rose oil on the rib; and place it on the side where it should be. Cure while observing the side for what is needed for the abscess, and let him lie on his side where it needs to be until he is healed.
de la brisure dou col	of the breaking of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Any time the bones of the neck break, and often it bends; and similarly with the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you wish to know if they will be healed or not, observe whether their hands are softened, swollen, and dead, and cannot move or extend, and when pricked with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is fatal in many respects, and if they can move and feel well when pricked with a needle, know that the joints of the bone are saved, and the patient will recover if proper treatment is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if such a thing comes to the spine of the back, and you wish to know whether it is healed or not, see if the flesh is softened, and if the accidents are in the hands, and on the back with windiness and effortless evacuation; and when one has soothed it on their abdomen, there is effortless evacuation.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it has been soothed on their back and they wish to sit up, they cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	Know that it is mortal: if it does not labor at all in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if such an accident does not come to them, it is the matter less severe.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that you apply oil of roses or oil of egg yolk if there is a hot abscess. Then apply one of the comforting and drying plasters, and bind it with a bandage. Instruct the patient to rest; and do not let them sleep on that part where they feel pain until they are healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone separates, it is necessary to cover over the heart; remove the bone, then join the two edges of the wound, if large, with one suture, then treat with ointment promoting flesh growth until it is healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the cow," you must take your left hand's fist and place it evenly in your right hand at your power, then apply the plaster and bandage over it, if you need them; then bind it. If there are separated bones, cut out, remove them, and treat the wound until it is healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the fracture of the hip bone
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Often it happens that the bone of the hip is broken, and if it happens, there will be but a slight alleviation in the head; stretch long, and decline to the side, and pain comes to the patient at the site, swelling, and redness where it is broken.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, as long as you are over the brace; and know which is the break and its figure; and if the break is only at the head, set it equal to that break, so that it be in natural figure.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long, or it declines inward, you make the patient lie on his stomach so that the restoration of that break may be aligned.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it equal, apply a plaster, then place a stick or a rod over it, and bind the brace so that it does not move. And fill the area under the ribs, so that the binding is even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on his sound side, or on his back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if abscesses are hot and come, do not touch them until the abscesses are appeased, and apply what we have said before; then return to the restoration, and hold them as it should be, if there is no bad accident; and this is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The adjutoires are those between the scapula and the head of the shoulder. And if they are dislocated, you must restore them according to one of the two methods: one method is that you take a stick of medium size, as follows:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And bind the two shoulders with two ligatures, and draw them up, and seat the patient on the seat; then place his broken arm on the post, until it comes to the axilla, and have in the middle a piece of wood, then hang on any heavy thing or let the attendants extend downwards; then put the reaper's blade equal to his hands together, so that the broken part returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other method is that one supports the patient on his stretcher, and binds his hand to his neck, then commands two attendants that one hold what is on the reaper's blade at his hands, and the other hold below the ligature, extending each to their part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is stronger, hold the ligature both below and above the reaper's blade, and extend each attendant to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the break is near the head of the shoulder, it must be that you place the middle line over the axilla, and the other towards the cut, under the break; and also if the break is opposite the cut, it must be placed lightly, without labor, so that the break is equal over the bone, and over the cut; then set the break evenly as it should be, and bind it, unless abscesses come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if abscesses come, you must not bind it tightly for seven days, and place moistened wool in lint and rose oil until the abscesses are pacified; then bind it, and the way to bind it is that you put the plaster over the break, then assemble the arm on the shoulder support, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put the bandage, binding over the shoulder support and over the arm, so that the arm is in a sling, unless anything prevents it, or if the bone has not moved.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone does not move, use stakes, and place one wider and stronger stake above the fracture, with two fingers' width between each stake, and let each stake be so large that it passes the fracture by three fingers on each side; then pull on the stakes as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the fracture, more strongly and less by pulling away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the position of the stakes and the tightening, as we have said, in the hour that you set the broken limb, and you doubt the abscess is hot, leave it free for seven days, as we have said; then look at each three days the healing, to ensure pruritus does not swell or arise at the place, or the granulations cannot come to the limb because it is too narrow.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the treatment, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents come to pass, let the dislocation not be undone after three days or more, and let the patient lie on his back, and keep his hands over his stomach; place under the shoulder a cushion filled with evenly sized wool, and watch every hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken limb does not move, nor become soft the ligaments; by the virtue of medicine, it will heal, and let him eat the meat we have placed before, in such a manner that the meat be at first finely chopped; and when it begins to take, let it be generous.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is customary that the shoulder and the leg should be returned to their proper place within forty days from then; then one must reset them and administer baths and ointments to treat them.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the stricture is ugly and contracted, it must remain to be unbound for one or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fascicule," of which one is small and is that which surrounds the pouch; and the other is large, and is that which is beneath, opposite the small one; by chance the large fascicule may be broken alone, or the small one, and by chance both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small fascicules are broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the large one is broken, the healing is poor, and more severe than when they are broken together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is the small fragile bone that is broken merely, then it should be extended slightly and kept in place.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large bone, then it should be held more firmly; and extend it on the cushion, and hold the bag of the hand higher than the others, and the small bones lower than the others, and let the patient cross his limbs over themselves, and the cushion in front higher, so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the ministers' arms to the part below their hands, or to the armpit, and another minister above at the other side.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then set the bones in place, according to their best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the break into pieces, place each piece in its place, and if there is any detached piece that cannot be gripped to restore it to its place, then cut it out, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the cautery for wounds, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; so take the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if in the beginning of the restoration abscesses appear, apply a dressing made of rose oil and white wax, that is neither too hard nor too soft; and tie the dressing tightly but gently so that the abscesses are alleviated.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the cerote, and apply a plaster of powder from the mill mixed with abundant egg, then place the plasters, and let the plaster for the cautery be more firm and slightly wider than the others; and know that there should be six plasters or arms in various positions: whether the cautery is in one of the bones, or two; and apply it closer to the cautery than elsewhere, and diminish the tightness as days pass, as I have said at the beginning of this chapter; and let the dressings above the cautery be soft and moist, and not hard or harsh; and let the strips from which they are made be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have already stated.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the member and the ligament after a few days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accident happens to the member, such as itching that comes to the member, it must be that you rinse the member with warm water until the itching is alleviated; and let the member rest not too tightly.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then reapply the binding, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones dislocated, treat accordingly.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if you take care that the bandages do not come to the member, because it is too tight, it must be that you soften them a little and leave them for a few days, until the bandages fit properly, and then tighten them.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of these things we have said come to the patient, do not allow him to dislocate until二十字（注：原文为法语，此处翻译时调整为符合中文表达习惯）二十四天。
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	And if any of these things come to him later, then place his hands on his neck, and make his neck even, and guard against movement and shifting, and let him sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-five, and by chance in twenty, according to the compositions and complexities of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	Of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that in the back of the hand and at the base of the fingers, fractures occur rarely, and there often come many sprains.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the sole of the hand is broken or bent, it must be set straight and lie equally before him; then place his hand on an extended board, and stretch the broken bones, setting them equal until they are well joined; and apply the plaster and stops if no abscesses come about, then put a splint according to the size of the limb; and let it be wrapped in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the break is near the center of the sole of the hand, make a pad of cloths, and instruct the patient to hold it against his broken sole; then bind it with a long cloth bandage, and place the splint of hollow reed as large as the sole of the hand, and bind it properly.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the forearm, it must be that you place one splint above and another beneath on the palm, so that the hand is open and straight, then bind completely around the hand, and stop the bleeding between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture comes to any of our bones, if it is a dislocation, set it equal, as it should; and bind with the palm, and if you see that you put a small straight splint to lift the fracture, and it does not move; and if the fracture is at other bones, such as in the index or one of the others, set it equal, and tie with the healthy bone that comes after; or you tie all together, keeping them immobile, or you put on a splint, like a pouch; and take care in the restoration and in the positioning of hot abscesses, and help those who come, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The bone of the thigh is often broken, and one can see this when it twists front and back; and the restoration consists in ligating above the break and below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on their side, then each minister extends their ligature equally to their part; and this is when the break is located in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is near the root of the thigh, place one ligature on the side of the knife, and the other ligatures below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is near the knee, then place the ligatures below the knee, and the extension downward; then set the bone equally with both hands, so that it is according to its natural figure, and then apply the plaster and the ligature, unless an abscess arises.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside first, then return to your work and treatment; the incision is made in such a manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap around the sore twice or three times with a double-thick bandage, and let the excess remain, then turn the leg until the heels reach the root of the foot, and place a long thread between the thigh and the leg, underneath from the knee down, and follow the thread upwards; then wrap the bandage over the leg and thigh, placing a pad on the sore and putting one under the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and thigh with soft cloth to ensure even pressure, then begin tying in three or four turns around the sore; and as you go further from the sore, the tighter it should be; then attend to the two ends of the thread that you placed between the leg and thigh, and secure three pads above, then return underneath to the top of the thread, until you see down to the foot; and tie tightly so that it does not move in place, then leave it thus, until no abscess or swelling occurs elsewhere.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, release it, and set what comes to pass, as we have said many times; and if there are bone fragments that penetrate, it must be washed, if one can; and if one cannot, it must cut the limb, and extract the force; and cure it as we have said, until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And sometimes the thigh is broken when we insert tenes, as in the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, in the restoration done, the patient does not complain.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thigh is restored in three days, or a little less or a little more, according to the diversities of constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the hollow of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the groove of the knee a fracture occurs rarely, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it fractures, it is not just a crack or hole, but occurs in any wound, and feels like a deep injury.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that you place equal heat on its ends until they are assembled and move together as much as possible; then apply the plaster, and put a round splint if needed, and hold it properly. After that, reestablish all the arrangements we have said for other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar cases; apply what is suitable for each condition until it heals.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	Know that in the leg there are two bones, of which one is called by its name "muscle" and the other is called "fascicle"; and it breaks entirely as it does in the arm, and for this reason its restoration is equally so, and the works are all the same. And if both bones are broken together, then turn the leg in every direction.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the fine bone is broken, then turn it forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the large bone is broken, there is great pain, and it is evident; then turn it backward.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then apply extension, and set it equal, and ligate the tendons equally; but nevertheless, if the break is ugly, and there are many pieces, then the extension should be less and more gentle; and lighten according to your virtue.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed all your work, take two pieces of bent wood that fit the leg on both sides, and let them be long from the leg below the knee to above. Then wrap them in two layers over and under with one bandage, and tie them in the middle so well that the leg cannot decline to the right or left, and thus it is done; none administer a long belt of wood, and put the leg for warding off movement, and properly do this in the fracture where there is a wound. And move each day the leg, to see if there is an abscess hot or any other accident; so treat until it be healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the bones at the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	At the ankle no fracture comes about, but in the bones of the foot fractures come sometimes and in the toes often, and there is force only with multiple conditions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a fracture in the bones of the foot, and you see these bones protruding one over another, place the patient's foot on the ground as if it wanted to walk, and then put your foot on top of his, where the bones are lifted, and press until they return to their places; then apply the plaster and ointment, and put a small board with two pieces of cloth underneath the sole of the foot, then bind it to the foot in a suitable manner, and once you have wrapped it tightly with bandages and other things you need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three days or four have passed, release the ligament, for you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the two are broken, restore them as we have said for the two of the hand; then place a splint on the broken finger according to its length, and let it be a little wider, and put under the palm that board which I have said, and hold it properly; and if there are two or three or more broken, place a splint on each finger according to its quantity, wrapped in one linen cloth, and place the board under the palm; and let it be positioned above the head of the board towards the palm, so that it covers well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have said about other breakers, as we have said; and assist each accident as it requires.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the breaking of the bone at the knife wielder
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of nature in a woman is broken, you must make her sit stretched out, then incline her towards the back part, and hold her by the rear. Then fill the space of nature with cotton, and put in one as thick as the bone. Then remove the woman and lift the back little by little, so that the cotton comes to the entrance of nature, and the bone returns with the flesh. When she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, replace it, and do this for seven days or more: the break will be restored. If you wish, take a bladder from a lamb, tie a string at the opening, and fill the entire bladder inside. The nature will return the break; then fill it with cotton and leave it for some days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the hand is broken in the man or woman, restore it thus as we have said for the bone of the hip; and these nearby fractures are not hidden from him who puts his study and effort into it, and reads my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the fractures signify in many dispositions the right way of restoration: understand them accordingly.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the thigh, when it is broken, take a goose quill and insert the thigh into it; then wrap it tightly with bandages, and let it be for three days or more, and it will heal quickly.
de brisure avec plaie	of fracture with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	He who has a fracture with a wound, even if it is large, such as the thigh bone or shoulder blade or similar, must be treated for the wound now, as our treatments indicate.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is sound, treat it with vitriol, if you have nothing else, then restart the healing in that same hour or on that day, unless an abscess arises.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if an abscess arises, let the healing continue until a new day, as long as the abscess is pacified, and do not touch it on the third or fourth day, for you would cause it to bring about a harmful accident.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is apparent on the exposed chest, you must set it gently with your hands, extending it slightly.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not available to set it equal with your hands, you must reset it with an instrument made of iron, which has seven or eight lengths, and its width is according to the size of the wound; and for this purpose, you need a splint that should be round and slightly thick, so it does not bend under compression on the limb during your work, and it should be jagged in front, and broad at the center forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche," which means that the curved heads of the shoulder must be placed on the top of the visible bone; and fix it at once, so that it returns, and let them be level against each other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot grasp the bone well, then you must correct the head of the bone, so that the instruments can hold it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back, as we have said, then use a suitable instrument to correct it, such as a probe or needle, as much as possible; then fix what remains in the bone by hardness and small fragments.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you do this while it is in its place, then moisten I wrap with a wine-stained black cloth, and properly if it is soiled; and do not put anything on the wound such as a plaster or other thing that has touched, lest it cause corruption; then give medicines when you have set the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, and cover the dressing entirely around, according to the size of the wound, and take great care that the wound is not compressed with the breakage; and many times those foolish healers have done this, and caused harm or death to the patient at least once; and let the bindings be softer and looser than other bandages.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that some evil accident may occur, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, then it is not proper to put on plasters; but wrap around, in place of plasters, cloths hard, and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days swelling in the wound, remove what you have placed on top of it for wine, and put healing ointment for wounds, such as tetrafarmacon and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you should dislocate the limb twice a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is set and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And the limb should be aligned in such a manner that the swelling drains gently downward.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if many days pass and the swelling does not subside, know that there are small bone fragments, for which you should treat the wound with a tent, and remove all these detached pieces to relieve the pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the vein, or some other form of corruption, it must be treated, according to what is said in his chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and opened in the same limb, such as the bones of the thigh or shoulder, or other large bones, do not treat it immediately, for many times death ensues, but let it remain until it rots; by chance it may fall out after twenty or thirty days, then treat the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	of the bruises that come over the sore
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	Many times after the breaking of the bone, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a sad sight to see the figure of the limb; by chance it cannot perform its natural work.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Therefore, when our shoulder is fresh: administer hemostatic medicines, such as aloes, incense, myrrh, gum Arabic, acacia, and similar substances, provided that you use any of these things or all together, and prepare them with hemostatic wine or an abundance of egg or garlic; apply them to the joint in containers, bind well, and do not remove by hand for several days; then loosen, and begin another, until the joints are removed; or apply on a properly made piece of lint; for the properties of lint are that it removes all swellings above the limbs; and if the joint has already turned to hardness like stone and must be removed, cover over, and remove the apparent superfluity; or you may reapply to any sharpener until it is removed, and cure until it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	a limb that is weak after the siege
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored and remains after the limb is weak and subtle, it happens for many reasons: one reason is because it was tied too tightly, and not as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, preventing new growth in the limb; or due to excessive swelling; or from too great movements, not at their proper time; or because there is little blood in the body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the cure is that you make the patient eat and strengthen the body, until the flesh multiplies within him; and you administer baths, and give him joy and pleasure; then apply ointment to the limb, so that the ointment draws toward the great growth, and frequently wet the flesh with warm water, until the growth reaches the limb; and return to its natural figure.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	of the limb twisted after recovery
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after recovery, and the broken bones are exposed, and the form of the limb is ugly, all the same it does not lose its natural function: one must not believe those who say that one should break the limb completely anew; many have done this in our land; such works are blamed, and great evils arise from them, even death at times; all the same, if the swellings and pain are fresh, they should be treated with hot water, or cooked herbs that soften, such as leaves of vismarble, roots, mallow, and similar things; then apply a soothing plaster, well made, and take the muscled flesh of vismarble, and cook it with gelatin fat or olive oil, and apply it on top; or take fatty figs, grind them with flour of colostrum, and similar medicines that quickly alleviate.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the nodes are removed by rubbing continuously and for a long time with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And move the limb every hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosity is hardened like stone, and it needs to be removed with tongs, then it should be cut just to the bone with a sharp incisor gently; and apply skill and care in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book on dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to someone, it must now be brought back without rubbing.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	If one delays, the eyes will swell, and by chance, if it is reset while swollen; for this, it must not be moved until it is swollen: many times it brings on spasm and other pains; nevertheless, when this happens, make the patient lie down, then let him rest until the abscesses are calm; then arise the limb in warm oil, and cure each part as it comes to its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on dislocations from the shoulder to the foot.
des mandibules	of the jawbone
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Often the jaws are dislocated backward, and the dislocations of both sides occur in two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their sockets and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated and hang toward the ear, and block the saliva from the mouth so that he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, enveloping his tongue with his speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is minor, it often returns to place through natural means.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if it is complete and thorough, you must quickly reset it without delay; and in such a manner that the attendant holds the patient's head, and places his fingers or a cloth from one of his hands at the root of the dislocation in the jaw inside the mouth, if the dislocation affects both sides; and the other hand should support them to keep them level. Instruct the patient to relax and move his jaws in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And place the joint evenly, until it returns to its proper position.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the return is difficult, especially if it involves the two lower jaws together, apply hot water and oil, gently resetting them; do not hesitate to reset them, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are returned evenly, and the patient's mouth closes well, gently soften it with molten wax in a paste made of rose oil and wax, then tie it lightly with soft threads. Let the patient sleep on their back, with their head between two cushions so that it does not move to the right or left, nor try to chew, but feed them light food until the pain is gone, and secure the jaws; and then let him eat and drink what he wants lightly, without having to open his mouth to eat or drink, until the lower jaw is well set and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandible bones cannot be put back in place within an hour and are not fully returned to their sockets, then fevers and stiffness become habitual, and sometimes there is intestinal distension by accident, and by accident there is vomiting of black bile.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, know that it is fatal; often the one who suffers it dies within nine days.
de la forcelle	by force
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The shoulder cannot be dislocated along the side within its socket and further down, and is only dislocated once at the joint, and one can feel this clearly.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies often on their back and extends their arms. Then press the joint firmly against your palm, and it will return; then apply the plaster and the bandage, and tighten it. The shoulder on the opposite side cannot be dislocated; if at all, then you must reset it to its place as we have said. Then apply the plaster and the bandage, and tighten it, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed; in this same manner, the shoulder blade's shoulder is brought back when it is removed from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: one, it dislocates at the part of the socket outwards; and the second, at the part of the hip; and by chance it dislocates upwards, which happens rarely; and it does not dislocate behind for the shoulder, nor inside for the nerves; and often it dislocates forwards towards the socket, especially in those who have little flesh, for in them it jumps quickly; in those who have enough flesh, it jumps with hesitation and returns with hesitation.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men through a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated for this reason.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	Therefore, you must test it thoroughly until you are certain; then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known how dislocations occur when they go down towards the shoulder blade, and you place a difference between the diseased shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear diversity between them; and you will find in the head of the shoulder a fossa, and under the shoulder blade at the toucher of the head of the shoulder, as if it were an eye; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose nor move any movements; and also, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you clearly find it at the toucher; and this manner of dislocation is not easy to reset when it is new or when the child is diseased.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the minister lifts the patient's hand upwards, then places his skin over the arsele, and lifts the joint with force upwards to its place; and the minister lifts his hand and extends it upwards, so as to place it there; thus it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said with the hands days after, it must be that the patient is bathed in hot water; and the minister applies gently soothing remedies, such as a decoction of althea and fenugreek and melilot in water, and administers them. Then he should rub the patient's back, and place a piece of woolen cloth evenly, neither too soft nor too hard, under the arsele of the patient. Then place the patient's foot on the cloth, and lift the shoulder blade virtuously, and pull the hand of the patient; and another minister hold the patient's head, so that it does not move downwards. That shoulder returns immediately, and if you want to reset it in this manner: then you should have someone present who is larger than the patient; and stand upright facing the side, place the shoulder under the arsele of the patient, and lift the arsele upwards, so that the patient hangs by the arm; and another minister pull the hand of the patient downwards towards the belly.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, he can carry something heavy, and the dislocation will return now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And the dislocation is also reset in another manner: and this is done by sticking a long poker into the ground, where the shoulder should be as round as a post, neither too large nor too small; then it is placed under the patient, but with a pillow beneath, and the patient's arm is stretched out sideways. The joint will return to its place quickly. And if it does not want to return despite all these things we have said, then this treatment should be done: take a poker two arms long and four inches wide, which has a round head to easily enter perfectly under the armpit, according to this form.
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then bind on the head of the wooden splint under it, so that the wood does not bruise the patient, then put it under the patient's armpit; extend your arm over the long wooden splint, and bind the auxiliary support to the wooden splint, and the arm to the head of the hand, then place the arm on a step of a large ladder, and let the hand hang down, and leave the body hanging from another part: the joint will now be restored.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is done, in whatever manner it may be, you must put under the armpit a pad of even wool, then apply the plaster prepared with flour of mill, incense, and egg yolk, over the entire shoulder and around it, then remove the pad from under the armpit appropriately, and turn the bandage over the plaster, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let the hand remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it must eat little, until the limb is strengthened, for it will heal faster; then after five or seven days, he may eat more and move; and if it is firm and not softened, it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is dislocated due to moisture or for another reason, you must apply three cauteries at intervals, as is stated in the chapter on cauteries.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold and cannot lift its arm above, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint never returned to its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The dislocation that is near the buttocks, and the nipples, or behind, is made by impulse and extension of hands; and it is treated until it is healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing comes cracks in the limb, and delays due to movement, the patient uses baths many times until that crack heals and returns to its original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated at points, and returns to those points; and it is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not replied to, for it can be seen clearly and felt clearly; and it is dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the sick side with the healthy side, you must clearly see it.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And the joint is frozen, and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder at all.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you must first reset it as an abscess would heal and come to a head. For if an abscess heals and comes to a head, it would be grievous to bring it back; and by chance, it cannot be fully reset, especially when it is at the rear. This is worse than other dislocations, and causes greater pain, and by chance, many die from it.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is such that when it can be reset in that manner, you extend its hand with both your hands; and its arms are spread out, and the palms are aligned according to the direction of the cut around and beneath, and place the joint at its edges or at the root of its palm until it returns to its proper position.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his face, and presses with the root of his palm where it is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it will not return to place, administer strong extension; and two attendants extend the arm, and hold each other by the root of the palm, so that it does not move in extension; then turn the arm in all directions, then wrap it in a double long and wide cloth; and when you join the joint to the hand, rub with any oil to soften the joint, then form the joint properly until it returns; and when it is in place, put on a dry plaster with egg yolk, and bind tightly, and suspend the arm at the neck of the patient, and leave it for some days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly set in its place, release the ligature and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not fit well, reapply the plaster and the ligature, and leave it for some days until it is firmly set; then release it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if it feels sore after the setting of the joint, and it moves, bathe and gently rub it, pressing until it is relieved; or put on the joint a fat sheep tallow, leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and apply hot water or bath; and when it sweats, thoroughly rub the joint, then reapply the tallow, and then apply hot water again; and do this two or three times until it is healed; and if you see, apply warm moist cow dung heated with butter, and apply it; it will return to its proper position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The shoulder of the hand is dislocated, and the return is light, more than other joints. Whenever it becomes dislocated, one must restore it to place quickly, within the hour it is dislocated, just as the arm swells or an abscess forms hot.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the restoration is as follows: you place the affected hand on a table, extend the fingers of the assistant's hand, and position the patient's palm over the joint. Hold it until it returns to its proper place. You must ensure that it is indeed in its correct position; then place the back of the patient's hand on the table for extension and reduction.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, put the patient's back of their hand on the table, and the examiner place their hand on that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, that is well. If not, apply a plaster to alleviate the abscess and let it be so until it begins again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after several days, the joint will remain twisted; and it does not harm the patient as long as the hand is softened, and cannot grasp anything at all: then know that the nerve is cut or the artery; there may be no other way than to reset it with a fire cautery for such cases, and by chance nothing else works.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put on the plaster that we have said, then bind it and let it be 5 days, then unbind it and leave it thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if he cannot move it well, and there is any stiffness, apply warm watery grease and rub until it heals.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated in any direction, sometimes at the back of the palm or the palm's center; then reset the finger, and hold it with your fingers until it returns to place. Then support the thumb of the finger and pull it towards the part where it is disjointed; and let it be 2 days, and then make it equal on that day; and do not bind it, as we have said, but unbind it each day, and move it, and rebind it daily; and do this often until it is tightly set. If it is dislocated at the palm's center, do so as you did before until it heals. Do the same if it is dislocated in another part.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	of the dislocation of the shoulder blade of the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder blade of the back or neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there is no point in treating it, as death comes quickly to the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the evacuations jump without willingness, and cannot be held, and often they soften some limb, or both thighs or both arms. And often the shoulder blade changes in four parts; that which changes at the back is called "gilbositez": the cure is that you rewarm if the gilbositez came from infancy: there is no cure nor healing for this entirely.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from falling or impacts or similar things, the ancient methods of treatment with grand words say they have no real benefit in all cases; but I have summarized them according to my intention, and formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the soreness that comes before the buttocks, there is no health; and also that which comes directly into two sides, and cannot be cured except by that which properly comes to the back, as I say; and it is that the patient extend themselves upon their side in one even place, and have a support beneath them, so they do not swell; then stick one coal at the head on the ground formed, and another at the feet, and tie one string below the assels of the patient, and the other at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles; and two ministers know the strings, the one at the head and the other at the feet, among the two coals; and may their hands be well fastened, the coal as we have said, and the prisoner put his palms on the backbone formed, until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return by this treatment, take a board of three feet long, lean it against the wall, and if the patient is on their side, place the head of the board under the wall, then put the middle of the board on the spine; and have the person's feet on the other end of the board, pressing firmly until it returns to its place; and if you see, do this at the grindstone that turns by hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And you stick two coals in the head of the patient's arm with a foot-long distance, and place two others under the feet, with an palm-length space between each pair; and put a perforated object or where the grindstone runs under each coal, ensuring the coals are firmly fixed in the ground so they do not move; between each pair of coals, place a turning coal on which the thread turns, with two small coals of a foot-long distance for turning the grindstone; and then tie one end of the rope among the axles to the grindstone near the head, and the other end near the feet to the other grindstone, and each minister turns their grindstone along the rope, and the master keeps the spine level as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when it is even, put a drying plaster with much egg on it, and then the poultice, and then place a stick of three long fingers under one side of the backbone, to purge the fatty part and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a bandage as we have said, and let the patient rest until he is healed; and if any matter comes at the end of his healing, then give medicines softening and assuaging, along with the poultice that we have mentioned before; and sometimes one administers a piece of flax, and sometimes there appears in the lower part of the backbone a sign, and one should suspect dislocation; and it is the bone that shows, so one must not presume: by chance it might bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of hip dislocations
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	The joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder come about only from dislocations, not in the same way as other joints; and the hip joint is displaced according to four parts: internally and externally, in front and behind; more internally it is more so, and less displaced in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of an internal dislocation is that when one joins the injured leg with the healthy one, it is longer, and the injured knee is more exposed than the healthy one, and the injured knee cannot bend at all; this is due to the swelling of the thigh caused by the abscess.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it comes as a deficiency, is that this accident is contrary to those mentioned above.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him to whom it comes as a deficiency, is that his leg is well arranged; nevertheless, he does not double his knee without pain, and if one tries to make him do it, he cannot, and retains his urine, and swells the veins, and when he walks, he passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him to whom it comes as a deficiency, is that he cannot spread his knee, nor bend it, and that this leg is more twisted than the other, and the veins are softened, and the head of the shoulder is at the side of the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The treatment of this case of dislocation is that you should allow it if the dislocation is old and remains in its position, for which there is no need for any further treatment; nor should one have any presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And for that which the dislocation is fresh, and it is of four kinds of dislocation, you must hurry to put the joint back, stretching it inside and outside, moving it to the right and left; perhaps it will return to place, and has no need of further treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, you must prepare a strong assistant, and hold the leg firmly with two hands, or at the part where it is tied above the knee; and another person extends his hand over in such a way that he inserts his hands under the patient's armpits, then ties them with a rope above the thigh; and another holds the head of the rope; and extend both upwards and downwards all at once, until the patient is lifted from the ground all at once, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common for the four similitudes, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not so, it is necessary to treat its similitude. If the dislocation is in the shoulder blade, you must support the patient on his healthy side, then place the bandage at the root of the thigh, and below the angle, then tie the bandage upwards towards the angle and towards the spine; then have another minister grasp the patient's arm, and embrace the large bone of the affected thigh, extending it firmly: it will now return to its place; and this method of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot tie it in this manner as we have said, it is necessary to tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong bandage under the heels and knees, and let the affected leg be extended about two feet more than the other; then hang it from the top of a stake, and extend its arms long on either side. Then command one minister to embrace the top of the thigh, and have another minister hanging alongside the patient, who firmly embraces the thigh, for the joint is now returning quickly.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocations are at fault, the patient lies down, as we have said in that which has gilbosexterity, and draw the thread above the sick leg properly, and above the peel also; then place two sticks, one at the head and one at the feet, then thrust the stick between the thighs of the sick person according to form; and plant moist cloths around, so that it does not scab the sick person, then stretch each minister toward him, and the mirrors set equal to his hand the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	And if it returns, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	And if not, place it on the table and press it as we have said in gilbosexterity, and let the patient lie on the healthy side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is forward, it must be stretched out the bad leg hastily, and according to what I have said; and place the mirror on the painful side, then press with the other hand, and stretch downwards towards the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is to the side, it must not be stretched downwards or lifted from the ground, but should be positioned as if the hip were dislocated to the side, as we have said in our description of lying on two hips; and it should be placed under the buttock, with the ligament stretched as we have said before, and one hand should press at the joint on the table. It will be done when the patient stretches his legs, and they are equal; then adjust the thighs, apply the plaster, and wrap with a bandage so that the hips do not move; and let it rest for three or four days, then remove the bandage and apply the plaster again; and if you see that they are equal, continue to wrap as before for three days; then remove the bandage, and allow the limb to heal properly until the member is strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: namely, internally and externally, and behind; and it does not dislocate in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the sign is that you command the patient to bend his leg at the thigh, and if it does not fit against the thigh, know that it is dislocated; and for the restoration of all, you make the patient sit upright, extend his leg if he can, and place your back against his thigh, placing his foot on yours; then take his knee with your palms, pull gently between your hands, and form the two sides of the knee firmly. And have other ministers extend his foot until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that the leg fits easily against the thigh. Then apply the plaster, and warm the leg at the thigh, binding them tightly for three or four days, then release. The patient must not move much until the limb is strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not in place, administer strong stretching, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the dislocation of the heel
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The heel is dislocated once, and thoroughly reduced both inside and outside.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and shifts forward to the part where it was dislocated: the movement is slight, and one should gently stretch it with their hands when it is only reduced.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is thoroughly reduced, you must seat the patient upright, and have the attendants hold them by the leg above the ankle; then pull the foot toward yourself with your right hand, and twice with your left. Stretch it upward and beautifully place the foot high. Do this twice, as we said, by pulling and pulling the foot. If it returns, that is well; if not, restart the procedure, for it will return. If it cannot return in this manner, have the patient lie on their back on the ground, and firmly drive a stake into the earth between their thighs, tying it tightly with cloth so as not to bind the patient. Then have the attendants hold the thigh, and others stretch the foot by their hands or at the ankle, securing it above the ankle; then stretch each attendant equally, and the stake should be fixed between the patient's thighs to hold the patient when they are stretched. Place your fingers equally on the dislocation with both hands, and have another attendant hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is in place, put the plaster and plugs over it, bind up well, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are behind the ankle, that the ties not be too tight; then let it remain for two or three days, and as the ties loosen, so does he remove them; then untie on the third or fourth day, and prevent the patient from going about for four days; and if he goes before this term, it is not safety that he will not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess comes up, it must be relieved as we have said elsewhere until it is healed.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When both are dislocated, they must be beautifully extended with effort, and this is a light matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any notch of the back or foot, you must place the patient on a firm bench or on a ii. table entirely straight, and put his foot on what appears from these joints, then press firmly on his foot until it returns; and when it is equal, and nothing appears, place under the sole of the foot a bench for heads, then hold firmly, and let him rest three days, then release him; and make him rest until he is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	of wound and dislocation together
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation, and one sees hope for restoration: do not be presumptuous in the cure, if you are not skilled in the art and have not used it long, and if you are not all pitiful and merciful and late; nor too bold. Use at the beginning of things that pacify hot abscesses, and leave the patient to God, if you see no hope of healing; and when you see hope, now reduce the member to its place, as the hot abscesses lose their life; and when the members are in place, administer things that pacify hot abscesses, and cure the wound as it should be with drying ointments; and if with dislocation there is fracture and small broken bones, remove them, and do what we have said about simple diseases; and keep yourself from entering the way of fear, according to what I have said, for this serves you according to your Creator, and for the knowledge that arms and protects you.
Amen	Amen
