O vos, tres chiers filz, je vos ai acomplit cest livre qui est li derriens de la science de medicine ensamble l’emplissement de lui, et ai fait la fin per ses expositions et par ses declarations.	O you, very dear sons, I have completed this book which is the last of the knowledge of medicine, putting together its fulfillment and finishing it through his explanations and by his declarations.
Et m’est venu en vision que je le vos acomplisse avec cest traitier, qui est partie de l’uevre de mains, c’est a savoir «cyrurgie».	And it has come to my vision that I should complete it with this treatise, which is part of the work of hands, that is to say "surgery".
Et por ceu que l’uevre de mains est fortraite en nostre region et est etraingie dou tout en tout, si est perie li science et decopee, et n’est riens demorez de li fuers que les petites descriptions en livres des anciens que les mains ont muees.	And because the work of hands is scarce in our region and has been lost altogether, the science has perished and been cut off, and nothing remains of it except the small descriptions in the books of the ancients that their hands have moved.
Et de ceu est venue li error et li vanitez, et sont closes les ententions et est aloignie li science.	And from this have come errors and vanity, and intentions have been closed, and the science has been abandoned.
Or me semble que je la vuel vivifier ensamble l’ordination de cest traitier selonc la voie d’exposition et de declaration et de l’abreviation; et venrai ensamble les formes des ferremens de cautere, et des autres estrumens de l’uevre avec l’ajostement de la declaration et de preparation de li, sicom il est mestier.	It seems to me that I should bring this work of the treatise to life in its entirety according to the path of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and will assemble the forms of cautery instruments, and other tools of the craft with the adjustment of their declaration and preparation as it is necessary.
Et por la raison de ceu que nuls boins maistres de mains n’est trovez en nostre tens, est li ars de medicine eslongié.	And because no skilled surgeons are found in our time, the art of medicine is neglected.
Et covient celui qui s’en entremet sormonter en la science d’anathomie, si com Galiens dit, tant qu’il saiche la juement des menbres, et les formes et les conjunctions et les separations d’aus, et aient connissance des osses et des nerf et des brais et le nombre d’ous, et le demenement et des voines movans et des reposans, et dou leu de lor issue.	And it is necessary for him who undertakes this to excel in the science of anatomy, as Galen says, so that he knows the judgment of the members, their forms and their connections and separations, and have knowledge of the bones and nerves and sinews and the number of them, and their movements and veins moving and resting, and from where they issue.
Et por ceu dist Ypocras que li nons avec le non est mout, et avec l’uevre est poc; et meismement en l’art de main.	And because of this, Hippocrates said that words are much, and deeds are little; especially in the art of surgery.
Nos vos disons en l’introite de cest livre que qui n’est conissans des choses devant dites, si se gart qu’il ne chiece en error et qu’il n’ocie les homes; ensi que j’ai veut maintes fois plusors de ces qui s’entremettent de ceste science et si s’abandonent sen science et sens experiment.	In the introduction of this book, we say that whoever is not acquainted with the things previously said should take care not to act in error and not deceive people; so that I have often wished many of those who undertake this science and abandon their knowledge and experience.
Car je vis un fol mire qui copa I apostume de scrophules ou col d’une femme, et copa les arteres dou col; por coi tant de sanc issit hors que li femme cheit morte entre ses mains.	For I saw a fool who incised an abscess of scrofula or throat in a woman, and incised the arteries of her neck; because so much blood flowed out that the woman died in her own hands.
Et vis I autre mire qui traït une piere d’un home d’eaige, et li piere estoit grans; si emporta avec li une piece de la vessie, et fut mors li hons dedens III jors.	And I saw another fool who extracted a stone from an old man, and the stone was large; so he took with it a piece of the bladder, and died the man within three days.
Et je i avoie ja esteit apelez por lou traire, et vis la disposition dou malaide et la grandor de la piere, et soi bien s’on lou tailloit il en morroit.	And I had already been called to draw the stone, and saw the patient's condition and the size of the stone, and knew well that if it were cut out he would die.
Et vis I autre mire qui prist en cure I duc de nostre terre qui avoit la jambe brisie, et avec la briseure ot plaie; et li mires plains d’ignorance estraint la brisure sus la plaie as esteles par fort lieure, et ne lassa a la plaie point de xalain, et le lassa ensi I termine; et li comanda qu’il ne la desliast mie; et demora ensi que li jambe fut toute enflee et li piez et vint a perdition.	And I saw another patient who was treating the duke of our land, who had a broken leg, and with the breaks there were wounds; and the ignorant surgeons fixed the break over the wound with strong ligatures, and left no scab on the wound, and left it thus to end; and ordered that he not loosen it; and remained thus until the leg became entirely swollen and the foot rotted away.
Je fuis apelez por venir a lui, et me hastai por venir deslier la jambe; et quant je l’oi desloie si fut em pais et ne sentit point de dolor.	I was called to come to him, and hastened to come to release the leg; and when I heard it dislocate, he was at peace and felt no pain.
Mais toute voie li corruptions estoit ja confermee ou membre, et ne la poi saner; et ne cessa li corrution d’aler par le membre tant que li membres fut dou tout perdus.	But all the way in which corruption was already confirmed or member, and could not be healed; and the corruption did not cease to go through the member until the member was entirely lost.
Et vis I autre mire qui effondra I apostume enchancreit, et puis enflama per le malice de sa signorie.	And take another method which collapses the abscess by pricking it, and then inflames it through the evil of its own nature.
Car chancre, quant il est purs d’umor melancolique, ne covient mie qu’on i(l) touche de fer s’il n’est en teil leu c’on puisse toute oster ce que est corrumpus.	For an abscess, when it is pure melancholic humor, it is not fitting to touch it with iron if it is not in a place where one can entirely remove what is corrupted.
Et por ceu, treschier filz, vos est besoig que vos sachiez que oevre de mains est devisee en II divisions: c’est asavoir, huevre ou il a peril en plusors dispositions; et je mostrerai en chescun leu de cest livre ou il a paour et peril.	And for this reason, skilled surgeon, you are in need that you know that the work of hands is divided into two parts: namely, where there is danger in many positions; and I will show in each place of this book where there is fear and danger.
Por coi il est besoig que vos vos en gardez, si que li fol mire ne puissent mal parler de vos Si prenez vos armes en cusenson, et entreprenez vos malaides legierement et fermement, et usez de la millor voie si que per la graice de Deu vos venez a salut et soiez loez; et lassiez les maladies espoantables de grief saniteit; et ostez vos armes de ceu que vos fait douter, et aiez foit en vos si que vos puissiez venir de cestui monde a l’autre de gloire.	Because it is necessary that you take care, so that the foolish ones do not speak ill of you. If you take your arms in counsel, and undertake your ailments lightly and firmly, and use the better way, so by the grace of God you come to salvation and be joyful; and leave the terrible diseases for health; and take away from those who make you doubt your arms, and have faith in them that you may come from this world to the other of glory.
Galiens dist en aucuns de ses amonestemens: «Ne prenez mie en cure male maladie, que vos ne soiez apelez fol mire.	Galisien said in some of his admonishments: "Do not take care of a base illness, lest you be called a foolish one.
» J’ai deviseit cest traitier selonc III chapitres.	I have dealt with this treatise according to three chapters.
Li premiers chapitres est des cauteres de feu et dé cauteres de medicine ague, et est li chapitres ordenez de lou chief jusques as piez; et des formes des estrumens, et des ferremens de cautere, et de tout ceu qui est necessaire en l’ueuvre.	The first chapters are about fire cauteries and cauteries of medicinal water, and they order the chapters from the head down to the feet; and about the forms of instruments, and the tools for cautery, and all that is necessary in the work.
Li secons chapitres si est de taillier et de percier, et des ventouses et des plaies, et des estractions des saiettes, et des semblans choses; et est li chapitres ordenez et les formes des estrumens.	The second chapters are about cutting and piercing, and about suction cups and wounds, and about the extraction of arrows, and similar things; and they order the chapters and provide the forms of instruments.
Li tiers chapitres est de restorer les dislocations et des torcions, et des semblans choses; et est ordeneiz des lou chief jusc’as piez, et des formes des estrumens.	The third chapters are about resetting dislocations and torsions, and similar things; and they are ordered from the head down to the feet, and provide the forms of instruments.
Ainsois que nos nos remembriens de l’uevre, il covient que je die la qualiteit de l’aide et dou nuisement de chescune complexion.	Thus, as we recall the work, it is necessary for me to describe the quality of the aid and the harm of each complexion.
Je dis que li qualiteis de l’aide, et dou nuisement, est li plus longe parole et subtilz science et li secrez reponus; et de ceu parlerent li plusors des saiges, et s’acorderent a ceu; et me soffisent poc lor paroles, car je redous la longesce.	I say that the qualities of the aid and its harm are topics of great length and subtle science, and secret responses; and on this many wise men have spoken, and agreed upon it; and their words suffice me little, for I fear the length.
Je dis que cautere aide universement a toute complexion ou il a matiere, fuer que II complexions: c’est a savoir complexion chaude sens matere, et complexion seche sens matere.	I say that the fire cautery helps universally for all temperaments where there is matter; there are two temperaments: namely, warm temperament due to matter, and dry temperament due to matter.
En complexion chaude et seche ensamble matiere, deviserent aucun et dirent que cautere i est grans aide; et li autre dirent le contraire: que cautere ne vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de sechour.	In the warm and dry temperament with matter present, some debated and said that the fire cautery is great help; others said the opposite: that the fire cautery does not help for diseases coming from heat and dryness.
Car li nature dou feu si est chaude, et ne doit mie estre cureiz de chaude maladie par chalor, ne per sechour; et dist cil qui dist lou contraire que cautere fait grant aide a maladie chaude et seche que vient en cors des homes.	For the nature of fire is warm, and should not be applied to diseases that are hot due to heat or dryness; those who said the opposite stated that the fire cautery provides great help for hot and dry diseases that affect the body.
Car quant tu comperes le cors de l’ome et sa moistor a la complexion dou feu, tu trueves le cors froit.	For when you examine the body of a man and its moisture according to the nature of fire, you find the body cold.
Et je m’acorde a ceste parole.	And I agree with this word.
Car je l’ai troveit aucune fois per experiment.	For I have found it to be so through experience.
Et toute voie, ne s’en entremette mie fuers que cil qui l’a esproveit, et qui conoit par lonc usaige le chapistre des cauteres, et la diversiteit des complexions des homes, et les dispositions et les causes de lor maladies, et les sorvenues et l’espaice dou tens; des autres complexions n’avons nos mie paour, meismement em maladies froides et moistes.	And moreover, let no one intervene in this except those who have proven it and know through long use the chapter on cauteries, the diversity of the natures of men, and their dispositions and causes of diseases, and their outcomes and duration over time; we fear nothing from other natures, especially in cold and moist diseases.
Et tuit li mire s’asemblerent et s’acorderent au cautere.	And all the wounds gathered and agreed with the cautery.
Et sachiez, filz, que cautere ensamble feu si est des secrez des cures, et de plus grant bonteit que cautere de medicine ardant.	And know, son, that the fire cautery together with the heat is part of wound care secrets, and has greater goodness than the cautery of burning medicine.
Car li feus est simples, et ne vient mie fuers que au membre qui est cuis, et ne nuit a autre membre se poc nom.	For the fire is simple, and affects only the part that is cauterized, and does not harm other parts much.
Les medicines ardans vienent de membre a autre en aloignant, et font venir au membre maladies de grief sanation; et par aventure ocit lou malaide Li feus por sa hautece et por la bonteit de sa substance ne fait mie ceu, s’il n’i a superfluiteit.	The burning medicines spread from part to another and bring diseases harmful to healing to the other parts; and by chance, the fire kills the patient due to its intensity and the goodness of its substance if there is no excess.
Et ceu vos ai je troveit par experiment et par la longesce dou servise et de l’estude que j’ai mis en l’art, et esteit sus la verteit des choses; et por ceu je m’escuse de la longesce de la parole, car il ne me plait mie que je vos oste le secreit qui est reponus ou feu, et la qualiteit de l’uevre, coment il deboute les maladies des cors, si com li philosophe le dit en demostrant; or le recevez en vos pensees.	And I have found this through experiment and the length of service and study I have devoted to the art, which is based on the truth of things; and for this reason, I excuse the length of my words, as it pleases me not to deprive you of the secret concerning fire, and the quality of the work, how it expels diseases from the body, as the philosopher demonstrates. Receive it in your thoughts.
Et sachiez, fil, que il s’acorderent en quel tens doient estre faites les cauteres, et eslirent prientens.	And know, boy, when the cauteries should be applied, and they chose to pray about it.
Et je dis que cautere est covenable en tous tens, por ceu que li nuisemens sorvenans est desoz mis par l’aide dou cautere; et meismement se li cauteres est por dolors necessaires fors et hastans que ne puent atendre le tens que plus grans malice ne veigne au membre.	And I say that the cautery is suitable in all times, because the evils coming from within are kept off by the aid of the cautery; and especially when the cautery is for pains necessary and urgent that cannot wait for the larger evil to arise in the limb.
Et n’i pensez onques, chier fil, si com font li fol mire; car a la maladie qui est sanee par cautere n’a point de revenue; et il le dient ensi; mais il n’est mie si com il cuident, por ce que cauteres nen est que medicine qui mue la complexion, et seche les humors que sont cause de la dolor, et vaut mues que medicine por le hastement de sa valor, et por la vertut de son oevre et de sa signorie.	And never think that way, dear boy, as the foolish doctors do; for a disease that is healed by cautery does not return. They say this, but it is not as they believe, because a cautery is not medicine that changes the complexion or dries the humors that cause pain. It is worth more than medicine due to the speed of its effect and the virtue of its action and authority.
Et possans chose est que li maladie viegne aucune fois selonc la complexion dou malaide et lou leu de la maladie et sa vertut; et sont assemblees en lui les superfluitez par l’aquisition des viandes et des semblans choses, se ce n’est cauteres administrez em leu ou il ait poc de superfluitez et de moistor, si com cauteres de dens por la dolor, et les semblans choses, et teil dolor ne revient mie; mais ce avient poc.	And it is possible that the disease comes once according to the constitution of the patient and the location of the disease and its virtue; and in him are gathered the superfluities through the acquisition of meats and similar things, if not cauterizations applied at the place where there is little superfluity and moisture, such as cauterizations for teeth due to pain, and similar things, and such pain does not return at all; but this happens rarely.
Et mout de gens n’entendent mie por coi cauteres est apelez li derriens de medecine, et c’est voir; mais il ne croient mie que cauteres vaille aprés medicine, mais lor ententions est fause, et est cauteres li derriens de medicine por ceu que quant nos aministrons manieres de cures en aucune maladie et elles ne valent, adonc administrons nos le cautere, et il vaut.	And few people understand why cauterizations are called the last resort of medicine, and it is true; but they do not believe that cauterizations are effective after medicine, and their intentions are false. For when we administer methods of treatment in any disease and they do not work, then we apply the cautery, and it is effective.
Adonques apert bien que cauteres est li derriens de medicine, ne mie selonc l’entention des folz mires.	Therefore it is well known that cauterization is the latest in medicine, not according to the intent of wise men.
Li ancien dirent que cauteres d’estrument d’or est muedres que de fer, et ne dirent ceu fuers que por la qualiteit de l’or et por la hautece de sa substance; et dirent que li leus de cautere ne fait mie porriture, mais ceu n’est mie voir car je l’ai esprovei, et ai troveit que c’est voir en aucuns homes; et cauteres d’or vaut mues que de fer, si com il lou dirent.	The ancients said that cauterizers of gold are better than iron, and they did not say this because of the quality of the gold and its high substance; and they said that the leeches of the cauterizer do not cause putrefaction, but this is not true, for I have proven it and found that it is so in some men; and cauterizers of gold are better than iron, as they said.
Et toutevoie quant tu chaufes estrument d’or, tu ne seis mie quant il est chaus par la color de l’or, et s’est tantost refroidiez; et s’on le chaufe trop; si font au feu; et ensi i a assez d’empechement.	And whenever you heat an instrument of gold, you cannot judge when it is hot by the color of the gold, and it must be cooled immediately; and if you heat it too much, you must dip it in water; and thus there are sufficient hindrances.
Et por ce usons nos de cautere de feir que nos l’avons mues apparilliet a nostre oevre.	And for this, we use the fire cautery that we have prepared suitable for our work.
Or vos ai ordeneit cest chapitre des lou chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que li voie soit plus legiere a trover.	Or you have ordered this chapter from the head to the feet, because the veins shall be more easily found.
dou cautere olivaire	of the olive oil cautery
Cist cauteres vaut a moistor et a froidor sus lou cerveil, et en i a dous c’on fait par la cause d’une maladie qui est apelee «soda», et par la cause de maintes humors qui dessendent dou chief as eulz, et as oreilles, et por multitude de songes et dolor de dens et dolor de gorge, et meismement a toutes maladies qui vienent de froidor si com paralisie et sode et apoplexie et semblans maladies.	This cautery is good for moisture and cold in the head, and there are two of them on which we perform due to the cause of a disease called "soda," and due to many humors that descend from the head to the eyes, and to the ears, and for the multitude of dreams and toothache and throat pain, and especially for all diseases that come from cold such as paralysis, soda, apoplexy, and similar diseases.
Li forme de cest cautere si est que li malaides soit espurgiez par medicine solutive mondifiant le chief III nuis ou IIII, selonc ceu que li vertus et li eaige et li acostumance dou malaide le puet soffrir; et puis fai rere lou chief dou malaide.	The form of this cautery is such that the patient should be purified by solvent medicines changing the root three or four times, according to what the virtues and strength and custom of the patient allow; and then remove the root from the patient.
Et puis le fai seoir croisiet entre tes mains, et mettre ses mains sor som peis; aprés met la racine de ta palme sus la racine de son neis entre ses II eulz; et lai ou venra tes dois moiens, si saigne d’enche puis eschaufe le cautere qui est apelé «olivare», de coi ci est li forme:	And then place it crosswise between your hands, and put his hands on the side of your head; after that, put the root of your palm over the root of his nose between his two eyes; where your two ends meet, let it bleed profusely, then heat the cautery called "olivare," whose form is as follows:
Et le met sor le leu signiet d’encre, et fai en dessendant et en estraignant ta main poc et poc en trestornant; puis lieve ta main isnelement, et rewarde le leu se tu vois l’os I sol petit; et se tu ne lou vois, si rencomence le cautere tant que tu voies l’os si com je lou t’ai dit; aprés pren I poc de seil, et met en awe et molle coton dedens, et met sor le leu, et li laisse III jors; aprés met sus cotun moilliet en burre; et laisse sus tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés cure la plaie de l’oignement qui est apelez «tetrafarmaçon», tant qu’il soit sanez.	And place it on the marked spot with ink, and let your hand descend and withdraw little by little in turning; then withdraw your hand entirely, and look if you see the bone a little; and if you do not see it, start again with the cautery until you see the bone as I have said. After that, take a bit of salt, and put in soft cotton, and place it on the spot, and let it be for three days; afterward, put a moist cloth in butter; leave it there until the burning is gone; afterwards, treat the wound with ointment called "tetrafarmaco" until it is healed.
Et se dirent li ancien, que quant plus demoure overte li plaie, plus s’espurge; et por ce si aide mues.	And the ancients said that when a wound remains open longer, it purges more; for this reason, they advised keeping it moving.
Et dirent aucun de ces que on doit tant lassier le cautere que partie de l’os soit arse, et puis rese on ceu qui est ars de l’os, et soit curez.	And it was said that one should allow the cautery to burn part of the bone, and then remove what is burned from the bone, and it should be cured.
Et dient li autre c’on doit le cautere tant lassier sus, et bouter si fort c’on abaite de l’os ausi large comme I vertoil que les femmes mettent en lor fusez por ceu que les humors issent mues hors; et doit on lassier la plaie longement overte; aprés le doit on curer et sodeir.	And others say that the cautery should be applied for a longer time, and pressed so forcefully that it displaces bone as wide as the ring that women wear in their noses, for this causes the humors to move out. One should keep the wound open long; afterwards, one should cure and draw out.
Et ces II manieres de cauteres ne me semblent mie estre bones dou tout en tout, fuers qu’en aucuns homes ou il ait voie de paor; et mues me semble que je lou doie laissier; car li chiés li est afoiblis par les solutions continuees de nature, si com nos le tesmoignons ens autres membres; et meisme quant li chiés dou malaide est foibles par nature, et li premiere semblance de cautere est plus salve et muedre por moi, et de celi use je oevre en donques emsamble salut.	And these two methods of cautery do not seem entirely good to me, except in some cases where there is a fear of pain; and I believe that I should keep the less severe one. For the shoulder is weakened by continuous natural drainage, as we testify with other limbs; and even when the patient's shoulder is naturally weak, and the first application of cautery appears more beneficial and effective to me, from this I work in their assembly for a certain salvation.
de l’anciainne dolor dou chief	from the old pain of the head
Quant en tout le chief vient dolor croniques, et dure longement, si doit user li malaides yeris et pilules qui sont apelees «cochie», et d’espurgement de chief et d’oiles et d’emplastres; et s’on li fait le cautere que nos avons devant dit, et il ne vaut.	When chronic pain comes to the head and lasts long, the patient should use years and pills called "cochie" and head purgatives, oils, and plasters; and if one makes the fire cautery as we have already said, it is not useful.
Pren warde se li chiés dou malade est de fort nature, et qu’il ne soit trop froit; adonques le cauterize desoz celui cautere un poc que nos avons dit desus.	Take care that the patient's head is of strong nature and not too cold; then cauterize below that cautery a little as we have said above.
Aprés fai cautere sus chescune corne dou chief jusc’a l’os, si com devant avons dit, et fai I cautere ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz»; et est I leus en coi on met ventouses; et alige ta main si que tu ne voises mie jusc’a l’os: li malaides sent trop plus grant dolor en cest cautere que as autres, et je em parlerai aillors; et covient que li cauteres des cornes soient plus subtis que cil dont on cautere la moieneteit dou chief, et c’est li forme:	After cauterizing each horn of the head to the bone, as we have said before, make the cautery on the side called "vasselz"; and this side is where one places suction cups; and lighten your hand so that you do not go too close to the bone: patients feel much more pain in this cautery than others, and I will speak of it elsewhere; and the cautery for the horns should be finer than that used for the middle part of the head, and this is its form.
dou cautere dou chief	for the fire cautery of the head
Quant en une partie dou chief vient dolor sodaine, et est estendue li maladie jusc’a l’oil, et li chiés est espurgiez par medicines mondifians, et on a fait les autres cures que j’ai dit en la division des maladies, et tout ceu ne profite mie: adonques li fai cauteres selonc II manieres, c’est a savoir de medicine ague et de feir.	When sudden pain comes to a part of the head and the illness extends to the eye, and the head is purged by cleansing medicines, and other treatments I have said in the division of diseases have been done, and all this does not help: then he makes cauterizations according to two methods, that is, with medicine that is aqueous and with fire.
Li cauteres de medicine ague si est que tu preignes une doce d’alz, et oste l’escorce et le recope I poc as II chiés, et puis fent la temple ou li dolor tient en teil maniere que tu puisses reponre la doce d’alz desoz le cuir; et quant elle sera reponuee si le lie et l’estraint bien et le laisse ensi XII houres; et puis le deslie et trait fuers la doce d’ail, et laisse la plaie ensi II jors ou III; puis met sus cotun plongiet en burre tant que porreture en isse.	The cauterization with aqueous medicine is done by taking a piece of alum, removing the rind and outer layer just a little around the head where the pain is located in such a way that you can place the alum piece beneath the skin; and when it is placed there, bind it well and leave it for twelve hours; then remove the binding and apply a dressing with a piece soaked in butter; let the wound remain covered for two or three days; then cover it with a poultice of honey until healed.
Aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues si fai ceu d’aucunes medicines comburans que j’ai escrites ou dozime traitier des medicines comburans.	After the application of ointment until he is healed; and if you see, do those of some burning medicines that I have written or in the seventh treatise on burning medicines.
Li cautere de fer si est selonc ceste meniere.	The iron cautery is done in this manner.
Chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	Heat the iron cautery which has the form:
Et est apelez «clos» por ceu que li chief est fait a la forme d’un clo ou il ait I poc de corbeure, et em mileu a une petite apparance; et le met sor le leu dolorous, et tien ta main et trestorne le feir un poc legierement, tant que li moitiez de l’espés dou keur soit arse; et lieve ta main que li artere n’arde, que est defuers, et decorre habundance de sanc.	And it is called "clos" because the tip is made in the shape of a small cup with only a little bulge, and in the middle there is a small opening; and place it on the painful area, and hold your hand and gently move the iron slightly, until the half thickness of the flesh under the heart is burned; then lift your hand so that the artery, which is above, does not burn, and let out an abundance of blood.
Aprés met coton en awe de seil, et met sor le leu par III jors; puis i met coton moilliet em burre, et puis cure le leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vuelz cauterize ceste emigraine avec le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare», a tout la pointe, et te garde de coper l’artere en ceste emigraine qui n’est mie anciaine.	After apply cotton for the sake of the sore for three days; then put moistened cotton in butter, and afterward cure the shoulder with ointment until it is healed; and if you wish to cauterize this headache with the cautery called "cultellare", do so entirely at the point, and take care not to cut the artery in this headache which is not old.
de emigraine	of the headache
Quant tu cures emigraine si com nos avons devant dit en divisions des maladies, et ne profite mie, et vois que li cauteres devant dis de la medicine et dou fer ne li soffit mie, adonques covient il que tu eschaufes le cautere qui est apelez «cultellare» tant qu’il soit blans; et seigne ainsois sor le leu doillant une ligne de demi doi de lonc, et oste ta main une fois, et l’estrain que tu ne coper l’artere et que ne viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde de la mandibule que muet quant on menjut, et li ners n’ait regart que la muet et que spasmus ne veigne a malaide, et te warde de decorrement de sanc de l’artere quant elle sera copee, ou copement ait grant paour et meismement a celui que ne s’i conoit, et qui n’est estudians et esprovez; et laisse l’uevre em mi voie; mais je vos dirai coment on restainche sanc quant li artere est copee, et je vos mostrerai a leu ou il afiert en cest livre.	When you treat the headache as we have said before in the divisions of diseases, and it does not improve, and you see that the cautery and iron previously mentioned from medicine are not sufficient, then it is necessary to heat the cautery called "cultellare" until it is white-hot; and prick the shoulder along a line half an inch long, and withdraw your hand once, ensuring you do not cut the artery and do not go as far as the bone; and beware of the jaw that moves when eating, and let the nerves have only regard to the movement and avoid any spasm in the patient, and beware of bleeding from the artery when it is cut, or cutting with great fear and especially for those who are not students and inexperienced; and leave the work unfinished; but I will tell you how to stop bleeding when the artery is cut, and I will show you where it occurs in this book.
Et se tu vois que cist cauteres ne soffise mie a la maladie, et li malaides est soffrans, cauterize le enmi le chief ausi com nos avons dit, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et se tu vues, aministre le cautere que nos avons dit ou chapistre de l’estraction de l’artere, avec le cautere qui ait II coutelz; et est cist cauteres millors de celui et plus aidans.	And if you see that this cautery does not suffice for the illness, and the patient is suffering, cauterize them between the shoulders as we have said, and treat the wound until it is healed; and if you see, administer the cautery as we have said or the chapter of the extraction of the artery, with a cautery that has two knives; and this cautery is better and more helpful than the other.
de la dolor des oreilles de part froidor	Of the pain in the ears due to cold
Quant en l’oreille vient dolor de froit, et on i a ovreit de medicines solutives et des autres cures que nos avons dit en la division, et li dolors ne se muet, adonques eschaufe cest cautere qui est apelez «poins», de coi ci est li forme:	When pain in the ear comes from cold, and medicines have been applied as well as other treatments that we have mentioned in the division, and the pains do not change, then warm this cautery called "poins," of which the form is as follows:
Aprés pointoie tout entor l’oreille malaide, ou entor les II se la dolor tient en ambedous, et t’esloigne un poc ensus de la racine de l’oreille puis que tu as signiet le leu d’enche; et ait X poins entor chescune oreille; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After puncturing entirely through the sick ear, or in both places where pain resides, and then move a little upwards from the root of the ear after you have marked the site; and make ten points in each ear; after that cure the site until it is healed.
de la torture de la bouche	of torturing the mouth
Torture qui doit estre curee par cautere nen est fuers que de celles que muevent de fleume, si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladie; et ne faire point de cautere as semblances que vienent de sechor et de spame de ners.	Torture that must be cured by cauterization is not of those that move from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases; and do not make any cauterization for symptoms that come from drying and wasting of nerves.
Quant tu cures ceste semblance de torture qui muet de fleume d’ydres et d’espurgemens de chief et de gargarisme, et ceu ne vaut, adonc covient que tu cauterizes le malaide de III cauteres: l’une en la racine de l’oreille, et l’autre un poc defuers la temple, et le tier en l’ajostement des II levres; et met le cautere en la partie qui apert saine, et li fai cautere endroit le chief de l’oreille desus un poc desoz la corne dou chief, et un autre en la temple ausi longe com uns poce; et laisse le cautere tant sus que li moitiez dou keur soit arse; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	When you cure this symptom of torture that moves from phlegm in the fluids and from purgings of bile and gargling, and if it does not improve, then you must cauterize the sick person with three cauterizations: one at the root of the ear, and another a little above the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips; and place the cauterizer in the part that appears healthy, and make the cauterization over the top of the head just below the corner of the head, and another on the temple as long as an inch; and leave the cauterizer there until the middle of the heart is burned; and this is the form of the cauterization.
Et est li semblance dou cutellaire que nos avons mise devant, mais il est un poc plus subtilz et covient que li coutelz soit un poc plus gros; aprés cure lou leu si com j’ai devant dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And it is the likeness of the cutaneous one that we have placed before, but it is a bit more subtle and it should be that the knives are a bit larger; after curing the head as I have said before, until it is healed.
Quant apoplexie est ancieinne et tu la cures ensi com nos avons dit, et il ne profite mie, et li malaides n’ait fievre, adonques li fai IIII cauteres: II sus les II cornes dou chief, et I emmi le chief, et I ou leu qui est apelez «vasselz» si com nos avons devant dit, et lou derrien cautere sus la bouche de l’estomac; et soit curez si com nos avons dit devant.	When apoplexy is old and you cure it as we have said, and the patient does not improve, and the patient has no fever, then I make four cauteries: two on the two horns of the head, one in the head, and one on the part called "vassels" as we have said before, and the last cautery on the opening of the stomach; and they should be cured as we have said before.
de litargie	For lithargy
A cest maladie covient doner au malaide yeres grans et pilules mondifians le cerveil; aprés reis lou chief dou malaide tout, et li met sus l’occipite l’emplaustre de sinapi qui est escrit ou traitier des emplastres; et c’est li maniere dou cautere: si lou fai si com j’ai dit.	For this disease, it is fitting to give the patient great and purifying herbs for the brain; afterwards rinse the head of the patient thoroughly, and put on the occiput the plaster of mustard which is written or treated in the chapter on plasters; and this is the manner of cautery: do so as I have said.
S’il est sanez ensi, boin est; et s’il ne l’est, se li fai III cauteres des emmi le chief en dessendant jusc’a col, et ait d’espaice entre chescun cautere I doi de gros; et le cure si com les autres, et se tu i vues ajoster, et li malaides est soffrans, se li fai I cautere en mileu; et se mestiers est, II autres sus les II cornes, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare», si com j’ai devant dit.	If it is thus clean, well. And if not, do three cauteries descending from the head down to the neck, and have a large space between each cautery one day. Cure as with the others, and if you see fit, and the patient suffers, do the third cautery in the middle; and when necessary, two more over the two horns, and cure until it is clean. Let the cauteries which are called "olivare," as I have said before.
de la froidor dou chief	of the cold from the head
Il covient que li chief soit mundifiez de yeres et de ceu que nos avons devant dit; aprés reis le chief dou malaide, puis li fai cautere emmi le chief et sus chescune corne, et I derrier et III sus l’espinee dou col; et se tu en as plus mestier, et li cors est moiste et li malaides est soffrans, et li maladie est fors, se li fai IIII cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos; et li laisse tant que li plus dou keur soit ars, et lieve ta main; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «olivare» que nos avons devant dit.	It is necessary that the head be cleaned of grease and as we have said before; after this, lift the head of the patient, then apply a fire cautery between the head and on each horn, behind and three above the spine of the neck; and if you need more, and the body is moist and the patient is in pain, and the disease is strong, make four fire cauteries above the spine of the back; and let it be until the softest part is burned, then remove your hand; after this, treat until it is healed, and use the cautery called "olivare" as we have said before.
de l’epilempsie	of epilepsy
Li epilentiques ne doit useir de cautere fuers que cil qui est fleumatique, et covient premier mondifier le cerveil de yeres et d’autres cures que nos avons dites en la division quant li malaides est grans et soffrans de penre medicine.	Lepers should not use fire cautery except those who are phlegmatic, and it is necessary first to modify the brain with years and other treatments as we have said in the division when the patients are great and suffer from weak medicine.
Et se c’est uns enfes qui ne lou puisse soffrir, se li fai gargarisme et mastication mondifiant le cerveil sovent avec bones viandes; aprés li reis lou chief em mileu, et i fai I cautere selonc ce que nos avons dit devant, et I cautere sus lou vassel, et sus chescune corne; et se li malaides est fors et soffrans, se li fai cauteres si com j’ai dit a celui qui ait paralisie et mollification de cors, sus l’espinee dou dos et dou col, et soit li cauteres olivier selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if it is an infant who cannot tolerate the pain, they should do gargling and chewing, often modifying the brain with good meats; afterwards pierce the tongue in the middle, and do the fire cautery as we have said before, and on the vessels, and on each horn; and if the patient is strong and suffers greatly, they should do the fire cauteries as I said for those with paralysis and softening of the body, on the spine of the back and neck, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to the manner I have said.
Se li malaides est enfes, se li fai I cautere subtil selonc ceste maniere:	If the patient is inflamed, if you do the fire cautery delicately according to this manner:
Quant par la cause de melancolie sunt les superfluitez ou les moistors corrumpues et fleume grosse, adonques lou cauterize de teils cauteres com nos avons dit a celui qui ait paralisie.	When by the cause of melancholy the superfluities or corrupt humors are thick and gross, then use the cautery with such cauteries as we have said for that which has paralysis.
Et se par la cause de melancolie est li superfluitez declinans a melancolie, et est li cors dou malaide moistes, adonc li done a boivre chose par coi li cervelz soit mundifiez, selonc ceu qu’il est devant en la division.	And if by the cause of melancholy the superfluities are declining into melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give to drink something whereby the brain may be cleansed, according to what is said before in the division.
Aprés reis lou chief dou malaide; aprés fai I torteil de lin bien fait, ausi com I cercle, si le met emmi le chief; et li malaides sié croisiez, et soit bien tenus de toutes pars; aprés presente le linement, et vaut mues de burre de berbis ancien; et lou chaufe a feu tempreement, si que li dois s’on li boute le puisse soffrir; aprés vuide le cercle par dedens emmi le chief, et lou laisse refroidier; et fai ce a malaide chescune semaine une fois avec autre governement boin, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the patient is laid down; after make the linen torteil well made, as a circle, so put it under the head; and the patient lies crossed, and be well held from all sides; afterwards present the liniment, and use mixed with old barberry butter; and the heated fire tempered, that the dew on it if one breathes can bear it; after empty the circle from within under the head, and let it cool; and do this to the patient each week once with another good government, until he is healed.
Ou se tu vues cauterize lou en faisant poins plusors a tot le cautere.	If you see the cautery mark, make pricks at several places over the entire cautery area.
Ceste maniere de cautere amoistit le cerveil igaument; et puis met sus coton moilliet en burre et en graisse de geline.	This method of cautery moistens the brain more; and then place wet cotton in butter and gelatin.
de l’awe des eulz	from the fear of the eyes
Quant awe vient premierement as eulz par les signes que j’ai dit en la division, adonques encomence et done boivre au malaide chose mundifiant le chief, et le warde de toutes moistors, et lou fai suer ou bain plusors fois a jeun.	When fear comes first to the eyes through the signs I mentioned in the division, then begin and have the patient drink purifying things for the head, and guard him from all moisture, and make him sweat or take baths several times on an empty stomach.
Aprés li comande a rere son chief, et li fai cautere emmi le chief, et li fai II cauteres sus les II temples se li dessendemens de l’awe est as II eulz ensamble, ou en I se li dessendemens est en I; et cope a tout le cautere toutes les voines et les arteres que sont desoz le keur, et soient li cautere lonc selon lou large de la temple; et te warde de decorrement de sanc, et se tu vois trop de sanc issir, si li estainche de teil pooir com tu as.	After this, instruct him to turn his head, and make a cautery behind the head, and make two cauteries on the two temples if the descent of fear is in both eyes together, or one if the descent is in one. Cover the entire cautery area with all the veins and arteries beneath the skull, and let the cauteries be long according to the width of the temple; and guard against the flow of blood, and if you see too much blood issuing, stop it as you can.
Et je t’enseignerai en l’estraction des arteres et a l’incision la cautele coment tu l’estencheras; et aucune fois fait on cautere ou hatereil desoz les II os derrier.	And I will teach you in the extraction of arteries and incisions how to handle it; and sometimes one makes a cautery or hot iron over the two rear bones.
dou cors des larmes	of the heart the tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont ancienes et acostumees et sont sus les voines, ou delez les arteres que sont en l’aparance dou chief defors; et on voit que c’est des superfluitez froides fleumatiques, adonques li fai le cautere que j’ai dit en l’encomencement de l’awe dessendant as eulz: I cautere emmi le chief, et II cauteres sus les II temples, et II cauteres ou haiterel desoz les II os; et s’il i a besoigne plus, si le cauterize saigement desus le sorcil a tout I petit cautere.	When the tears from the eyes are old and habitual and are on the veins, or delirious arteries that appear at the front of the head; and it is seen to be cold phlegmatic excesses, then make the cautery as I said at the beginning of this work descending to the eyes: I cautere through the forehead, two cauteries above the temples, and two cauteries with hot iron over the two bones; and if there is more need, cauterize bleeding above the solar plexus on all small cauteries.
dou cors des larmes par dedens les eulz	from the body through the eyes
Quant tu le medicines selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et il ne profite mie, adonques done a boivre a malaide III nuis cochies; aprés li reis le chief, et li fai cautere ou mileu dou cautere olivaire; et fai II cauteres dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis» sus les II sorcis, un poc desoz les chevous; et te warde de l’artere que tu ne la coper.	When you medicate according to what we have said in the division, and it does not profit at all, then give the patient three noxious doses; after that, lance the head, and make him undergo a cautery or in the midst of the olive oil cautery; and make two cauteries on the cautery called "clavilis" above the two sorics, a little below the hairline; and be wary of the artery so you do not cut it.
Et c’est li forme dou cautere qui est apelez «clavilis»:	And this is the form of the cautery called "clavilis":
Quant li papiere de l’oil est mollifie de maladie et de moistor, adonques la cautarize de cest cautere qui est apelez «olivare».	When the paper of the oil becomes softened due to illness and moisture, then cauterize with this cautery called "olivare".
de coi ci est li forme:	of which here is the form:
Et se tu vues si fai II cauteres sus les II sorcis ausi lons com li sorcilz sont; et n’i lassiez mie la main fors que tant que li tierce partie de la papiere soit arse, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit.	And if you see to make two cautery marks on the two sinuses as long as the sinus tubes are; and leave the hand there except until the third part of the paper be burned, according to the manner that I have said.
dou poil qui point l’oil	of the hair that points to the eye
Aucune fois avient que li poil des oilz sont convertit au pardedens, et poignent l’oil, et i fait on cauteres selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir de feu, ou de medicine ardant.	Sometimes the hair of the eyes turns white and pricks the eye, and in such cases one makes cautery marks according to two methods: namely with fire or with burning medicine.
Ou cautere de feu comande au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient lons et igals; et s’il le poignent a lor nassance, se li estraint les eulz qu’il ne se muevent tant qu’il naissent.	For the fire cautery, instruct the patient to let the hairs grow long and even; and if they prick at their base, hold the eyes steady so they do not move until they grow.
Quant il naissent et i sont igalz, adonques met le malaide en ton sain; aprés seigne sus la papiere des eulz une figure que soit ausi com li fuelle dou mirte, et soit li comencemens dou signe delez les poilz; puis i met coton moilliet en glaire d’uef et muscillaige de persillion sus l’oil, puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When they grow and are equal, then place the patient in good health; after that draw a figure on the paper of the eye that is as large as the leaves of the laurel, and be the beginning of the sign among the hairs; then put moistened cotton in egg white and myrrh above the eye, then heat the cautery as its form is described.
Aprés cauterize sus la figure que tu as signiet poc et poc mout de fois, que li keurs soit ars lai endroit; et li signes de la santeit de l’uevre est que tu voies la papiere retraite, et les poilz levez a la pointure de l’oil; adonques lieve ta main, et laisse ensi III jors, puis i met coton moilliet en burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	After cauterizing on the figure you have drawn a little and many times, until the corners are burned in place; and the signs of health for the work are that you see the paper withdrawn, and the hairs raised to the outline of the eye; then remove your hand, and leave thus for III days, then put moistened cotton in butter until the scalding is removed; after that apply ointment treatment until it is healed.
Et se aprés ceu vienent li poilz, et li papiere est mollifie adonques rencomence le cautere sus cel leu meisme, si com tu as fait premiers; et se li poil sont defuer, si le cauterize tant que li papiere soit levee a son leu natureil, et soit igals, et ne poignent mie li poil l’oil.	And when the hairs and papers become soft, then resume the fire cautery on that same place, as you did first; and if the hairs are destroyed, cauterize until the paper is lifted to its natural place, and let it be even, and do not prick the hairs near the eye.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il laisse les poilz tant qu’il soient grans et igalz, puis fai de parchemin la forme de la foille de mirte; puis pren de savon fransois et de vive chalz, de chescun une .З., et broie ensamble bien; et le fai hastanment, si qu’il ne refroide, puis en espant sus la forme que tu es fait sicom la foille dou mirte, et met sus la papiere des eulz; et se li maladie tient en I oil soulement, si doit on ovrer en I, et se en ambedous ausi; et met desoz l’oil coton moilliet en abin d’uef; et li chiés dou malaide soit en ton sain et met ton doi mostrant sus la medicine, et presse I poc et lou muef toutes les fois que li malaide sent mordication de la medicine, car il sent mordication ausi com de feu.	The cautery of burning medicine is that you instruct the patient to let the hairs grow until they are large and even. Then make a paper in the shape of the bay leaf. Take from French soap and strong hot oil, of each one .З., and grind them well together; then apply it quickly so that it does not cool, and spread it over the paper shaped like the bay leaf, and place eyes on the paper. And if the illness is only in the eye, work in I [eye], and if in both as well; and put underneath the eye moist cotton in eggwhite; and the patient's head be in your good hand and place your finger showing over the medicine, and press the point and the eyelid every time the patient feels a burning sensation from the medicine, for he feels the burning just like fire.
Quant tu as ceu fait longement, si oste la medicine a ton doit.	When you have done this for a long time, remove the medicine according to your discretion.
Et quant li mordication sera passee, si leve le leu d’awe, et rewarde se tu vois la papiere levee ausi com s’ele estoit levee par constraignement de feu ou par incision; et s’il est ensi, si est bien.	And when the bite has passed, lift the eyelid and reward it if you see the paper lifted as if it were lifted by the constraint of fire or by incision; and if it is so, it is well.
Se ceu non, si remet encor de la medicine sus lou leu ou li medicine n’ait ovreit, tant que tes ovraiges soit igalz, et tes eulz mis a point; puis met sus coton moilliet en burre tant que li keurs ars soit cheus, aprés cure le leu de l’oignement qui est apelez «dyafenis» et d’autre, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If not, put on more medicine over the eyelid or if the medicine has not taken effect, until your actions are equal, and your eyes are steady; then place a moist cotton cloth in butter until the cornea is healed, after which cure the eyelid with ointment called "dyafenis" and others, until it is cured.
Et se t’est mestier que tu te warde bien a ton ovraige par grant warde qu’il ne chiece point de la medicine as eulz.	And if you need to watch your work well with great care so that the medicine does not stick to the eyes.
Et se li papiere devient mole aprés, et li poil poignent en l’oil, si recomence la medicine sus celui leu qui est mollifiez de la papiere proprement, ensi com tu as fait devant; aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme de la fuelle dou mirte:	And if the paper becomes soft afterwards and the hairs prick in the eye, resume the treatment on that place which is softened by the paper properly, as you did before; after the wound heals; and this is the form of the leaf of the juniper.
Et saichés que li eul des homes sont divers en grandor et en petitece, et selonc ceu soit tes constraignemens; et ne soit mie reponue li droite voie a celui cui est li estude de cest art.	And know that men's eyes are diverse in size and smallness, and according to this, your constraints; and do not always hold the right way for him who studies this art.
de la cure de fistule par cautere	of the treatment of fistula by fire cautery
Quant tu cures fistule si com nos avons dit en divisions des maladies, et tes cures ne profitent mie, adonques covient il que tu li fais cautere selonc ceste maniere.	When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases, and your treatments do not help, then you must cauterize it according to this method.
Comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain; et teigne li menistres son chief entre tes mains en teil maniere qu’il ne se mueve, ne ne demoinne son chief; aprés met coton moilliet en abin d’uef ou en jus de persillion sus l’oil; aprés chaufe le cautere qui est teilz: et est chevez au chief si com li forme d’une penne de vouteul, ensamble la queil soit li cautere; se tu vues, si soit apointé des l’un chief dusc’a l’autre, et se tu vues, si soit ausi com une tente; mais toutevoie, cist qui est chevez vaut mues por ton ovraige.	Instruct the patient to place his head on your side; and make the ministers hold his head between their hands in such a way that it does not move or change position; after which put moist cotton in egg white or pomegranate juice over the eye; then heat the cautery, which is divided: and place it on the head as formed by a swallow's feather, so that the cautery be placed together; if you see, make it point from one head to the other, and if you see, let it also be like a tent; but in any case, what is placed there must move for your work.
Aprés presse la fistule s’ele est overte, et en trai la porriture, et la seche; et s’ele est close, si la oevre, et trai fuers la bowe; aprés met sus le cautere chaut forment, et tien ta main au cautere a la partie dou neif ensus de l’oil, que ta mains ne faice folie; et met le cautere en la graisse de l’oil, et la corromp.	After press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus and dry it; and if it is closed, work on it, and draw forth the worm; after place the hot cautery in the form of a feather, and keep your hand at the part above the eye where the nose joins, so that your hand does not do foolish things; and put the cautery in the grease above the eye.
Se tu viens au comencement dou cautere jusc’a l’os, si serait bien.	If you come to the beginning of the cautery until the bone, it would be well.
Se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere encor une fois, et autre se tu en as mestier, et le laisse III jors; aprés i met sus coton moilliet en burre, et lou cure de l’oignement desiccatif tant qu’il soit sanez, et se XL jors passent qu’il ne soit sanez, si met sus medicine ague corrosive tant que li os soit descovers; et lou reis selonc ceu que il venrait en son chapistre.	If not, resume the cautery once more, and do so as often as you need, letting it heal for three days; after that, place a moist cotton pad in oil, and continue the treatment with the ointment until it is healed. If forty days pass and it is not healed, apply an aqueous corrosive medicine until the bone is revealed; then proceed according to what comes next in your chapter.
Et i a une maniere de cautere de fistule que aucun des anciens dirent.	And there is a way of cautery for fistula that none of the ancients mentioned.
Entens a fistule, et fens le leu; aprés met en la fendure I camahan subtil de coi ci est li forme:	Understand the fistula, and make it open; after that, place one thin lammergeyer in the wound.
et i font a la quantiteit d’une .З. de plonc; et tien ta main ou camahan fermement, et ne se mueve li malaides nes point, que li plons fondus ne corre a son oil; et covient c’on mette sus l’oil a malaide coton moilliet en abin d’uefz ou en awe: li plonc si art lou leu de fistule, et lou saine per mervillouse saniteit.	and they make it the quantity of a drachm; and hold your hand or arm firmly, and let not the patient move at all, that the melted plonc does not run to his eye; and it is necessary to put on the eye of the patient wetted cloth in oil of eggs or honey: the plonc thus heals the fistula and the healthy part by wonderful healing.
Et se li fistule est sanee per le cautere que nos avons dit, c’est boin.	And if the fistula is healed by the cautery as we have said, that is good.
Se ce non, si covient aministrer pertus au neif, et ramener la fistule au cors dou neif selonc ceu qu’il covient en som propre leu.	And if not, it is necessary to apply pertusin to the nose, and return the fistula to the body of the nose according to what is proper in itself.
des crevaices en levres	of cracks in lips
Mout de fois avienent crevaices en levres que sont apelees «poil», et meismement en levres des enfans.	Many times, fissures occur in lips called "poil," especially in children's lips.
Quant tu cures ces crevaices de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et li cure ne profite, adonques eschaufe I petit cautere cultellaire selonc ceste forme:	When the cure for those we mentioned in divisions does not help these fissures, then heat the small fire cautery blade according to this form:
Et le met hastanment en celles crevaices tant qu’il viegne jusc’a font; aprés cure le leu de cerote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And quickly place it in the fissures until it becomes hot; afterwards, dress the wound with ointment until it is healed.
de l’aposteme de la goule	of the abscess of the throat
Quant apostume vient en la racine de la goule ou en l’uve, ou ou palais, ou as racines des dens, aprés fait porriture et ront et est enveillis et devient fistule; et tu le cures si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie: adonques covient il que tu aies I cautere selonc la quantiteit de la fistule; aprés le bote ou pertus de la fistule, et tien ta main tant que li fer chaus viegne au font de li, et ou derrien leu; et fai ensi une fois ou II, aprés le cure de ce que nos avons dit en cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est curez ensi, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si covient descovrir le leu et oster l’os corrumput, selonc ceu que vos le troverez en son chapistre.	When an abscess comes to the root of the throat or to the eye socket, palate, or roots of the teeth, after it is putrid and drained and becomes a fistula; and if the cure as we said in divisions does not help: then you must use the cautery according to the size of the fistula; afterwards, drain or puncture the fistula, and hold your hand until the iron cools at the bottom of it and behind it; and do this once or twice, after which dress the wound as we said in cures until it is healed; and if it is cured thus, that is good; and if not, you must expose the wound and remove the corrupted bone according to what you find in your chapter.
dou movement des dens	by movement of the teeth
Quant les gencives sont mollifies par moistor et les dens muevent, et tu le cures per medicines et ceu ne vaut, adonc met le chief dou malaide en ton sain; aprés eschaufe le cautere dont li forme venra ci aprés en teil maniere que tu mettes une cainne sor le dent; et met dedens le cautere chaut hastanment, et tien tant ta main que li malaides sente la chalor venant a la racine dou dent; aprés lieve ta main et rencomence le cautere selonc ta volenteit; aprés emplisse li malaides sa bouche d’awe salee, et la teigne une houre et raiche fuers.	When the gums are softened by moisture and the teeth move, and you cure it with medicines but it is not effective, then place the patient's head in a healthy position; afterwards, heat the cautery as described below to be done in such a manner that you put a stick on the tooth; and quickly insert the heated cautery into the tooth, and hold your hand so that the patient feels the heat reaching the root of the tooth; after that, remove your hand and repeat the procedure according to your will; afterwards, make the patient fill their mouth with salt water, let it sit for an hour, and then spit it out.
Et en teil maniere li dens qui estoit movans si est confermez, et li gencive mollifie restrainte, et li moistors corrumpue sechie.	And in such a manner, the tooth that was moving is set, and the softened gums are restrained, and the corrupt moisture dries up.
de la dolor des dens	of toothache
Quant dolor de dens vient por froidor, ou il i a froidor ou veir, et les cures de medicine ne valent, adonc i ait mestier de cautere selonc II manieres: et cautere de burre et cautere de feu.	When toothache comes from cold or there is cold in the body, and medical treatments are ineffective, then it must be treated by cauterization according to two methods: cauterization with butter and cauterization with fire.
Cautere de burre si est telz que tu preignes burre de vaiche, et le bout en une cuillier de fer ou d’arain; aprés pren coton et envolope sus la pointe d’une tente, et la moille en burre bulit, et met sus le dent dolant hastanment et tien tant qu’il soit refroidiez; et ensi fai sovent tant que sa vertus viegne a la racine de la dent, et se tu vues si moille laine et coton en burre froit, et met sus le dent doillant, et met sus I fer chaut tant que li feus viegne au chevement dou dent.	Cauterization with butter is such that you take butter from a cow, and the end of it in a spoon of iron or tin; afterwards, take cotton and wrap it at the tip of a tent, and let the butter be heated inside; then put it on the aching tooth quickly and hold until it cools down; and thus do often until its virtue reaches the root of the tooth. And if you see soft wool and cotton in cooled butter, put it on the aching tooth, and place hot iron above it until the heat reaches the pulp of the tooth.
Li cauteres ensamble feu si est telz que tu preignes uns cainne de fer ou d’arain, et soit grosse si que li feus ne viegne a la bouche dou malaide; aprés chaufe le cautere, de coi li forme venra ci aprés, et le met sus le dent et tien ta main tant que li cauteres soit refroidiez; fai ceu sovent, car li dolor sera ostee celui jor meisme ou l’endemain.	The cauteries of fire are such that you take a reed or iron needle, and let it be thick enough that the flame does not reach the patient's mouth; after heating the cautery, as will be described later, put it on the tooth and hold your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this often, for the pain will be removed on that day or the day after.
Et covient que li malaides emplisse sa bouche de boin burre en l’empressement de cel cautere, et puis le raiche fuer; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And the patient should fill their mouth with good butter in anticipation of the cautery, and then quickly remove it; this is the form of the cautery.
Et fai cautere dou queil chief que tu voudras, et selonc ceu que tu as pooir; et c’est li forme de la caine:	And apply the cautery to whatever tooth you want, and according to what you are able; this is the form of the reed.
des scrophules	of the scrofula
Quant les scrophules sont de fleume et de moistors froides, et ne sont obeissans a digestion par medicines, adonques eschaufe le cautere cheveit de coi ci aprés vient li forme, et ait II aovertures por les fumees a issir au cautere de l’autre partie; et met le cautere chaut sus l’apostume une fois, ou II se mestier est, tant qu’il viegne au font de l’apostume; et se li apostume est petis si met cautere selonc la quantiteit de l’apostume, et le laisse ensi III jors; et met sus coton moilliet em burre tant que li arsure soit ostee; aprés cure le leu d’oignemens et de tentes tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the scrofula is due to phlegm and cold moisture, and does not respond to digestion by medicines, then heat the cautery coals as described below to produce a flame. It should have two openings for smoke to exit from the other side; and place the hot cautery on the abscess once or twice where necessary, until it reaches the bottom of the abscess; and if the abscess is small, adjust the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and leave it for three days; then apply moist butter-soaked cotton until the burning sensation is gone; after that, treat the wound with ointments and bandages until it heals.
Li forme de la cainne:	The form of the cauterizing coal:
Quant les moistors vainquent sus les chenals dou pormon, et meismement quant ce vient de froide complexion, adonc covient que li malaides soit voidiez premiers par medicines solutives; aprés li fai cautere a la racine de la gorge, et te garde que tu ne venir mie jusc’a la gorge, et n’ardre dou keur mais c’un poc.	When the moistures overcome the channels of the body, and especially when this comes from a cold complexion, then it is necessary that the patient be first evacuated by means of solvent medicines; after which apply the cautery at the root of the throat, and take care not to come too close to the throat, and do not burn the heart but just a little.
Aprés li fai I autre cautere a la jointure dou col au chief de l’espinee, et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» de coi nos avons la forme devant; et cure le leu si com nos avons devant dit tant qu’il soit sanez.	After which apply the other cautery at the joint of the neck at the top of the spine, and let the cauteries called "clavile" be as we have shown before; and treat it as we have said before until it is healed.
de la toust	of the fire
Quant tous et maladie de pormon sont de moistors froides, et li malaides nen ait fievre ne sechor, et est li maladie anciaine, se li fai ij cauteres sus la forcele en leus vuis; et I autre cautere emmi le pis entre II mameles; et soit li cauteres qui est apelez «clavile» selonc la forme qui est devant dite.	When all the diseases of the body are due to cold moistures, and the patient has no fever nor drying, and the illness is old, apply two cauteries on the forcele in their veins; and the other cautery between the breasts; and let the cauteries called "clavile" be as shown in the form described before.
Et se tu vues, fai cautere en poignant a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins» de coi li forme est ci devant en la maladie des oreilles; et soient li poins jusc’a XXX, ou enqui entor.	And if you see, cauterize at pricking all the points called "poins" of which the form is described above in the illness of the ears; and let the points be until about XXX.
Aprés cure le leu selonc ceu qui est devant dit, et soit li cauteres a III rains selonc ceste forme:	After the treatment of the shoulder as previously stated, let the cauterizations be three times according to this form:
Et por ceu sont li cautere plus legier, por ceu que tu en fais III a cop.	And because these cauterizations are lighter, you perform three of them each time.
de la dislocation de l’ajutoire	of the shoulder dislocation
Quant li chiés de l’ajutoire est desaloiez par cause de moistor, et on le remet a leu, et il n’i puet demorer ains revient adés et desalue par petit movement qui avient, si com nos avons esproveit, adonques covient il que tu ramoinnes la dislocation premierement.	When the head of the shoulder is dislocated due to moisture, and it is reset but cannot stay in place, repeatedly dislocating with slight movement as we have experienced, then you must first reset the dislocation.
Aprés soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos et sus son costeit; aprés lieve le keur qui est dedens le titillite as dois de ta main senestre; et se li jointure est desaluee dedens, si eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners douqueil ci est li forme:	After clean the patient's back and side; afterwards, touch his heart which is irritated at your left wrist with your right hand; and if the joint is dislocated within, heat the fire cautery which has two nooses of the form given here.
et cauterize lou keur tant qu’il le perce jusc’a costeit, et venrait li fugure dou cautere ensamble IIII cauteres; et por ceu est faite cautere avec le cautere qui a III ners, por coi li figure de cauterization sunt sis cauteres; et sont li nerf selonc la subtiliteit d’une tente et c’est li forme dou cautere qui a III ners:	and cauterize the heart until it perforates to the side, and bring together the figures of the cautery as four cauteries; and for this, a cautery with three nooses is made, because the figures of the cauterization are six cauteries; and the nerves are according to the subtlety of a tent, and this is the form of the cautery with three nooses.
Et aucune fois est ajostez sus ce I nerf por coi il i a VIII cauteres.	And sometimes it is adjusted over this first nerve, for which there are eight cauteries.
Aprés met sus le cautere porrelz broiez avec seil; aprés fai reposer le malaide, et ne soit meus li membres par lonc tens tant qu’il soit bien confortez.	After applying the fire cautery with powdered brimstone and salt, let the patient rest, and do not move the limbs for a long time until they are well comforted.
Et s’il est desaloiez desus, liquelz chose avient poc, adonques fait cautere sus l’epaisse dou cautere clavile, ou mout de cauteres en poignant.	And if it is dislocated above, little happens then, so apply a fire cautery over the thick part of the clavicle, or several cauteries by pricking.
Car li jointure est refermee, et est ostee li moistor et est sanez li malaides.	For the joints are closed, and the moisture is removed, and the patients are healed.
Quant en l’estomac vienent froidures et mout de moistors tant qu’il l’estraient a sa complexion, et sont multipliet li catharre a lui, et es manieres de cures acostumees et il ne profite mie, adonc covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son dos, et estende ses jambes et ses mains.	When coldness and much moisture come to the stomach because it is contrary to his constitution, and he produces a great deal of catarrh in this manner, and usual treatments do not help, then the patient should be treated on his back, stretch out his legs and his hands.
De ceu en aprés li fai III cauteres I desoz la cuillier dou pis per la quantiteit d’un doi, a tout le cautere clavile, et II cauteres defuers les II costez tant que li figure des cauteres soit a III angles, et ait teil espaice entre l’une et l’autre qu’elles ne soient jointes ensamble quant elles giteront porriture; et soient li cautere si parfont qu’il porpreignent les II pars dou keur, et soit li figure des cauteres selonc ceste forme sens ajostement:	After this, I will make III cauteries over the heel for the quantity of a doe, to all the cautery claws, and II cauteries below the II sides so that the figures of the cauteries be at III angles, and have space between one another that they not be joined together when they grow purulent; and let the cauteries be so perfect that they penetrate the two parts of the heel, and the figure of the cauteries according to this form without alteration:
Et se tu vues cauterize d’un grant cautere enmi l’estomac selonc ceste forme; et celui qui avra paour de cest cautere, cauterize en poignant et seigne sus l’estomac i. point selonc la quantiteit que tu vues d’enche; puis le cauterize a tot le cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if you wish to cauterize with a large cautery in the stomach according to this form; and he who has fear of this cautery, cauterize by pricking and bleeding above the stomach i. point according to the quantity that you see of ink; then cauterize all the way with the cautery called "poins.
Aprés le cure de la cure que nos avons eut devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment of the treatment we had before, until he is healed.
Quant au foie vient dolor de froit et de moistor et de grosse ventositeit, tant qu’il est fuer mis de sa complexion natureil per les superfluitez; et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne li profite mie, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus son haitereil; et signe d’enche III cauteres selonc ceste forme et ceste figure et ceste quantiteit sus lou foie, defuer les ypocondres, lai ou li coutes de l’ome vient; et ait d’espaice entre chaicun cautere la groissece d’un doi; et soient li cautere dou lonc dou cors, et ne presser mie mout ta main a tot le cautere; et soit arse tant soulement li moitiez dou keur, et soit li malaides drois sus ses piez; et s’il ne peut, si soit gisans, et estende ses jambes, et lieve ses brais; et c’est li forme:	When the liver comes to pain from cold and moisture and great windiness, while it is forced to change from its natural temperament due to excesses; and the patient has been treated with what we have said in divisions, and it does not benefit him, then the patient should be attended to his bed; and mark three cauteries according to this form and figure and quantity on the liver, below the hypochondria, where the sides of the body come; and let there be the size of a finger's breadth between each cautery; and may the cauteries be as long as the torso, and do not press your hand too much on the entire cautery; and let only the halves of the heart be burned, and let the patient lie straight on his feet; and if he cannot, then lie down, extend his legs, and lift his arms; and this is the form:
Et se ta volentez est, si cauterize ces cauteres dou cutellaire, se tu es subtilz et saiges en l’art, et te warde que tu n’ardes mie tout le keur, car tu feroies sechier tout le cors; et qu’il ne viegne jusc’a boueil, car li keurs est mout subtilz lai endroit, et lou saiches por voir.	And if you wish to cauterize these cauteries of the cutellaire, be subtle and skilled in the art, and watch that you do not burn all the heart, for you would make dry all the body; and let it not come to a boil, for the heart is very delicate there, and the wise ones know how to see.
Quant il a apostume au foie, et tu vues savoir s’il est en la char dou foie ou en la toile: s’il est en la char, se sent li malaides dolor ne mie trop fort; et s’il est en la toile, si sent dolor forsenee.	When there is an abscess in the liver, and you wish to know if it is in the flesh of the liver or in the membrane: if it is in the flesh, the patient feels pain not too severe; and if it is in the membrane, the pain is intense.
Et lors quant ceste cure desoit les mires, si covient que li malaides soit sovinez sus sa teste; et puis seigne d’enche le leu ou li apostumes est, et puis chaufe le cautere qui est semblans au rais, de coi ci est li forme:	And when this treatment alleviates the pain, it is necessary to treat the patient's head; then make a small incision where the vein or abscess is, and then heat the cautery which resembles fire, of which here are the forms:
Et cauterize I cautere tant que li keurs soit ars, et viegne jusc’a syphac, tant que li porreture soit toute fuers; aprés la cure selonc la cure des essues tant qu’il soit sanez; et ne covient mie que de cest cautere use nuls fuers que cil qui ait estudieit longement en l’art de medicine, et par cui mains cestes maladies ont corrut aucune fois.	And apply the fire cautery until the wounds are seared, and bring it just to syphacia, until the pores are entirely closed; after the treatment, as in the treatment of burns, until it is healed; and it should not be used any more than this cautery that has studied long in the art of medicine, and by whose hands these diseases have been cured many times.
Adonques puet il hardiement ovrer, et toutevoies il me semble que mues vaut li laissier.	Then he may boldly operate, and always it seems to me that movements are better left undone.
dou cautere de pleuresin	For the fire cautery of pleursin.
Li ancien dirent que on doit faire a pleuresin cauteres de racines d’aristologe, et en teil maniere: pren une racine d’aristologe longe, la plus grant que tu poras troveir, et soit seche, et soit ausi grosse et ausi longe comme tes dois; et la moille en oile, et l’emprens au feu, et cauterize I cautere entre la forcele et lou col, et II petis cauteres un poc en dessendant en la partie qui est desoz la barbe; et II cauteres entre la quinte coste et la sisime, en declinant derrier un poc; et I cautere emmi le pis, et I autre sus l’estomac, et I entre II espaules, et II as II costez dou pis defuers le cautere qui est entre II espaules; et ne presser mie ta main, ains fai apertement ausi com en odorant.	The ancients said that one should use fire cauteries of roots of aristology for pleursin, and in this manner: take a root of aristology long, the longest you can find, and dry it, and make it as large and as long as your thumb; extract its juice with oil, and sear the cautery between the forcele and the neck, two smaller cauteries slightly downward on the part beneath the chin; two cauteries between the fifth and sixth ribs, inclined a little backward; one near the heel, and another above the stomach, one between the shoulders, and two along the ribs below the cautery between the shoulders; do not press your hand, but apply it openly as if smelling it.
Et dirent aucun ancien que aucun home usent de cautere de feir semblant a I raseur, et l’eschaufent et le mettent entre les costes, tant qu’il vient a cel aposteme; et saut fuers li dolor, si com nos avons dit en l’aposteme dou foie.	And it was said by some ancient one that no man uses the fire cautery to resemble razors, and they heat it and place it between the ribs, until it comes to that abscess; then suddenly the pain goes away, as we have said in the case of the liver abscess.
Mais en cestui ovraige est paour ou li malaides muert maintenant, ou fistule i vient qui ne puet estre sanee.	But in this work there is fear or the patient dies now, or fistula comes which cannot be cured.
de la mice	from the mouse
Quant tu cures la maladie de la mice de ceu que nos avons dit as divisions des cures, et il ne profite mie, adonques i afierent III manieres de cautere que tuit sont boin.	When you treat the disease of the mouse as we have said in the divisions of treatments, and it does not benefit at all, then apply three methods of cautery, all of which are good.
Desquelz li une maniere si est que tu faices III cauteres, ou IIII, en lignant selonc la longor de la mice, selonc la figure dou cautere dou foie que nos avons dit devant; et n’apresser mie ta main a tout le cautere, et soit li malaides sovins sor son dos; et une autre maniere de cautere si est que tu eschaufe le cautere qui a II ners, si com nos l’avons mostreit en la dislocation de l’espaule; et lieve le keur qui est endroit la mice, ou li coutes dou malaide vient devers senestre, et soit li elevations dont tu lieves le keur selonc la keur, selonc la longesce dou cors, et li cautere soient selonc la largesce dou cors.	Of which one method is such that you make three cauteries or four, aligning them according to the length of the mouse, as per the figure of the liver cautery we have said before; and do not press your hand against the entire cautery, and let the patient be often on his back. And another method of cautery is such that you heat the cautery with two prongs, as we have shown in the dislocation of the shoulder; and lift the keur which is at the location of the mouse, or where the wounds of the patient come from the left side, and let the elevations be such that you lift the keur according to the shape, according to the length of the body, and the cauteries should be according to the width of the body.
Aprés i boute les II ners enflamez tant que li keurs soit perciez de l’autre part, et puis trai fuers le cautere, et ensi en i avra IIII Et se tu vues, si cauterize a tot le cautere a III ners.	After letting the two inflamed nerves burn until the cores are pierced from the other side, then remove the cautery, and thus it will have four. And if you see, cauterize the entire cautery to three nerves.
Aprés le cure quant il a geteit porriture par lonc tens, et ce vaut mues que li autre des cures devant dites.	After the treatment when it has gotten gangrene over a long time, and this affects even the other wounds mentioned before.
de ydropisie	from dropsy
Cautere ne vaut a ydropique, fors c’a la maniere qui est apelee «asclytes».	The cautery is not effective for dropsy, except in the manner called "asclytes.
Quant tu la cures selonc les manieres que nos avons dit en divisions, et ta cure ne profite mie, adonques covient il que tu li faices IIII cauteres entor la boude, et I sus l’estomac, et un sus le foie, et I sus la mice, et II derrier le dos sus l’espinee, et I endroit le pis; et soit li cauteres bien pres de l’espés dou keur.	When you treat it according to the methods we have mentioned in divisions, and your treatment is not effective, then you must make four cauteries around the mouth, one on the stomach, one on the liver, one on the spleen, two behind the back on the spine, and one at the anus; and let the cauteries be close to the skin of the heart.
Aprés laisse le cautere aovert por giter porriture lonc tens, et ne lassier mie la cure dou malaide aprés le cautere; et sanation se hasterait, et seront ensamble les II ententions avec l’aide de Deu.	After let the cautery open to drain pus long enough, and do not leave the treatment of the patient after the cautery; and healing would be hastened, and both intentions would be fulfilled with the help of God.
Li forme dou cautere por le ventre soit li clavile que nos avons devant mostreit; et cil por le dos soit olivaire, selonc ceu qu’il est ci devant mis.	The form of the cautery for the belly should be like those we have shown before; and that for the back should be olive-shaped, as described earlier.
de l’enfleure des piez	of the swelling of the feet
Quant li piez sont enflez a celui qui est ydropique, et sont plain d’awe citrine, il covient que tu cauterizes sus le dos dou piet entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire; et lieve ta main avec le cautere sens torner.	When the feet are swollen in those who are hydropic and are full of yellow bile, you must cauterize on the back of the foot between the thumb and the ring finger; and hold your hand with the cautery without turning.
Et n’entrer mie trop em parfont, ensi sarrait fuers li awe citrine, et soit li cauteres selonc cest forme:	And do not enter too deeply, otherwise it would go beyond the yellow bile, and let the cauterization be according to this form:
Aprés fai sus II jambes II cauteres en chescune jambe a la pointe dou cutellaire; et soit li cauteres dou lonc, l’un desoz le genoil devant et l’autre defuers, enmi la jambe; et laisse les cauteres aovers longement sens curer, que li awe en isse; aprés le cure des autres cures que nos avons dit.	After make on two legs two cauterizations in each leg at the point of the scalpel; and let the cauterizations long, one below the knee in front and the other above, between the legs; and leave the cauterizations long without curing, until the bile comes out; after that cure the other wounds as we have said.
de la menoison	of the dislocation
Quant solution de ventre vient de froidor et de moistor, tant que li vertus retentive et digestive qui est ou stomac et en l’intestine est afleboie, et ne puet estre curez par manieres de cures; et tu vois le malaide bien soffrant et de fort vertut, si fai I grant cautere sus l’estomac selonc ceu qu’il en a parleit ci devant ou cautere de l’estomac, au cautere circule; et IIII cauteres entor la boude subtilz a tout I cautere clavile subtil, et II cauteres sus les hainches.	When the solution of the belly comes from cold and moisture, while the retentive and digestive virtues in the stomach and intestines are weakened and cannot be cured by usual means; and you see the patient suffering greatly with strong virtue, make the great cauterization on the stomach according to what he has spoken about earlier regarding the cauterization of the stomach, at the circular cauterization. And four small cauterizations inside the mouth for each small cauterization, and two cauterizations on the hips.
Et se tu vois les moistors habundans et le malaide soffrant, se li fai cautere sus le poignil, et I cautere sus chaicun yle, et II petis cauteres sus l’estomac delez le grant, car li cure est profitans quant il i a bone aide.	And if you see abundant moisture and the patient suffering, apply the cautery to the handle, and one cautery to each thigh, and two small cauteries on the stomach below the large, for the cure is beneficial when there is good aid.
de la cure des emorroydes	for the treatment of hemorrhoids
Quant les emorroydes sont ou fondement, ou une ou plusors, et sont ancienes et sont de grosses humors froides et moistes corrumpues, et sont curees si com nos avons dit en divisions, et il ne profite mie, si fai cauteres: III sus l’espine dou dos, celi qui est tout defuers desoz almecdate poc et poc en triangulant, et I cautere desoz la boude II dois; et se tu penses que ses estomac soit refroidiez, et li viande ne cuise, et on voit enfler la faice, adonques li faice on I grant cautere sus le stomac, si com il est devant dit, et I autre sus le foie, et I autre sus la mice a tout le cautere clavile; et laisse le cautere overt lonc tens.	When hemorrhoids are open or internal, one or more, and are old, being large cold and moist humors corrupted, and have been treated as we said in the divisions, if it does not profit, apply cauteries: III on the spine of the back, that which is just above the iliac crest, little by little in a triangular pattern, and one cautery under the navel II twice; and if you think his stomach is cold, and the meat does not cook, and one sees the fauce swelling, then apply the large cautery on the stomach as it was said before, and another on the liver, and another on the spleen for the entire clavicle; and leave the cautery open long enough.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	After the treatment, let the wound heal until it is healed.
de la charnositeit qui est nommee «thelul»	of the carbuncle which is called "thelul
Quant tu copes althelul, si eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et puis le met tout embraseit sus cel althelul copeit; et i laisse tant ta main que li cauteres viegne a la naissance de la voine, de coi li sans cort; fai ceu une fois ou II, et s’il i a mout d’althelul, si cauterize chaicun si com nos avons dit; aprés les cure d’oignemens profitans tant qu’il soient sanez; et se tu cauterizes d’un cautere grant sus alchatim, si avra plus grant aide.	When you treat the carbuncle, heat the cautery to seem like a razor, and then place it completely ablaze over the carbuncle being treated; and let your hand remain there until the vein begins to appear, at which point the flesh will start to blister; do this once or twice, and if there is much carbuncle, cauterize each part as we have said; after that, apply beneficial ointments until it heals; and if you cauterize with a large cautery over abscesses, it will have greater help.
de plaie mal curee	of a wound poorly treated
Quant li malaides ne puet soffrir tailleure ne overture, que nos raconterons en son leu, si vient teil maladie que ne puet estre sanee fuer que par cautere.	When the patient cannot endure a surgery or incision, as we will discuss in its place, comes a sickness that can only be cured by fire cautery.
Quant a aucun vient fistule, et est enveillie et giete porriture et moistors corrumpues, si la doies prover a tot une tente subtil, et garde que tu saiches a tot la tente combien elle a de parfont.	When there is an abscess and it is inflamed and filled with rotten moisture, you should probe the entire length of the abscess with a fine probe, and make sure you know the full length of the abscess.
Aprés eschaufe le cautere qui semble I raseur, et le boute en la fistule selonc la quantiteit que li tente i est entrée, et rencomence lou cautere tant que cil cors porris et corrumpus soient ars, une fois, ou II ou III, selonc la quantiteit de som besoing; et te warde d’ardre lé nerf qui sunt enqui, et des grans voinnes.	After heating the cautery to the burn, apply it to the abscess according to how far the probe entered, and reapply the cautery until the rotten and corrupted flesh is burned, one or two or three times depending on the amount needed; and be careful not to burn the nerves or large veins.
se li fistule vait au cors de la vesie et a l’intestine, si te warde de ces leus, et ne faire ceu fuers que en leu charnut, et pense qu’ele n’est mie persans; aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez, et se li leus est saielez, et les matieres sont ostees lonc tens, adonc saiches que li leus est sanez entierement; et se les matieres ne sont ostees, saiche que li leus est troez, et corrumpus li os au font; et ensi com un de ces que nos dirons en son leu.	If the fistula goes to the body of the bladder and the intestine, beware of these signs, and do not make them in living flesh, for they are not permanent; after curing the flesh until it is healed, and if the flesh is hardened and the matter is removed over a long time, then know that the flesh is completely healed; and if the matter is not removed, know that the flesh is torn and corrupted at the root; and in such cases, as we will say in their place.
de la maladie des reins	Of the disease of the kidneys
Quant dolor de froit vient as rains, et de grosse ventositeit, et ne prent talant de femme, adonc covient il que tu li fais cautere sus les rains d’une part et d’autre au cautere clavile que nos avons devant dit; et se nos le cauterizons em mileu, si avra III cauteres en ligne, et se feront plus grant aide.	When pain from cold and great wind comes to the kidneys, and does not affect a woman, then you must make a cautery on the kidneys from one side and the other using the clavile cautery as we have already said; and if we cauterize in the middle, there will be three cauteries in line, and they will provide greater aid.
de la vessie	from the bladder
Quant li vessie est mole et foible de froit et de moistor, si que li malaides retient l’urine, adonc li fai cautere en la partie defuers sus la vessie, la ou encomencent li poil dou poignil, et I a destre et I a senestre, et soit chescuns cauteres si lons com li nous d’un poce; et li fais I cautere defuers le dos, ou II se tu en as besoing; et soit li cauteres clavile selon la forme devant dite.	When the bladder is soft and weak from cold and moisture, causing the patient to retain urine, then you should apply a fire cautery in the lower part above the bladder, where the hairs begin around the navel, both on the right and left. Each cautery should be as long as one inch of your thumb; and you should make the cautery over the back, or where you may need it. Let the cauteries be regular according to the form previously described.
de la marris	of the wart
Quant li marrix est froide et moiste, et ne laisse mie por ceu a concevoir, et les flors sont corrumpues et lor termines tarde; et quant elles vienent, si sent grant dolor: adonques covient il c’on li faice III cauteres entor la boude, si com nos avons dit ou cautere de la vessie, et II cauteres defuers le dos; et soit li cauteres clavile, si com nos avons dit.	When the wart is cold and moist, and does not allow conception, and the flowers are corrupted and their termination is delayed; and when they come, great pain is felt: then you should make three cauteries around the vulva, as we have said or those for the bladder, and two cauteries over the back; let the cauteries be regular, as we have said.
de la hainche	of the hip
Quant les moistors viscouses dessendent a la boiste de la hainche, et por ceste cause si se muet de son leu, et li signes est que li cuisse est plus longe que li autre quant on le mesure ensamble; et est trovez li leus dou departement vuis, si covient que tu cauterizes le malaide sus la boiste de la hainche a I cautere semblant au cercle, et seigne devant le leu entor la boiste si com elle torne, si que li boiste soit dedens le cercle; et si soit li cauteres telz com cil dont on a cauterizeit le stomac.	When the thick mucus descends to the socket of the hip, and for this reason it dislocates from its place, the signs are that the thigh is longer than the other when measured together; and the cause is found in the departure of the joint space. Then you must cauterize the patient on the socket of the hip with a cautery resembling a circle, and mark around the space inside the socket as it turns, so that the socket is within the circle; and the cautery should be such as those used to cauterize the stomach.
Et se cist cauteres ne t’est presens, se li fai III cauteres de l’olivaire grans, et soit li cauteres ausi parfont com tous li keurs; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you do not have such a cautery at hand, make three cauteries from olive oil, and let the cauteries be as perfect as all the rest; and cure him until he is healed.
de la dolor de la hainche	of the pain of the hip
Quant dolor vient en la boiste de la hainche, et c’est de froidor et de moistor, et li malaides est curez de ceu que nos avons dit en la division et li cure ne vaut, et li maladie est anciene: adonc covient il que tu purges le malaide des grosses humors de pilules fetides, ou autres pilules bones semblans.	When pain comes to the socket of the hip, and it is from cold or moisture, and the patient has been treated as we said in the division and the treatment does not work, and the illness is old: then it must be that you purge the patient of the large humors with foul pills or other good pills similar.
Aprés li fai cautere; et li maniere dou cautere si est selonc II manieres: c’est a savoir ensamble medicines ardans, et cautere de feu.	Afterwards, you apply the cautery; and the manner of the cautery is according to two methods: that is to say, with hot medicines together, and fire cautery.
Cautere de feu si est selonc mout de manieres, desquelz li uns est telz: que tu cauterize sus la boiste de la hainche III cauteres triangulalz selonc ceste forme, et i fai bone profunditeit et grant, et ait entre chaicun cautere d’espaice la groissece d’un doi, et soit li cauteres olivaire; aucune fois fait on cautere en mileu sus lou chief de la hainche, por coi il en i a IIII selonc ceste forme:	Fire cautery is in many ways. Of these, one method is as follows: you apply three triangular cauteries in this form, and they should be of good depth and large, with an interval between each cautery the thickness of two fingers, and let the cauteries be olive oil-based; another time, a cautery is made in the middle on the head of the hip, so there are four according to this form.
Et se tu vues, si le cauterize au cautere dou cercle que nos avons devant dit en la dislocation de la hainche; mais fai en teil maniere que li cercles conteigne toute la hainche, et tous li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if you see, cauterize with the cautery of the circle that we have already described in the dislocation of the hip; but do it in such a manner that the circle contains all of the hip, and all the parts of the thigh be burned.
Et c’est li maniere c’on fait en sciatique, quant li dolor tient en la hainche, et ne parvient mie jusc’a la cuisse ne jusc’a la jambe.	And this is the way we treat sciatica, when the pain remains in the hip and does not extend to the thigh or the leg.
Et s’ele vient jusc’a la cuisse et la jambe, se li fai II cauteres lai ou li malaides dit que li dolor li tient, et I cautere desus la cheville IIII dois, a la partie senestre un poc; et soit li cauteres cutellaire, et soit arse li espesseté dou keur; et se li malaides sent que li dolor s’estende jusc’a dois dou piet ou pres d’enqui, se le cauterize la ou il sent la dolor III poins ou IIII au cautere qui est apelez «poins».	And if it comes to the thigh and the leg, then make two cauteries where the patient says the pain is located, and one above the ankle on the left side a little; and let the cautery be either cutaneous or burn the thickness of the thigh; and if the patient feels that the pain extends to the toes or near them, cauterize where he feels the pain with three or four cauteries called "poins".
Et se mestiers est, se li en fai plus; et se il seit que li dolor soit desoz le genoil vers la cuisse, se li fais cautere au cautere cutellaire ou circulaire, et te done bien garde en tous tes cauteres que tu n’i lassier mie tant le cautere que tu brules les ners et les grans arteres, et que tu ne faices au malaide plus grant nuisance et contraction.	And if the skill is, and if the pain be below the knee towards the thigh, then make the cautery with the surgical or circular cautere, and take good care in all thy cauteries that thou leave not too much of the cautere so as to burn the nerves and the great arteries, and that thou do not make more harm and contraction to the patient.
Et je meisme ai veus plusors qui ont fait cautere sus la cheville dou piet, et li lasserent tant que li jambe fut toute enflee, et li piez ausi, et fut perciez et corrumpus toz li piez.	And I myself have seen many who made a cautery on the ankle of the foot, and they left it such that the leg was all swollen, and the foot as well, and the foot was pierced and corrupted altogether.
Aprés une solution de ventre dont il ot la mort.	After an abdominal solution from which he died.
Et se li dolors est en II parties ensamble, fai cautere en l’une et en l’autre, selonc ceste maniere.	And if the pains are in two parts together, make the cautery in one and in the other, according to this manner.
Et li saige dirent en la cautere de la hainche, de coi ci est li maniere, fai I tel fer et soit au chief ausi gros com uns nauvillon de dacte, ou un poc moins, et soit par entrechetres et soit des l’un entrechetres jusc’a l’autre d’espaice la quantiteit d’un nou de poce; et soient li entrechetres aovers de II pars, et soient aussi comme noez, et i ait I mainche de fer bien fait; et c’est li forme:	And the wise men said about the cautery of the hip, as follows: make such an iron and let it be at the end as thick as a finger or a little less, and let them be interwoven and let there be between each interweave the space of one inch; and let the interweaves above two parts, and let them be like nuts, and have the hand made of iron well crafted; and this is its form:
Et soit eschaufez tant qu’il soit toz rouges et giete senteles, et puis le mette on sus la boiste de la hainche malaide, et soit tornez sus lou sain costeit; et lou cauterize une fois I cautere reont et lou laisse III jors; et puis fai emplaustre de burre, et laisse la plaie aoverte lonc tens; aprés la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let it be heated until it is completely red and emits sparks, and then place it on the socket of the painful hip, and turn it over to the healthy side; and apply the cautery once with the cautery hot, and leave it for three days; and then make a plaster with butter, and keep the wound open long enough; after the ointment treatment until it is healed.
Albucasim dit que nos usons poc de cest cautere por la paor de son regart, et se voions poc qui en usent; et toutevoie ceu est des boins cauteres, qui le puet soffrir, et lai ou il s’afiert.	Albucasim says that we use this fire cautery little due to fear of its effect, and we see few who use it; nevertheless, those who can endure it should apply it where it takes effect.
Li cauteres de medicine ardant si est que tu faices I estrument a entrechetres en coi dessende li marge de la porte, et soit d’arain ou de fer a une paroit longe, et en la hautece ait II nous, et ait entre chaicun la quantiteit de la groissece d’un doi; et soient overt defuer et desus, et se joignent ensamble selonc ceste forme:	The fire cautery in medicine is such that you make the instrument of tongs in which hangs the wick of the lamp, and it should be made of brass or iron on one side long, and at the height of two fingers, and each should have the thickness of a thumb; and they should be open above and below, and join together according to this form:
Aprés met sus la boiste de la hainche au malaide gisant sor suin costeit sain, et apresse ta main mout sus la boiste de la hainche; aprés giete entre les II cercles de l’awe chaude qui soit chaufee au feu I poc, et li laisse une houre dou tens, et soffre li malaides la chalor et l’arsure de li.	After placing the hip box on the patient lying on their side, press your hand firmly over the hip box; then pour between the two circles of hot coals that are heated by fire to a slight degree, and let it remain for about an hour or so, and allow the patient to feel the heat and the burning from it.
Car il i trueve mordication ausi com de feu; et quant li mordications iert passee, se lieve ta main avec l’estrument et leve la hainche d’awe douce, et laisse ensi III jors, et met sus burre tant que ceu qui est noir de l’eschaudure soit osteit; et lou laisse III jors que porriture en istrait; et ceu serait li derriene aide aprés le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is found as a bite or from fire; and when the bite has passed, withdraw your hand with the instrument and lift the hip gently, and leave thus for three days, and apply butter until the blackness of the scalding is removed; and let him lie for three days until corruption is drawn out; and this would be the last aid after the treatment with ointments until he is healed.
Et se li dolor s’est estendue jusc’a la cuisse ou jusc’a la jambe, se li fai I estrument que teigne awe selonc ceu que tu as fait en la hainche igaument; et c’est li maniere de l’awe chaude, et je l’ai escripte ou traitier de la rectification de medicine.	And if the pain has extended to the thigh or to the leg, apply the instrument gently according to what you have done for the hip; and this is the way of warm application, and I have written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicine.
Pren alcali et chaulz vive, autant de l’une com de l’autre, et les broie ensamble, et les met en I nuef pot.	Take alkali and quicklime, as much of one as the other, and grind them together, and put them in a new pot.
ou il ait I petit pertuis defuer se que li pointe d’un raisor i puisse entreir; et met desor celui pot I autre pot bien plombeit, et met sus alcali et chalz et awe douce sus, tant qu’il en i ait I doi desus les poudres cant tu l’avras bien preingte a ta main; et le laisse ensi tant qu’il en dessende awe ague et chiece ou pot plombeit, puis pren toute cele awe, et la giete sus chalz et sus alcali si com devant.	or there be a small hole defaced so that the point of a razor might enter; and put over this one another pot well leaded, and put on alkali and wax sweet on it until there be two above the powders which thou wilt have well strained by hand; and let it thus until it descend wax and juice or water and lead, then take all that wax and cast it on alkali and on wax as before.
Et lors si sera mout ague et est aministree en mou d’ovraiges de medicine et en cauteres d’autres membres Car elle fait auteil oevre com feus, et si a autres medicines dont on cauterize bien la hainche ensi com tesisie et miel anacardi et chalz avec savon, toutes ces choses mellees ensamble.	And then it will be very watery and is administered in many works of medicine and in cauteries of other members. For it makes as much work as fire, and to other medicines with which one cauterizes well the hip thus with terebinth, honey, anacardium, wax with soap; all these things mixed together.
Et Galiens nos raconte une cure dont uns hons fut curez de la dolor de la hainche et de la voine sciatique, et lou loe mout, et dit que on n’i fist autre cure, et qu’il en fut sanez a une soule fois quant on ot fait ceste cure, et il se fut baigniez si com il l’enseigne ci aprés.	And Galen tells us of a treatment where a noble was cured of the pain in the hip and sciatic vein, and the good lord much, and says that no other treatment was done, and he was cured after only one time when this treatment was done, and he bathed as he instructs hereafter.
Et dist en teil maniere que tu preignes dou litargire vert fres et sec, et le broie mout avec I poc de graisse, et met sus la hainche et sus la cuisse et sus la jambe ou la dolor tient, et la lie; et li laisse III houres et par la quantiteit que li malaides ne sente plus l’arsure.	And he says that you should take fresh and dry verdigris, grind it a great deal with a little grease, and apply it to the hip and thigh and leg where the pain resides, and cover it; and let it remain for three hours and by the quantity that the patient no longer feels the heat.
Et puis le fai entrer ou bain tant que li cors li soit un poc arousez, et lou fai entrer ou lit, et li dolor s’en ira toute et sera sanez.	And then make him enter a bath while his body is somewhat warmed, and make him go to bed, and the pain will leave entirely and he will be cured.
Et saiches que nuls ne doit user de cautere de telz medicines, se ceu n’est aprés l’evacuation de cors.	And know that no one should use a fire cautery with such medicines if it is not after the evacuation of the body.
Et Dyascorides dist que quant li voine sciatique est cauterizee de fiens de chievre, si i aide mout; et doit estre fais li cauteres en teil maniere.	And Dioscorides says that when the sciatic vein is cauterized with sheep's fat, it helps much; and the cauterization should be done in such a manner.
Prenez lainne et la beurez d’oile vielz, et metez sus la fossete qui est entre le pouce dou piez et l’autre qui est apelez foscile.	Take wool and grease it with old oil, and apply it to the hollow between the big toe and the other toe called the fossiculus.
Aprés pren fiens de chievre sec, et l’empren a feu tant qu’il soit charbons, et lou met sus la laine, et le laisse tant qu’il soit estains; et refai encor ensi, et ne cesser de faire ensi tant que tu penses par sens qu’il viegne jusc’a la hainche, et que li dolor soit cessee; et cist manieres de cautere est apelez «cautere de chievre».	Afterwards, take dry sheep's fat, and heat it on fire until it becomes hot coals, and place it on the wool, and let it remain until it is extinguished; and do this again, and continue in this manner until you think by sense that it has reached the hip, and the pain has ceased; and this method of cauterization is called "sheep fat cauterization.
de la dolor dou dos	of the pain from the back
Quant dolor vient au dos, ou par cheoir ou de percussion ou par trop grant evacuation, ou par semblans de matiere espandue froide, a nule de ces semblances ne vaut cauteres, fuer que a celi qui vient de infusion de froide matiere.	When pain comes to the back from falling or percussion or from too great an evacuation or from similar spread of cold matter, none of these circumstances call for cautery, but only in the case of infusion of cold matter.
Il covient c’aprés ceu que li malaides est voidiez de pilules fetides ou d’autres semblans, que on li faice sus lou dos, lai ou li dolor tient, trois lignes signies d’enche, et en chescune ligne V cauteres ou plus selonc la vertut et la quantiteit que li malaides puet soffrir; et soit fait li cauteres selonc le cautere qui est apelez «poins»; et se tu vues, fai III cauteres ou IIII au cautere clavile moien selonc ceste forme:	After that, if the patient is void of foul pills or other similar matters, make three lines signed with enche on the back where the pain resides, and in each line use five cauteries or more according to the virtue and quantity that the patient can endure; and let the cauteries be made according to the cautery called "poins"; and if you see, make three or four cauteries at the medium clavile according to this form:
Maintes fois vient ceste maladie as petis enfans, et li signes de l’encomencement si est qu’il ont estroite alainne quant il se lievent, et paor; et tu trueves en la derriene espinee dou dos et en nous l’apparance qui vient sus les autres espinees.	This sickness often comes to small children, and the signs of the beginning are that they have a tight throat when they wake, and fear; and you find in the last spine of the back and in us the appearance that comes upon the other spines.
Quant tu vois ceu et tu le vues curer, si le cauterize au cautere de celcle selonc ceste forme.	When you see this and it needs to be treated, cauterize it with the circular fire cautery according to this form.
Si que li cautere porpreigne chescune partie de l’espinee egaument.	So that the cauterization for each part of the spine increases.
Et se tu vues, si cauterize entor l’espinee au cautere poignant II lignes ou III, et soient li poins pres l’uns de l’autre.	And if you see, cauterize between the spines with a sharp fire cautery two or three lines wide, and let the points be close to each other.
Aprés cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez selonc ceu que nos avons dit, et warde que tu n’amenistrer cautere en gilbositeit qui soit en spame de nerf.	After treating the limb until it is healed as we have said, be sure not to apply a fire cautery in swelling that is due to nerve damage.
de la dolor des jointes	of joint pain
Quant dolor de jointes sunt de moistors que sont espandues a chaicun membre dou cors, et quant dolor vient em piez, que li mire apelent «podagre» proprement, et quant elle est de froide cause et cures de medicines ne la puent curer, si est curez par cauteres en teil maniere: fai li mout de cauteres entor la jointure dou piet, et soit li cauteres olivaire selonc ceste forme:	When joint pain is due to moisture spread throughout each limb of the body, and when pain comes from the feet, which doctors call "podagre" properly, and when it is caused by cold and cannot be cured with treatments or medicines, it is treated as follows: make many fire cauteries around the joint of the foot, and let the cauteries be olive-shaped according to this form:
Et s’il i a besoigne que tu poignes sus la faice dou piet, se li fai cautere a tot le cautere c’on claime «point».	And if there is need to prick the face of the foot, let the cautery be as wide as what we claim "point".
Et se les dolors viegnent jusc’a genous et as autres jointures, et ceu avient maintes fois, se li fai cautere sus chaicun genoil III cauteres ou IIII de chescunne partie, a tout le cautere olivaire; et se tu as mestier de plus, si en fai plus, mais n’i tenir mie ta main fuers que tant que li espés dou keur soit ars.	And if the pains come down to the knees and other joints, and this happens often, then make a cautery on each knee three or four times from each part, for the entire olive oil cautery; and if you need more, do more, but keep your hand out no longer than until the coals of the heart are extinguished.
Et se les dolors dessendent jusc’a genoil et au dos, se li aministre le cautere que nos avons dit en son chapistre.	And if the pains descend to the knee and the back, then apply the cautery as we have said in its chapter.
Et se les dolors sunt as mains, si fai poins entor le foscile II lignes; et s’il remaint point de dolor as dois, si fai poins sus chescune jointe et sus lou poil de la main; et se les dolors vienent jusc’as coutes ou jusc’as espaules, si cauterize chescune partie, et fai boin governement au malaide et penre medicines.	And if the pains are in the hands, make punctures two lines apart; and if there remains any pain in the fingers, make punctures on each joint and over the hair of the hand; and if the pains come down to the knees or down to the shoulders, then cauteryize each part, and give good governance to the patient and mild medicines.
Car se tu li fais boin governement et tu purges fleume, si sera saneis a l’aide de Deu.	For if you make good governance of it and purge phlegm, it will be healed with the help of God.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the side
Quant routure vient en angres, et li bouelz dessendent as coions et c’est novelement, si covient que quant tu lou vues curer, qu’il ne menjuce mie celui jor; et qu’il use choses qui laichent lou ventre, si que li fiens dessende de son ventre; aprés le fai seoir sus son dos entre tes mains, et li comande qu’il teigne son alaine tant que li boueil soient repairiet, et les ramoinne a tes dois, et seigne d’enche desoz la routure sus l’os dou poignil, et a tout un signe que soit semblans a la moitiet d’un cercle a desus dou cors; puis eschaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	When a rupture comes in the groin, and the bellies descend into the scrotum, this is new and needs care. When you see it needs to be treated, do not let him eat that day; and give him things that release wind from his stomach, so that the contents descend from his abdomen. After that, make him sit on his back between your hands, and instruct him to hold up his scrotum until the bellies are repaired, then lower them with your fingers, and mark over the rupture under the bone of the thigh, and make a sign that resembles half a circle above the body; then heat the cautery as is its form.
tant qu’il soit blans et qu’il giete senteles.	until it is white and gives off scent.
Puis ramoine les bouels a lor leu; et li ministres teigne sa main sus qu’il ne retornent arrier; et oevre bien les cuisses au malaide, et met desoz lui I cussin et I serjant sus les cuisses, et I autre sus lou pis qui li teigne les mains; puis met le cautere sus lou signe a tout ta main, et lou tien droit et lou tien tant que tu ateignes l’os, et se tu ne l’ateins la premiere fois, si le rencomence encor une autre tant que tu viegnes jusc’a l’os; et te warde subtilment que li boueil ne saille quant tu fais lou cautere; que tu ne le brulasses; et que par ceu li malaides ne muere, ou autre malz.	Then reset the bowels in their place; and the ministers hold their hand so they do not return. Work well on the thighs for the patient, and put the cook and the squire on the thighs, and the other one on the foot which holds the hands. Then place the cautery at the sign on your whole hand, and keep it straight and hold it until you reach the bone. And if you do not reach the bone the first time, repeat it again another time until you come to the bone. And carefully watch that the bowels do not protrude when you make the cautery; that you do not burn them; and that thereby the patient does not die or suffer other harm.
Et saiches que quant tu ne viens jusc’a l’os au cautere, tes ovraiges ne vaut rien.	And know that when you do not come to the bone with the fire cautery, your work is worth nothing.
Et covient que li cauteres des enfans soit subtilz selonc la mesure d’ous, et des grans gens aussi grans selonc lor mesure; aprés III jors cure lou leu dou cautere de burre tant que li eschaudure soit ostee; aprés le cure d’autres oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez, et gise li malaides XL jors sus son dos tant que li plaie soit bien soudee; et covient que ses norrissemens soit lassatis longement, si que li boueil ne saillent quant il se preigdra d’aler en chambres.	And it must be that the fire cautery for children is subtle according to the measure of their size, and for large people as great according to their measure; after three days, cure the area of the cautery with butter until the scalding is removed; afterwards, apply other ointments until it is healed, and let the patient rest on their back for forty days until the wound is well healed; and it must be that their nourishment is prolonged, so that the boils do not burst when they are taken to rooms.
Et aprés XL jors, quant il se voudra lever, se li amenistre une faixe bien faite, et la porse XL autres jors; et ait boin repos, qu’il se travaille poc et se warde de trop grant repletion de boivre et de mengier, et de trop haut braire; et quant il fait cest enseignement si est sanez entierement.	And after forty days, when he wants to rise, provide him with a well-made bandage, and let him rest for another forty days; have good rest, and let him work little and avoid too much drinking and eating, and too much loud noise; and when he follows this instruction, he will be completely healed.
Et je dirai ci aprés la cure de taillier en son chapistre.	And I will say after the treatment to shave in his chapter.
de la routure dou ventre	of the rupture of the belly
Quant routures vienent en autres ventres et sont connisans, et tu vues qu’elles ne croissent plus, se li fai I cautere dou cautere reont selonc sa quantiteit, et soit ars li tiers dou keur; aprés le cure selonc ceu que nos avons dit; et aucun des anciens ont dit c’on le doit cauterizer au cautere a III angles selonc ceste forme:	When ruptures occur in other bellies and are known, and you see that they do not increase, then let them make the fire cautery according to its quantity, and be heated one-third of the chord; after the treatment according to what we have said; and none of the ancients have said that one should cauterize at a III angles in this form:
mais signe premier le leu d’enche et fai une ligne per la largesce desus la routure, et une autre defuers, et main ta main emmi a tout le cautere clavile.	but mark the center line first and draw a line along the width above the rupture, and another below it, and hold your hand through all the cautery.
Mais li premiers cauteres est plus legiers et muedres.	But the first cauterizations are lighter and more soothing.
de dolor anciene en aucun membre	of old pain in any limb
Quant dolor vient en aucun membre, ou de cheoir ou de ferir, et cele dolor tient lonc tens, et li cure de medicine n’i vaut, adonc covient qu’il soit cauterizeis au cautere qui est apelez «poins», et soit li cauteres selonc la longesce dou membre et la petitece et sa foibleteit et sa vertut et sa location de torcions et de sa dolor.	When pain comes to any limb, due to falling or injury, and that pain lasts a long time, and the cure of medicine does not help, then it must be cauterized with the cautery called "poins," and the cauterizations should be according to the length of the limb and its size and weakness and its virtue and its location of twists and its pain.
s’il est sanez dou premier cautere, c’est bien; se ceu nom, recomence I autre cautere sus celui, car teilz costume est qu’il se doit muer au membre que li est prochiens, por coi il covient que tu faices les cauteres tant que li malaides soit saneis.	If the pain is relieved by the first cauterization, that is well; but if not, you must repeat the other cauterization over it, because such is the custom that it must change to the limb nearest to it, so you must make the cauterizations until the patient is cured.
de meselerie	of leechcraft
Li meseil sont aidiet aucune fois par cautere par grant aide, et meismement li maladie que vient de la putrefaction de fleume et de melancolie.	The diseases are often cured once by the fire cautery with great help, especially those that come from the putrefaction of phlegm and melancholy.
Cant tu la vues cauterizer, pren warde se li maladie est au comencement, et s’ele est curee selonc ceu que nos avons dit en la division, et ne dessent ne ne demoure, et tu doutes que li corruption ne porpreigne tout le malaide, adonques li fai V cauteres sus lou chief: I emmi le chief a nouf, et l’autre vers lou front a la fin des chevous; et II sus les II cornes, et I derrierre sus le haiterel; et i laise tant ta main que li cauteres viegne jusc’a l’os, et tant que les escorces en issent fors si que les vapors des grosses humors s’en puissent issir; et le cauterize sus la mice selonc ce qu’il est devant.	When you see the wound is to be cauteryed, take care that the disease is in its beginning stage, and if it is cured as we have said in the division, and does not swell or remain, and you doubt that corruption might spread throughout the patient, then make five cauteries on the head: I place one on the forehead near the hairline, and another at the back towards the crown of the head; and II on the two horns of the head, and III behind on the occipital bone; and leave your hand there until the cautery reaches the bone, and until the skin is removed so that the vapors from the gross humors can escape; and make a cautery on the mice according to what is described before.
Et se li meselerie est partout esparse; et elle pert manifestement, si covient que tu lou cauterizes de ces cauteres que nos avons dit ou chief, et I cautere en som lou neis, et II cauteres sus l’espinee dou col, et VI cauteres sus l’espinee dou dos, et I grant sus la crupie et I autre delez, et II sus les II espaules; et II sus les coutes, et II sus les tendrons dou pis, et I sus chascune jointe des mains et des piez, et sus les fosses des mains; et te warde des ners que sunt sus lou derrien calcant, que tu ne les bruler; et aucune fois fait om cautere sus l’os dou poignil, et I autre sus l’os de l’estomac, et I autre sus lou foie.	And if the mezererie is scattered everywhere; and it clearly appears, then you should cauterize with these cauteries that we have said or chief, and the cautery on the nose, and two on the spine of the neck, and six on the spine of the back, and one large one on the breast and another laterally, and two on the ribs, and two on the tendons of the foot, and one on each joint of the hands and feet, and on the palms; and beware of the nerves that are behind the heel, that you do not burn them; and at no time make a cautery on the bone of the elbow, and another on the bone of the stomach, and another on the liver.
Et saiches que quant plus i fais de cautere, plus li fais d’aide, et mues li profite; et saiches que li malaides ne sent point de dolor au cautere si com li sain le sentent, por ce que li cors est ja toz corrumpus.	And know that the more you make a cautery, the more you do help, and they profit from it; and know that the sick do not feel pain at the cautery as the healthy do, because their body is already all corrupted.
Et covient ke li cautere soient grant et petit selonc les membres et les jointures, selonc ceu que vos lou troverez en manieres des fers.	And it must be that the cauteries be large and small according to the members and joints, according to those you find in manner of irons.
Aprés cure lou leu de farine de veces avec miel et autres cures tant qu’il soit saneis.	After the wound is cleansed with flour of wheat and honey and other dressings until it heals.
Quant enfleure vient en aucun membre et est curee par medicines et oiles et emplastres, et il n’est mie sanez, adonques li fai cauteres sus le membre selonc la grandour et la petitece dou membre; et soit li cauteres un poc entrans en l’espés dou keur; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	When swelling comes to any member and is treated with medicines and oils and plasters, and it is not yet healed, then make cauteries on the member according to the size and smallness of the member; and let the cautery be a little within the thickness of the skin. Then dress with ointments until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on cautere et a la main et au piet et au dos, a l’issue dou nerf que muet le membre, et ensi si est ostee li enfleure; et toutevoie ne s’en entremette nuls s’il n’est conoissans des membres et des issues des ners movans lou cors.	And sometimes a cautery is made with the hand and with the foot and with the back, at the end of the nerve that paralyses the member, and thus the swelling is removed; and in any case, no one should do it unless they are knowledgeable about the members and the outlets of the moving nerves of the body.
de albaras	of leeches
Quant li maladie qui est apelee «albaras» est enveillie, et li engien de medicine n’i valent rien, adonques le cauterize d’un cautere un poc parfont, selonc la quantiteit de l’espés dou keur, tant que li blenchour soit ostee, et soit muee sa color; puis le cure de farine de veces et de lentilles avec oile roset et foilles de plantain, et sanc de colon et sanc d’alondre, de chescun une partie; et soit mellez tout ensamble, et soit liiez d’un drapel, et soit aers au leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the disease called "albaras" is mature, and medical remedies are of no use, then cauterize with a slightly hot cautery, according to the thickness of the skin, until the white color is removed and its color changes; then cure with flour of wheat, lentils, rose oil, and plantain leaves, and blood from a donkey and cherry, one part of each; mix all together, apply with a cloth, and keep on the body until it is healed.
li cure de chancre par cautere	the treatment for a chancre by cauterization
Quant chancre vient au comencement, et tu lou vues arrester, si le cauterize au cautere qui semble I cercle, tout entor au tour dou chancre.	When a chancre begins to appear, and you see it stop, cauterize around the chancre with a circular cautery.
Et toutevoie li saige dirent que on faice cautere ausi au mileu dou chancre; et toutevoie ceu ne me semble mie boin, car je redous que il ne soit ulcerez et corrumpus, et je l’ai ja veut avenir aucune fois; et plus droituriere chose est qu’il soit cauteriés entor, au cautere qui est apelez «circule», si com nos avons dit en mout de cauteres.	And truly the wise said that one should make a fire cautery also in the middle of the ulcer; and truly this does not seem good to me, for I fear it may be ulcerated and corrupted, and I have already wanted it to happen once; and more suitable is that it be cauterized between, at the cautery called "circule," as we said many times about cauteries.
de l’enfleure qui ne puet meurer	of the swelling that cannot die
Quant aucuns ait une maladie qui est apelee «adubelati», et elle tarde de meurer ou por la superfluiteit qu’ele fait ou por l’eaige dou malaide quant il est decrepites (c’est a dire trop vielz) et il a poc de sanc, ou por lou tens; et tu la vues haster de meurer: adonques le cauterize entor de mout de petis cauteres en poignant; aprés le laisse ensi.	When some have an illness called "adubelati," and it delays death or due to the superfluity it causes or the age of the patient (that is, too old) and he has little blood, or due to the tension; and you see that it should hasten its death: then cauterize around much of the skin with many small cauteries by pricking; after, leave it thus.
Car elle se hastera de meureir.	She will hasten to die.
Et se tu la vues percier a tout le cautere, si chaufe le cautere de coi ci est li forme:	And if you see it pierce through the entire cautery, heat the cautery with what is of its form:
Et met ta main en mileu de cele maladie qui est apellee «adubelati» tant que li cauteres ait perciet lou keur, et soit telz li cauteres que li malaides lou sente defuers en teil maniere que li cours de la porriture soit alegis.	And place your hand in the middle of that disease called "adubelati" until the cautery has pierced through the heart, and let the cautery be such that the patient feels it on the other side in this manner so that the course of the putrefaction is alleviated.
Aprés le cure tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	After the treatment until it is perfectly healed.
li cure dou feu par fer	the fire cure with iron
Une autre maniere de maladie i a qui est apelee «corrodens», et n’est autre chose que une mengeson de membre, car ele menjut les membres ausi com li feus les leignes seches.	Another manner of disease is called "corrodens," and it is nothing more than a corruption of the member, for it eats away at the members as fire does to dry wood.
Se tu vois ceste maladie en leu qui puisse soffrir cautere ensamble feu, adonques eschaufe les cauteres clavile mout petit et grant, selonc ceu qu’il covient au leu ou li maladie est; aprés le cauterize de toutes pars tant que tu erraiche toute la corruption, et nen remaigne rien de li, que tout ceu qui est corrumpus ne soit osteit.	If you see this illness in a patient who can endure cautery with all fire, then heat the clavile cauteries very little and much, according to what is suitable for the patient where the illness is; after the cautery from all sides until you erradicate all the corruption, and let nothing remain of it, that all that is corrupted be removed.
Et puis le laisse III jors, et met sus les leus cauterizez soffre broiet avec oile tant que les eschaudures dou feu soient ostees, et toute li corruption.	And then let it be for three days, and place endured hot pieces on the cautery wounds with oil until the scalds from the fire are removed, and all the corruption.
Aprés lou cure d’oignemens engendrans char.	After the application of ointments producing flesh.
Et se tu vois aprés III jors que chars saine ne naisse, c’est boin; et se ceu non, si rencomence le cautere sus ceu qui est demoreit des leus corrumpus.	And if after three days flesh healthy does not arise, that is good; and if it does not, then repeat the cautery on what remains corrupted from the wounds.
Et ceste mengeson est aucune fois esteit curee de medicine ague en leu de cautere de feu; mais toutevoie cautere de feu est de plus grant aide, et j’ai ja dit la cure de la medicine ague en la division: pren la quant tu en as mestier.	And this mixture has been sometimes cured with medicinal water instead of the fire cautery; but nevertheless, the fire cautery is of greater help, and I have already said the cure of the medicinal water in the division: take it when you need it.
des porrelz qui vienent as piez	of corns that come from the feet
Mout de fois avient que as piez par defuers naist une maladie qui est apelee «clos» selonc nostre entencion, et est une grosse chose fautree qui blece lou piet.	Many times it happens that from the feet, due to blisters, a disease arises called "clos" according to our understanding, and it is a large, painful lump.
Et li cauteres de ceste maladie si est selonc II manieres.	And the cauterization for this disease is done in two ways.
C’est a savoir cautere de feu, et cautere d’aigue chaude.	This means cauterization with fire, and cauterization with hot water.
Cautere de feu si est que tu eschaufe I cautere cheveit ausi com est une penne de vouteul, et soit fait de boin fer a la mesure qu’il puisse porpenre le clou de toutes pars, et qu’il i ait subtilz marges; aprés le met tout chaut sus lou clou, et torne ta main tot entor le clou tant qu’il viegne au font dou clou; et lou laisse ensi III jors tant qu’il encomence giter porriture; puis li fai un emplaustre de malves savaiges broiies avec seil, et laisse l’emplaustre sus toute la nuit, et li clous cherra et sera desracinez de ses racines.	Fire cautery is when you heat the cautery tip as if it were a church spire pen, and it should be made of good iron to fit around the nail in all directions, and have thin edges; then put everything hot on the nail, and turn your hand all around the nail until it reaches the bottom of the nail; and leave it thus for three days until it begins to rot; then apply a plaster of wild mallows crushed with salt, and keep the plaster on overnight, and the nails will fall out and be uprooted from their roots.
Puis cure le leu d’oignement enjanrant char tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then apply ointment to the wound until it heals.
Et s’il sont convertit par defuers lou cors, et maintes fois avient et en mains et em piez, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere d’aigue chaude; et est en teil maniere: pren une cainne d’arain ou de fer, ou une penne de vouteul, et met sus lou clou et l’althelul, c’est asavoir porrelz verrues; et met la cainne sus si qu’ele porpreigne tout entor, puis i met un poc d’awe chaude, et retien bien ta main, et presse ta main en tornant si que li marge de la cainne viegne a la racine dou clou, et puisse trover l’aigue chaude voie parfonde jusc’a la racine; et soffre li malaides un poc la mordication de l’aigue chaude une houre; puis le laisse ensi, et il se derracinera tous a tout ses racines.	And if they are converted by burns on the body, and this happens frequently in hands and feet, you must apply a hot cautery to it; and it is done thus: take a rod of charcoal or iron, or a church spire pen, and place it over the nail and the althea (which refers to porre roots for warts); and put the rod on such that it penetrates all around, then add some hot water, and hold your hand well, pressing your hand as you turn so that the margin of the rod comes to the root of the nail, and may find the hot water deep path down to the root; and let the patient endure a bit the burning from the hot water for an hour; then leave it thus, and it will uproot itself completely from all its roots.
Ensi fai un aprés autre, tant que tu esraiches toz ces qui sont au cors, puis les cure des oignemens qui engenrent char.	Afterwards, do one after another until you cleanse all these that are in the body, then treat the wounds that generate flesh.
li cure dou trembler	the cure for trembling
Quant aucuns tremble de froidor de ners, ou de fievre quartaine ou d’autre, si covient que tu li faices IIII cauteres ou IV sus l’espinee dou dos, I cautere entre chescune espinee; et I cautere ou pez, et I sus l’estomac au cautere olivaire; si laissera lou trembler, et se hastera li santez de la maladie froide.	When some tremble from cold or nerves, or from quartan fever or other fevers, it is fitting that you make four or four cauteries on the spine of the back, one cautery between each vertebra; one at the feet, and one on the stomach with the olive-shaped cautery. If this does not stop the trembling, speed will be given to the health of the cold disease.
des pustules puans	pus-filled pustules
Aucune fois apperent par defuers le cors bathes, ou pustules puans, que vienent de grosses matieres corrumpues.	Sometimes apparent by the smell of the body bathed, or pus-filled pustules, that come from corrupt matter.
si covient au premier quant eles apperent que on faice cautere sus chescun chief de la pustule: un cautere subtil de fust de mirte, de coi li pointe soit emprise au feu, ou de racine de aristologe longe, ou au cautere lenticulaire.	If it is necessary upon the appearance of each head of the pustule to make a cautery: a thin fire cautery from juniper wood, with its point heated over the fire, or from the long root of arnica, or with the lentil-shaped cautery.
Et aucune fois les cauterize on au comencement quant il aperent, selonc ceste maniere, et il ne puent croistre des enqui en avant, mais est desrompue li superfluitez dont il vienent, et sont sanez; mais il covient que ceu soit fait aprés l’evacuation de sanc.	And sometimes the cautery is applied at the beginning when they appear in this manner, and it prevents them from growing further, but the excess that causes them is relieved, and they are cured; but it must be done after the evacuation of blood.
quant li artere est copee	When the artery is cut.
Maintes fois avient grans decorremens de sanc de l’artere qui est copee a la plaie que vient au pardefuers, ou a l’incision de l’aposteme, ou au cautere dou membre, et as semblans choses; et est mout grief chose d’estenchier.	Many times there are great hemorrhages from the artery that is cut during the wound, or in incising an abscess, or with the cautery on the member, and similar things; and it is a most grievous thing to stink.
Et toutevoie quant ceu avient a aucun, si te haste de mettre ton doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne, et l’estrain mout tant que li sans soit apaisiez desoz ton doi, et que goute n’en isse plus; puis met au feu les cauteres olivaire plusors petis et grans tant qu’il soient tuit rouge; puis empren I, ou grant ou petit selonc la plaie et lou leu en coi li artere est route, et met le cautere sus cele voine ou tu tiens ton doi, et tien le cautere tant sus que li sans soit restainchiez.	And whenever this happens to anyone, hasten to place your index finger on the wound of the vein, and hold it tightly until the bleeding is appeased beneath your finger, and no more fluid comes out; then put the olive fire cauteries, both small and large, on until they are all red hot; then take I, or a large one or a small one according to the wound and the limb in which the artery runs, and place the cautery on that vein where you hold your finger, and keep the cautery there until the blood is coagulated.
Et s’il saut fuers quant tu lieves ton doi desus la voinne, et li cauteres estint, si pren hastivement I autre des cauteres qui sont au feu.	And if it leaps out when you remove your finger from above the vein, and the cauteries are still hot, so take quickly another from those on the fire.
Et ne cesser de faire ceu l’un aprés l’autre tant que li sans soit estenchiez; et warde que tu n’ardes lou nerf qui est delez, et que autre malice ne viegne sus lou malaide; et saiches que quant sans decourt de l’artere, c’on ne lou puet mie bien restenchier meismement quant li artere est grans, se ceu n’est par une des IIII manieres que nos avons dit: ou par cautere, ou par extraction quant ele n’est mie traite, ou par fort liement de fil, ou par medicines mises sus qui ont pooir de restenchier sanc; et soit liee et estrainte avennament.	And do not cease to do this one after another until the blood is coagulated; and guard that you do not burn the nerve which is nearby, and that no other harm comes to the patient; and know that when blood flows from the artery, one cannot properly coagulate it themselves if the artery is large, unless it is by one of the four methods that we have said: either by cautery, or by extraction when it has not been treated, or by strong ligature with thread, or by medicines placed on which have power to coagulate blood; and let it be tied and held immediately.
Qui i amenistrera restenchement de liier estroitement de drapelz ou de metre choses ardans sus, ou autres semblans choses, se n’i profite se poc non.	Who will treat the stench of lime tightly with cloths or put burning things on it or other similar things, if it does not help much, then do something else.
Et se ce avient a aucun et il n’ait mie mire ne medicine present, si doit mettre son doi indice sus la plaie de la voinne si com nos avons dit, et bien estrendre tant qu’il soit restenchiez desus la plaie et desus la voinne; et ne remuer lou doit, mais lou moille d’awe froide sovent que soit mout froide tant que li sans soit congelez et engrossiez et restenchiez; et faice des enqui en avant ceu dont il a mestier de cauteres et de medicines.	And if this happens to someone and they have neither sight nor medicine present, they should place their index finger on the wound from the vein as we have said, and extend it well so that it is filled with stench above the wound and above the vein; and do not move the finger, but frequently rub the flesh with cold water until it is very cold, so that the wind is frozen and engorged and filled with stench; and proceed to make incisions and use cauteries and medicines as needed.
Ci encomence li secons livre des cures de taille	This begins the second book of wound treatments.
Nos vos avons dit ou premier chapistre toute maladie en coi il covient cautere de feu, ou de medicine ardans, et les oquisons et les causes et les estrumens et les formes des cauteres; et ai mis celui chapistre des lou chief jusc’a piez, et je irai en cest chapistre par celi meisme voie por ceu c’on trueve plus legierement ceu c’on voura.	We have told you in the first chapter where it is necessary to use a fire cautery or a burning medicine, and about the ointments and their causes and the instruments and forms of the cauteries; and I placed that chapter from the elbow to the feet, and I will proceed in this chapter by the same way because one finds more easily what one wishes.
Et ainsois que je encomence ceu, il covient, chier fil, que vos aprenez que en cest chapistre a plus de peril et de paor que ou premier des cauteres, et por ceu il covient plus grant cautele.	And since I begin this one, it is necessary, dear friend, that you learn that in this chapter there is more danger and fear than in the first on fire cauteries, and for this reason, greater caution is required.
Car en l’ovraige de cest chapistre avient maintes fois evacuation de sanc a l’ovrir la voinne, et a l’incision sus aposteme, et as cures des plaies, et a l’estraction des saiettes, et a l’incision sus la piere, et les semblans choses; ou il a doutance et paor, et en vient li mors a plusors.	For in the work of this chapter, there is often the evacuation of blood when opening a vein, and incising an abscess, and in the treatment of wounds, and in the extraction of arrows, and in cutting into stones, and similar things; where there is doubt and fear, and many die.
Et je vos amoneste que vos n’entreprenez folie.	And I advise you that you not undertake folly.
Car mout de manieres de gens vienent en cures.	For many people come for treatments in various ways.
si vienent de telz qui s’aïrent si avec lor maladie qu’il muerent legierement por la forsenerie qu’il trueve de sa maladie, et de la grandour de son malice; et de ces doit on avoir paor.	If they come so afflicted with their illness that they die lightly from the fever they have contracted, and from the greatness of their wickedness; one must be afraid of these.
Et de ces i a qui te done son sens, et dit: «atendez, je sui garis»; et li maladie est despitouse.	And among these there are those who give you their word, saying: "Wait, I am cured"; but the disease is fierce.
Il ne covient mie que vos vos consentez a ces qui vienent a vos qui ont ceste maniere, mais mettez plus grant cusanson en vostre honor qu’en vostre covoitise, et n’ovrez mie folement mais saigement de ceu dont vos estes certain, et dont vos poez avoir pris et los; et usez de pronostication et de indication en cures de vos malaides a coi salus soit convertie; et ceu vos aidera a aquester bone renommee, et gloire, et memoire de loenge.	It is not fitting that you consent to those who come to you in this manner, but put more careful consideration into your honor than into your greed, and do not give your word rashly but wisely of what you are certain and have experienced. And use prognosis and indication in the treatments of your patients for whose health this will be helpful; and this will aid you in gaining a good reputation, and glory, and lasting memory.
Tres chier fil, Nostres Sires vos doint boin entendement et droiture, et se vos vuelle espireir de la sainte inspiration de sa main, amen.	Very dear child, Our Lord gives you good understanding and righteousness, and if you wish to inspire from the holy inspiration of His hand, amen.
Or je vos ai ordeneit cest chapistre en devisant par chapistres, selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre des cauteres, que je vos ai deviseit des le chief jusc’a piez, por ceu que vos trovez plus legierement ceu dont vos avrez mestier.	Or I have ordered this chapter by speaking of chapters, according to that which was before in the chapter on fire cauteries, that I spoke of from the head down to feet, because you find it more easily what you need.
dou chief plein d’aigue	from the head full of fluid
Saiches que ceste maladie vient mout de fois as enfans a l’enfanter, et quant li baille estraint trop fort le chief de l’enfant; et aucune fois vient ceu de cause reponue que on ne seit.	Know that this illness comes very often to children at birth, and when the midwives grip too tightly the head of the child; and sometimes it comes from the reason given that we do not know.
Et je ne vis onques ceste maladie fuers qu’en enfans, et a toz ces que j’ai veus se hastait li mors; et por ceu me semble qu’il me vaut mues lassier l’ovraige en teilz cures.	And I have never seen this disease occur except in children, and among all those I have seen, death hastened; for this reason, it seems to me that it would be best to abandon the work in partial healing.
Et je vis I enfant de coi li chiés estoit plains d’aigue, et li chief engroissoit chescun jor tant qu’il ne lou pooit sostenir; et crut tant li moistor qu’il fut mors, et ceste moistor si est assemblee desoz l’os sus lou syphac, entre lou keur et l’os; et li ovraiges si est telz se li moistor est entre lou keur et l’os, et li apostemes est petis, que tu fendes emmi lou chief une fendure large; et soit ausi longe com II nous, tant que li mostor corre; et vez ci la forme dou spatumile:	And I have seen the child whose shoulder was full of fluid, and the head grew larger each day to the point it could no longer bear it; the moisture increased beneath the scapula, between the heart and bone; the work is such that if the moisture is between the heart and bone, and the abscesses are small, you should make a large incision through the head; let it be as long as two of our fingers, as long as the moisture extends; and see here the form of the spatumile:
Se li moistor est plus creue, et li aposteme soit plus grans, si fai II fendures en maniere d’une croix, selonc ceste forme:	If the moisture is greater, and the abscess is larger, make two cuts in a cross-like manner, according to this form:
Et se li moistor est desoz l’os, et li signes que tu vois les commissures dou chief overtes de chescune partie, et li aigue saut fuer quant tu la presses de ta main au dedens, et ceu ne t’est mie reponut: si covient que tu fendes enmi lou chief III fendures selonc ceste maniere:	And if the moisture is beneath the bone, and the signs you see are the corners of the mouth open on each side, and a sharp pain shoots out when you press it with your hand from within, and this does not respond: then you must make three cuts in the forehead according to this manner:
Et aprés l’incision estrai la moistor toute fuers.	And after incising, extract all the moisture out.
Aprés estraint les fendures de drapelz et de poudres, et i met vin et oile, et laisse ensi jusc’a cinquieme jor; puis le deslie, et cure la plaie par tentes et par oignemens, et laisse estraindre le chief egaument, et done mengier au malaide viande seche de poc de moistor tant que li membre soit confortez et sanez.	After holding the cuts with bandages and powders, and putting wine and oil on them, leave them this way for five days; then remove the bandage, and treat the wound with cloths and ointments, and let the forehead heal evenly. Then give the patient dry meat with little moisture until the limb is strengthened and healed.
Et une autre maniere d’incision est que tu regardes ou apert li grandor de l’aposteme, et li assemblé de l’aigue; car aucune fois est elle devant; aucune fois derrier; aucune fois en destre; et aucune fois en senestre.	And another method of incision is that you look for the center of the abscess and the accumulation of pus; for it is sometimes in front; sometimes behind; sometimes on the right; and sometimes on the left.
Taille donques lai ou li aposteme apert, et l’emplissement de l’aigue, et lou fent selonc ce que tu en as le pooir; et warde que tu ne coper l’artere; et veigne flun de sanc, si que li malaides muere dou decorrement de sanc et de l’evacuation de moistor.	Cut then the skin where the abscess is centered, and where the pus accumulates, making a cut according to what you can do; and beware that you do not cut an artery; and let the blood flow freely, so that the patient dies from the discharge of blood and the evacuation of moisture.
de reume	of rheumatism
Quant il avient a aucun une maladie qui est apelee «catarre» as eulz ou au pis, et li maladie est anciainne, et li cure de medicine ne profite mie, adonques li derraine cure si est li cauteres avec ceu c’on li copera les II arteres.	When someone has a disease called "catarre" in the eyes or the testicles, and the disease is longstanding, and medical treatment does not help, then the last resort is to use the cautery by which one will cauterize the two arteries.
Il covient donques, cant tu les vues coper, que li malaides faice rere son chief; aprés li frotte lou leu d’un drapel aspre tant que les arteres aperent, puis estraingne li malaides son col a tout I drapel; puis regarde ou li voine bait, et li leus de l’une et de l’autre sont aprés les oreilles, et poc sont reponues; puis signe les leus d’enche, puis cope l’une et l’autre d’un spatumile agut de II pars, tant que li taille veigne jusc’a l’os, et ceu soit par lou large dou chief.	Therefore, when you see the eyes swollen, the patient should turn his head; afterward, rub the area with a rough cloth until the arteries are visible, then squeeze the patient's neck completely with the cloth; then look where the vein lies, and the lobes of both sides are behind the ears, and they are slightly raised; then mark the lobes with ink, then cut each one with a sharp spatule from two sides, so that the cut reaches the bone, and this should be done by the side of the head.
Et se tu vues, boute le spatumile desoz l’artere et la cope au desus, en taillant ausi com II dois au traver.	And if you see, place the spatule beneath the artery and cut above, cutting as twice through.
Et quant li voinne est copee, si saut li sans en haut continuelment fuers.	And when the vein is cut, the blood flows out continuously upwards.
Et se li artere n’apert au sentir, si covient que tu mesures la quantiteit de l’espaice de III dois, puis seigne d’enche et fent jusc’a l’os; et ceu qu’il covient dou sanc mettre fuers si est VI c/, et par aventure un poc plus ou moins, selonc ce que li malaides puet soffrir, et la repletion de l’artere; puis regarde la plaie: s’il remaint sus l’os point dou syphac, si le cope que apostemes chaus n’i veigne, puis estrain la plaie et lie, et la cure d’oignement tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And if the artery does not open to touch, you must measure the length of a thumb three times, then prick and cut until reaching the bone; the amount of blood that should be let out is six denarii, and by chance a bit more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if there remains over the bone point of syphacia, if the cloth that we apply over the abscess does not change, then drain the wound and bind it, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
de emigrainne	And if the artery does not open to touch, you must measure the length of a thumb three times, then prick and cut until reaching the bone; the amount of blood that should be let out is six denarii, and by chance a bit more or less, according to what the patient can endure, and the filling of the artery; then look at the wound: if there remains over the bone point of emigrainne, if the cloth that we apply over the abscess does not change, then drain the wound and bind it, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
Quant emigrainne anciaine vient, et catarre agut, por les moistors des larmes et les chalors en temples et sode anciene forsenee et semblans choses, et il est medicinez par manieres de cures de medicine et tout ceu ne li profite mie, si estraions les arteres des temples et lou cauterizons, si com nos avons conteit.	When old migrainne comes and acute catarrh, due to the moisture of tears and the heats in the temples and ancient soreness and similar things, and it is treated with methods of medical cures and all those things do not profit him, then extract the arteries in the temples and use cauteries, as we have recounted.
Et li maniere de l’estraction d’elles si est que li malaides faice rere les poilz de ses temples, et entende a l’artere qui apert en la temple, car elle apert bien par son batement, et est poc reponue fuers que en aucuns homes qui sont trop froit; et s’elle est reponue, si estraigne son col li malaides d’aucuns drapelz, puis frote le leu d’aucun aspre drap, et arose le leu d’aigue chaude tant que li artere apere manifestement; puis pren le spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	And the method of extracting them is that the patient pull back the hairs on his temples, and find where the artery opens in the temple, for it opens well through its pulsation, and is little responsive elsewhere except in some very cold people; and if it is responsive, the patient grasps the neck of the artery with some cloth, then rubs the area with a rough cloth, and rinses the area with hot water until the artery appears clearly; then take a splint from which this is the form:
puis escorche le cuir legierement tant que tu veignes a l’artere, puis la trai en haut as pinceures, et la depart bien des toiles que sont desoz li de chescune partie; et se li artere est subtilz, si la torne a la pointe de l’uncine, puis la cope de celle partie selonc la quantiteit des II chiés.	then scarify the skin lightly until you reach the artery, then draw it up with the forceps and detach well the threads beneath each part; and if the artery is fine, turn it with the point of the curver and incise that part according to the size of the two heads.
Car s’elle n’est copee, si ne saut mie li sans dou tout en tout.	If it is not incised, it will not burst entirely.
Et trai dou sanc des VI c/, jusc’a III; et se li artere est grans, si covient que tu la lies en II leus d’un fil double fort de soie, que porriture n’i veigne devant le soudement de la plaie, et veigne decorremens de sanc; puis cope la superfluiteit qui est entre les II liiens en celle houre meisme, et puis, se tu vues, si lou cauterize dou cautere cutellaire jusc’a l’os tant que li chiés soient copez; et c’est li muedre oevre, se li malaides n’a fievre et il est de chaude complexion.	And draw out blood from six cuts, up to three; and if the artery is large, you must tie it in two places with a double strong silk thread, so that putrefaction does not occur before the suddenness of the wound, and hemorrhage decorrupts; then incise the excess that is between the two ties at that same hour, and afterward, if you see, cauterize the cut with the knife cautery down to the bone as the heads are cauterized; and this is the major work, if the patient has no fever and is of hot complexion.
Car li cauteres est aide por finir les moistors: por ceu est il de plus grant aide as moistors.	For the cauteries are helpful to end moistures: because they are of greater help against moistures.
Ou il covient por l’estraction des arteres que om emplisse lou leu de viel coton et mette on sus tentes bien faites; et quant on les desliera, si soit curez de medicines seches que font naistre char, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se sans cort de l’artere tant dis com tu i oevres, si te haste dou coper par cautere, ou tu emple lou leu de vitriole et l’estrain a ta main que li sans soit estainchiez; et se tu n’as ceu present, si met sor le leu ton doit tant que li sans soit congelez, et arose le leu d’aigue froide tant que li sans cesse, et soit estraint si com il covient; et ceu qui est muedre et plus legier en l’estraction de l’artere est que tu cauterizes la voinne de cest cautere trenchant de II pars, mais li trenchant soient bien espés por warder plus longement lor chalor.	For the extraction of arrows, it is necessary to fill the socket with old cotton and place a well-made tent over it; and when you remove it, it should be treated with dry medicines that promote flesh growth and tents until it is healed; and if there is no cork from the artery as much as you work on it, you must hurry by cautery where you apply the cotton of vitriol and squeeze with your hand to ensure the arrow is extracted; and if you do not have this at hand, place your thumb over the socket so that the arrow is frozen, and wet the socket with cold water until the arrow stops moving, and it should be held as necessary; and what is more moist and lighter in the extraction of the arrow is that you cautery the vein from two parts of this cutting cautery, but the cuttings should be well thick to ward off heat for a longer time.
Car quant li estrumens est trop tenves, si tient moins sa chalor.	For when the instrument is too cold, it holds less heat.
Et doit avoir entre les II coutelz I doit de gros d’espaice, et puis quant tu as signiet d’enche les II leus, et tu mes lou fer ardant sus tant qu’il viegne jusc’a l’os, et cope la voinne en II leus; et soient esloigniet entre les II chiés car il n’est mie soudez de cest cautere dou tout en tout; et c’est li forme dou cautere:	And it should have between the two knives a thickness of about an inch, and then when you signet them to the two leeches, and you heat the iron until it comes just to the bone, and cut the vein in two places; and let them be spaced apart between the two heads because they are not completely cauterized with this cautery from end to end; and this is the form of the cautery:
des larmes	of tears
Quant les larmes des eulz sont dessendans des voinnes que sont sus lou test dou chief de fuer, et il ne profite mie cure de medicine c’on i faice, et tu vois la faice dou malaide enrougir, et sent ou front ambulation si com de fremis; et sui oil sont tenve et moiste si que li poil des papieres sont cheut, et sont eschaufees les papieres, et escorchies de l’ardor des larmes, si ait mestier de ceste cure.	When tears from the eyes are flowing down veins that are above the temple of the eye socket, and medicine treatment does not help, and you see the face of the patient turning red, and feel tremors on the forehead; and the eyes are cold and moist so that the hair papers fall out, and the papers are heated and scorched by the heat of the tears, it needs this treatment.
Et l’apelerent li ancien «cure contuse», et est que tu faices a rere au malaide qui a ceste maladie les poilz qu’il ait ou front, puis li fai III fendures ou front igalment selonc la longesce dou front; et soit l’une des fendures ausi com II doi tout emmi lou front en avalant aval jusc’a neif, et les autres II as II costelz par desus les papieres, et te garde de l’incision des arteres que sont as II costez par desus les papieres; et aloigne ta main de la continuation des II mandibules, et soit chescune plaie la quantiteit de III dois au traver joins; et aies apparillie une piece d’esponge et mout de drapelz ses por essuer lou sanc, puis boute le spatumile agut de II pars de coi ci est li forme:	And the ancients called it "cure contuse", and you should do this for the patient who has this disease: if he has any hairs on his forehead, let him have them; then make three equal cuts or incisions along the length of the forehead; and let one of these incisions be as deep as two digits below the forehead, and the other two on either side above the sinews, but avoid incising the arteries that are above the sinews; and keep your hand away from the continuation of the lower jaw bones, and each wound should be the size of three digits in width; and have prepared a piece of sponge and much flannel to wipe the blood, then apply the sharp edge of the spatillum from both sides as it is formed.
des l’incision qui est dever la temple jusc’a la seconde incision; et escorche tout le keur qui est entre les II fendures a tot lou syfac qui est sus l’os, puis fai autreteil des la moiene incision jusc’a l’autre seconde, et puis estrai fuer cest spatumile.	From the incision that is from the temple to the second incision; and cauterize all the cheek which is above the bone between the two cuts. Then do the same from the middle incision to the other second incision, and then withdraw the spatillum.
si boute en la premiere fendure l’estrument qui est apelez «cultellaire», et est tresbien trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part est souef, ne mie trenchans, et c’est li forme:	if you place the instrument called "cultellaire" in the first cut, and it is very sharp on one side, and on the other side it is rounded, not sharp, and this is its form:
Et met le costeit taillant vers la char aerse au keur, et lou costeit souef vers l’os, et lou boute tant qu’il veigne a la moiene fendure.	And place the cutting edge towards the anus at the center, and the rounded edge towards the bone, and keep it there until it reaches the middle cut.
Et cope toz les vasselz que dessendent dou chief as eulz tant que l’incision soit continue jusc’a ceu qui apert dou keur, et puis autreteil fai en la moiene fendure jusc’a l’autre defuer; et puis estrai dou sanc igalment, et espresse lou leu por le sanc pris; puis met en chescune fendure une tente de viel coton, et met sus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile et en aisil, et garde que apostemes chaus n’i veigne; et au tier jor deslie lou liien, et i amenistre grant planteit d’aigue tede, puis lou cure d’oignement basilicon avec oile roset, et d’autres cures dont on cure plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And cut all the veins that descend to the eyes until the incision is continuous down to those that open at the center, and then continue in the middle cut down to the other side; and then extract the blood evenly, express the flesh for the blood taken; then place a tent of old cotton in each cut, and cover with wet cloths in wine and oil and anise, and keep abscesses from forming; on the third day remove the bandage, and apply a large dressing with hot water, then treat with ointment basilicon with rose oil, and other treatments for wounds until it is healed.
dou reume des eulz	of eye pain
Quant a aucun vienent catarre agut acostumeement, et tu vois les eulz tenves et petis, et afoiblir la veue, et les papieres brulees; et li poil chieent, et ou chief en parfont a dolor ague, et li malaides esternue; adonques saiches par ces accidens que celles matieres et cil catharre ne vient fuer que de maintes voines, et li muedre cure que i est, si est ceste.	When someone comes with a sharp cataract accustomedly, and you see the eyes contracted and small, and weakening of vision, and burned papers; and the hair falls out, and where it falls there is pain from water, and the patient sneezes; then know by these accidents that those materials and this cataract come only from many veins, and the matter within, so it is this.
Et est que tu comande au malaide a rere son front, puis fai une grant fendure emmi lou front, et une autre dou large I poc.	And you command the patient to lie on their back, then make a large incision through the forehead, and another one of lesser width.
Et comence des la fendure de la temple senestre a la temple destre, et soit li incision jusc’a l’os; et esloigne ta main des ners des temples que muevent au mengier; et quant li os est descovers, si essue tout le sanc a une esponge, et puis desevre entre les II levres de la fendure et i met coton viel, et tentes de lin; puis lie desus drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile, et te garde d’aposteme chaut; quant il est ostez, si covient que tu frottes l’os tant que chars i comence a naistre, puis le cure de choses exiccatives, que font enjanrer char.	And start from the left temple to the right temple, and let the incision reach the bone; and keep your hand away from the nerves of the temples that move when eating. When the bone is exposed, wipe all the blood with a sponge, then separate between the two lips of the incision and place old cotton and linen; then cover above with moistened cloth in wine and oil, and beware of warm abscesses. When it is removed, you must rub the bone until flesh begins to grow, then treat with things that promote healing.
En teil maniere: pren II parties de flor de froment, et de colofoine IIII parties, et en fai emplaustre; et l’aministre en ces plaies por enjanrer char per tout.	In a manner such: take two parts of flour of wheat, and four parts of colophony, and make a paste; and apply it to the wounds to draw out flesh throughout.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	Of the stopping up of ears.
Tout ceu que chiet ens oreilles est une des IIII choses: ou grains, ou beste, ou piere de mine ou semblans chose si com fer; ou semence, si com jaisses, feves, pois; ou chose defluans si com aigue et aisilz et semblans choses.	All that falls into ears is one of four things: or grains, or beast, or mineral stone or similar thing such as iron; or seed, such as oats, beans, peas; or fluid-like substances such as water and oil and similar things.
Quant il chiet en l’oreille piere ou autre maniere de chose que ne s’ajoste mie a l’oreille, ne ne croist en l’oreille, si met l’oreille au solel.	When it falls into the ear as a stone or other kind of thing that does not attach to the ear and does not grow in the ear, place the ear in the sun.
Se tu vois la piere, si distille aucun poc d’oile violet ou oile de sisament, puis i amenistre extraction; et lou fai esternuer de condisi, et li estoupe les narines quant li esternuemens vient, et met entor l’oreille pieces de drapelz ou laine; et estent l’oreille au desus.	If you see the stone, if it distils a little bit of violet oil or sesame oil, then administer its extraction; and let the patient sneeze with condisi, and plug the nose with estoup when the sneezing comes, and place pieces of cloth or wool inside the ear; and keep the ear above.
Mout de fois vient fuer par ceste cure; et s’elle ne vient fuer, se li amenistre extraction as pinceures subtilz, de coi ci est li forme:	Many times sneezing comes from this treatment; and if it does not come from sneezing, then administer the extraction with subtle forceps, of which the form is described here.
S’elle saut fuer as pinceures, c’est boin; se ceu non, si amenistre extraction a l’oncine subtil de petite doubleure; et s’elle ne saut par ceu, si fai une caine d’arain et boute lou chief de la cainne ou pertuis de l’oreille fort, et estoupe ceu qui est entor la cainne de cire mole si que li vens n’i puisse entrer avec la cainne; puis le trai fuer forment, car mout de fois vient fuer si com nos avons dit; et s’elle ne vient fuer en teil maniere, si prent glut de coi en prent les oisiaus, et met en som aucun estrument qui soit a point por ceu faire, et met un poc de coton entor; puis presse le glut sus la piere ou quel chose que ce soit, et trai fuer.	If it sneezes with the forceps, that is good; if not, administer the extraction with a subtle oncine of small weight; and if it does not sneeze with that, make a cotton swab and insert the head of the swab or a hole in the ear firmly, and plug around the swab with soft wax so that the snuff cannot enter with the swab; then draw it to sneeze forcefully, for many times sneezing comes as we have said; and if it does not come in such a manner, take snuff powder and use any instrument that is suitable for this purpose, and put some cotton inside; then press the snuff against the stone or whatever it is, and draw it to sneeze.
Et s’elle ne saut fuer de toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si te haste de fendre l’oreille ainsois que aposteme chalz i veigne, et spasme; et li maniere de la fendure si est que tu faices premier sainier lou malaide de la cephalique, et estrai dou sanc selonc la mesure de sa vertu, puis fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains et li torne l’oreille au desus, et fent une petite fendure en la racine de l’oreille a la graisse ou leu dependant; et soit li fendure ausi com une lune, tant que tu viegnes a la piere, puis l’oste selonc ton pooir, et la suce hastanment a ta bouche; et la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if she does not burst from all these things that we have said, hasten to cut the ear as with a boil filled with pus and inflammation; and the manner of cutting is that you first make the patient savor the malady of cephalic origin, and draw out the blood according to the measure of its virtue, then seat the patient in your hands and turn the ear upwards, and make a small cut at the root of the ear where the fat or flesh hangs down; and let the cut be as narrow as the moon until you reach the stone, then remove it according to your power, and suck it quickly into your mouth; and treat until it is healed.
Et se c’est grains qui est ens et il enfle, si aministre extraction; et si’il ne puet issir, si amenistre I spatumile tenve subtil selonc ceste forme:	And if it is a grain that is inflamed and swells, administer the extraction; and if it cannot come out, administer the spatumile tenue subtil according to this form.
et amenistre incision de celui grain.	and make an incision of that grain.
Mais ne faire mie ceu quant tu penses que li grains est moistes por la moistor de l’oreille, tant que tu en aies fait maintes pieces; puis l’estrai as pinceures subtilz et au succier, si com nos avons dit, si que li estractions soit aligie.	But do not make one when you think the grains are moist due to ear moisture, until you have made many pieces; then extract with fine forceps and suction, as we have said, so that the extraction be gentle.
En l’aigue donques que chiet en l’oreille covient que li malaides use d’esternuement de condisi premiers, et ample l’oreille de viel coton.	In the ear, when water falls into it, the patient should use sneezing with initial conditions, and enlarge the ear with old cotton.
Et soit gisans sus celle oreille meisme ou li aigue est.	And let them lie on that same ear where the water is.
s’elle saut fuer per ceu, c’est boin.	If it drains well through that, it is good.
se ceu non, si prent maintes pieres selonc li longesce de ton doit tenves et legieres, et les eschaufe un poc au feu; et em mette li malaides une ou pertus de son oreille, et saille sus i. de ses piez d’autre part, et fiere d’une autre piere sus la piere qui est en l’oreille; et ne cesse de faire ceu de piere em piere tant que li aigue isse toute fuer, et ensi saut elle toute fuer; et se tu vues, si prent I jonc, et boute l’un des chiés en l’oreille, et l’autre chief emprent de feu tant que li plus dou jonc soit ars; puis refai autreteil d’autres jons tant que li aigue isse toute, si com nos avons dit en la piere.	If not, take many stones according to the length of your thumb and hold them lightly. Heat them slightly over fire. Place one end of the stone in the patient's ear, and place another part of it outside. Strike with another stone on the stone inside the ear; continue striking stone by stone until the water drains completely, and then it will drain completely. If you see this, take a reed, insert one end of the shoulder into the ear, and the other end near the fire until the softer reed is burned. Then repeat with other reeds until the water drains completely, as we have said in the stone method.
En l’estraction de la beste, s’elle est de petit cors, si com puce et semblans chose, cure la si com nos avons dit en la division; mais s’elle est de grant cors c’on la puisse sentir, si amenistre extraction de pinceures; et c’est li chose plus legiere a oster qui soit en l’oreille.	In the extraction of the beast, if it is of small size, as with a flea and similar things, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is of large size that one can feel it, use forceps for its extraction; and this is the thing easiest to remove from the ear.
En l’estraction des vers enjanrez as oreilles, quant tu lou cures si com nos avons dit en la division et ou traitier des distillations, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu regardes l’oreille au soleil: s’il i apert nulz vers, si les trai as pinceures subtilz, et s’il n’aperent, si prent la cainne de coi ci est li forme:	In the extraction of worms in the ears, when you treat it as we have said in the division and for distillations, and the cure does not help much, then you must look at the ear in the sun: if there are no visible worms, draw them with fine forceps, and if they do not appear, take the wick of cotton described here.
Et soit estroite desoz et large desus.	And it should be narrow outside and broad inside.
Et boute lou plus subtil chief en l’oreille selonc la quantiteit de la soffrance dou malaide, puis succe forment a tot la caine; fai ceu sovent tant que tuit li ver issent.	And put in the ear the finest needle according to the amount of pain of the patient, then successively throughout the canal; do this often so that all the pus comes out.
Et s’il n’obeissent a issir, si estoupe entor la cainne de coton si com j’ai dit en la piere; et s’il ne saillent fuer si com nos avons dit, si aministre distillations que li ancien ont esprovees en l’ocision des vers, et tu les troveras ou traitier des distillations; et si distille tes oiles et tes medicines en l’oreille a tout cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme si com tu vois:	And if they do not come out, stop up inside the ear canal as I have said for the stone; and if they do not come out forcefully as we have said, administer distillations that the ancients have proven in the extraction of worms, and you will find them or treat of distillations; and if you distill your oils and medicines into the ear with this instrument, of which its form is as you see.
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain estrois desoz a I petis pertuis, et desus overs por distiller; et por presser dedens la distillation a I estrument d’arain bien fait por ceu, et se tu vues pren I raseur et envoloupe entor la pointe avenanment coton; puis i giete ton oile ou ton jus, et ceu que tu vues de tes medicines en la cainne, et li caine soit en l’oreille; puis boute dedens lou raseur a tout lou coton, et presse ta main tempreement tant que li oile soit distilleit ou chevement de l’oreille; et lou sente li malaides dedens, et soit li distillations I poc eschaufee au feu ainsois c’on la distille en l’oreille; et garde qu’elle ne soit trop froide, car li medicine ne seroit mie si bone.	And let it be of silver or thin tin from below the small holes, and above open for distillation; and to press within the distillation with the well-made instrument of tin for this, and if you see use the razor and wrap around the point with suitable cotton; then cast your oil or juice, and what you wish of your medicines into the canal, and let the canal be in the ear; then put within the razor all the cotton, and press your hand firmly until the oil is distilled or movement from the ear; and let the medicines be smelled by the patient, and let the distillations be slightly heated over fire as when one distills into the ear; and keep it from being too cold, for the medicine would not be so good.
de l’estoupement des oreilles	of the ear stoppage
Aucun enfant naissent qui n’ont nul pertus ens oreilles; et ceste meisme chose avient as homes par estoupement de plaie, ou de char nee dedens l’oreille, et cist estoupemens vient aucune fois em parfont en l’oreille, si c’on ne lou puet veoir; et aucune fois avient I poc defuer lou pertus, et lou voit om bien.	No child is born who has no perforation in the ears; and the same thing happens to men due to ear wound obstruction or a clot formed within the ear, and these obstructions sometimes occur so completely that they cannot be seen; and sometimes only part of the perforation is obstructed, and the hole remains visible.
Celle donques que vient em parfont, si c’on ne la puet veoir, est de grief sanation em plusors dispositions, et en cele c’on voit covient que tu mettes l’oreille dou malaide au soleil; et regarde dedens: se tu vois l’opilation apparent, si la oevre a tot cest spatumile de coi ci est li forme:	That which occurs so completely that it cannot be seen is of great concern for proper treatment, and in such cases, you must place the ear of the patient in the sun; and look inside: if you see the obvious obstruction, then the work has been thoroughly completed.
Et soit agus et trenchans devant et derrier tout plain, si qu’il ne blece l’oreille; se li opilation est de char nee ou cors de l’oreille, si la tien as pinceures subtilz, et la cope legierement, tant que celle chars soit toute ostee.	And be sharp and cutting both in front and behind completely clean, so that it does not damage the ear; if the extraction is from flesh or cartilage of the ear, hold it with fine forceps, and remove it gently, until all the flesh is taken out.
Et se li opilations est em parfont en l’oreille, si pren I raseur subtil legier et l’eschaufe un petit au feu, puis li met ou cors de l’oreille.	And if the extraction is in the ear, take the fine scissors gently and heat them a little with fire, then place them on the cartilage of the ear.
Se tu sens l’opilation dont li malaides sent grieteit a l’oïr, perce legierement, et garde que tu ne grever les ners de l’oreille; puis met en l’oreille une tente selonc la largesce dou pertus, et la moille en l’oignement egyptien.	If you sense that the extraction causes pain in the patient's ear, pierce gently, and make sure not to damage the nerves of the ear; then place a wick in the ear according to the size of the hole, and fill it with Egyptian ointment.
Fai ceu aucun jor tant que li plaie soit soudee, ou tu pren une tente et la moille en aigue rose, et poudre sus vitriole broiet; et se tu vois enflee l’oreille, si couvient que tu traies la tente et remue une autre tente moillie en cerote qui soit fait d’oile roset et de cire, tant que li enfleure soit ostee; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Make this for any day while the wound is sewed up, or take a tent and marrow in rose-colored water, and powder mixed with ground vitriol; and if you see the ear swollen, it must be treated by removing the tent and using another moistened tent made of rosine oil and wax until the swelling is gone; then cure it until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si plonge une esponge et drapelz en aigue froide, et le met sus l’oreille, et use d’autres cures qui oste lou decorrement de sanc qui sont ou traitier des destillations.	And if hemorrhaging of blood comes, dip a sponge and cloth in cold water, and place it on the ear, and use other dressings that remove the hemorrhage which are or treat with distillations.
de la char des papieres	from the juice of papers
Cist althelul que vienent em papieres des eulz quant ils sont moiste et sont sec, si covient que tu les estendes de tenailles et de pinceures, et le cope d’un spatumile de ses racines; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet.	This althelul that comes from papers of eyes when they are moist and are dried, it must be that you spread them with tongs and forceps, and the peel of a spatule made from its roots; then put on the eye ground vitriol.
Et se sans en decort, si le cauterize dou cautere lenticulaire subtil, et li cauterizeir aprés l’incision vaut mues; et maintes fois repairent, cant aucune chose demoure de lor racines; et quant elles sont cauterizees par feu, si sont arses celles racines et ne revienent mie.	And if without decortic和平版本：而且如果未经去皮，就用细长形烙铁对静脉进行灼烧，然后在切口后使其移动；很多时候会复发，因为它们的根部没有留下任何东西；当它们被火灼烧时，那些根会被烧毁且不再再生。
de la gresle	And if without decortic和平版本：而且如果未经去皮，就用细长形烙铁对静脉进行灼烧，然后在切口后使其移动；很多时候会复发，因为它们的根部没有留下任何东西；当它们被火灼烧时，那些根会被烧毁且不再再生。
Maintes fois vienent em papieres des eulz unes choses que semblent gresle en sa forme et en sa duresce, et por ceu est ceste maladie apelee «grandine», et est une assemblee de moistor grosse en la papiere desus et desoz; li ovraiges est telz: pren warde se li grandine se muet d’une part et d’autre, et c’est legiere chose a savoir; fent la donques dou large, puis l’escorche de chescune partie legierement, puis la prent as pinceures, et la cope.	Many times come in the eyes things that seem hailstones in their form and hardness, and because of this, this illness is called "hail," and it is a gathering of moisture large on the surface and underneath; the operations are such: see if the hail moves from one side to another, and this is a light thing to know; then make it wide, then burn each part lightly, then take it with forceps, and scrape it.
se tu ne la pues coper sens percier un poc la papiere, si ne grieve rien au malaide; et se li fendure est grans, si l’assemble a une costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et s’elle est petite, si n’i faire point de force, car li oignemens la restoure tantost et enjanre char.	If you cannot cope it without piercing a little the paper, it does not hurt the patient at all; and if the cut is large, sew it up with a stitch, and cure it until it is healed; and if it is small, do not apply too much force, for ointments will restore it quickly and promote healing.
Et se li grandine est dessendans au dedens de l’oreille vers la partie desus, si enverse la papiere, et estent la grandine a unes pinceures, et la cope et presse d’une part et d’autre; et se li papiere est esloignie par l’incision, ce ne grieve rien; et quant li grandine est copee, si leive l’oil d’aigue salee, et cure le leu de ceu qui enjanre char tant que li malaides soit sanez.	And if the grain is descending into the inner ear towards the upper part, invert the paper, and place the grain with tweezers, and cope and press from both sides; and if the paper is removed by incision, it does not hurt at all; and when the grain is coped, wash the eye with salt water, and cure the head of what promotes healing until the patient is healed.
de la graisse des eulz	of the fat of the eyes
Exinach est une graisse qui est enjanree en toiles des papieres desus, et ce avient plus as enfans c’a nules gens, et grieve mout a lor eulz, et li vienent li catharre as matinees, et ne pueent regardeir la lumiere dou soleil por ceu que les larmes se hastent a lor eulz; et por ceu se couchent il sor lor faices adés, et dorment sus, et sont lor papieres desoz lor sorcilz moistes que li enfleure et li apparance ont covert de l’exinach qui apert en l’oil.	Exinach is a fat that is embedded in the membranes of the papers above, and this happens more to children than to adults, and greatly hurts their eyes. They get catarrh in the mornings, and cannot look at the light of the sun because tears rush to their eyes; for this they lie on their faces during the day and sleep face down, with their papers underneath them covered by their moist sorcery that swells and appears from the exinach which opens in the eye.
Et quant tu presses lou leu a tes dois et sent l’exirnach entr’ous.	And when you press on the head between your hands and feel the exinach within.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain; et puis pren I drapeil de lin, et appareille une tente em maniere d’un cercle selonc la quantiteit que conteigne exirnach de chescune partie, puis le met sus li; et presse a tes dois d’une part et d’autre, si que li exirnach soit assemblez emmi le cercle; puis fent em mileu de la moistor au spatumile trenchant une fendure dou large, et ne soit mie plus grans que li plaie c’on fait a la sainie de voinne; et fent le cuir em parfont tant que tu veignes a l’exirnach; et em plusors dispositions vient exirnach de la fendure, selonc la forme d’une piece de graisse blainche.	And the method of the work is that the patient places their head on your lap; and then take a linen cloth, and set up a tent in the manner of a circle according to the quantity of exinach that each part contains, then place it on them. Press from both sides with your hands so that the exinach gather within the circle; then cut through the moisture at the center with a sharp knife making a slit as wide as the wound made for the vein; and scrape the skin thoroughly until you see the exinach. And through many preparations, exinach comes out from the slit in the form of a piece of white fat.
Estrai la donques a tout une piece de drap charpit entre tes dois au defuer, et torne ta main a destre et a senestre tant qu’il soit espars; et garde que tu n’ajoster en la fendure, que tu ne viegnes a tout le spatumile jusc’a l’oil, que tu ne le bleces.	Extract then the entire piece of cloth charter between thy two forearms, and turn thy hand to the right and to the left until it is dispersed; and guard that thou dost not join in the fissure, that thou come not to all the spatumile until thou reach the eye, that thou wound it.
Et se li exirnach n’apert en l’encomencement de la fendure, si acroi un poc la fendure legierement tant qu’il apere; puis l’estrai si com nos avons dit, puis moille drapelz en aisil et en aigue, et met sus le leu, et estrain de bendelz.	And if the spatumile does not open at the beginning of the fissure, widen the fissure slightly until it opens; then extract as we have said, then stuff with soft cloth and water, and place over the eye, and extract with bandages.
Et si a de tels homes qui broient seil et mettent sus por corrompre cele moistor qui est demoree.	And if such men who grind grain and put it there to corrupt that moisture which remains.
Puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Then treat until he is healed.
Et s’il vient au leu aposteme chaut, si lou cure d’emplaustres assouajant tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if an abscess hot comes to the shoulder, treat it with soothing plaster applications until he is healed.
des poilz des papieres	of the paper hairs
Quant em papieres naissent poilz ajostez autre que li naturez, et sont enveillit, si nuisent as eulz, et font venir manieres de maladies si com larmes acostumees et mollifications des papieres et albugine, tant que c’est cause de la destruction des eulz; et est li cure selonc IIII manieres: ou par cautere ensamble feu, ou par medicine ague selonc ceu qu’il est devant ou chapistre de cautere, et est fais ou par incision et costure ou par caines, selonc ceu que je dirai.	When paper hairs grow other than as nature intended, and they become mature, they harm the eyes, causing conditions similar to habitual tearing, softening of the papers, and albugine, leading to the destruction of the eyes; and the treatment is according to four methods: either by a fire cautery with all types of fire, or by a medicinal wash as described in the previous chapter on cautery, and it is done either by incision and suturing or by cantharides, as I will say.
Il covient que tu mettes lou chief dou malaide en ton sain, puis torne la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre; s’elle est convertie, c’est boin; se ceu non, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil desus; et soit ce delez la marge de la papiere ou li poil naissent delez ces poilz, et trai I fil au desus a tout la papiere, et la torne au raseur; puis fent en la partie desoz la papiere, desoz les poilz ajostez, a tout le spatumile copant, des le grant larmier jusc’au petit; puis estrai I fil, et met desoz la papiere une petite tente de couton et de drapeil, puis seigne sus la papiere une figure d’enche, si com la fuelle de mirte, et toutevoie il covient que li figure soit selonc la quantiteit que tu vues eslever la papiere qui est devisez a toz.	You must place the head of the patient in your sound hand, then turn the paper of the eye with your left hand; if it is rotated correctly, that is good; if not, you should insert a needle along the thread above; and let this be from the margin of the paper where the hair grows among these hairs, and pull the thread above the entire piece of paper, and cut it at the edge with the razor; then make an incision under the paper, under the added hair, to the entire spatumile cutting, from the large eyelid down to the small; then extract the thread, and place a small tent of cotton and cloth under the paper, then sprinkle on the paper a figure of enchye, as the leaf of laurel, and always it must be that the figure is according to the quantity you wish to lift from the paper which is divided for all.
Et si a teil qui a mestier c’on cope grant quantiteit de la papiere selonc ceu que li papiere est mollifie; puis fent a tout le spatumile sus les II lignes que tu as signiet, et comence des lou grant larmier jusc’a petit; et soit li une des fendures pres des poilz naturez en la groissece d’un raiz, puis boute l’oncine en l’un des II angles dou keur, puis l’escorche toute; puis assemble les II levres a une costure d’une aguille a tout I fil de laine subtil, et essue le sanc, et fai aerdre la superfluiteit des filz sus les II sorcilz a tout aucunes choses gluans, se tu vues faire ce; et se ce non, si n’en aies cure, puis laisse la costure et les filz jusc’a III jors ou IIII; puis cure la plaie sens costure de choses sechans et constrignans, car li papiere se relive au soudement de la plaie et l’assemblement de li, mais li costure est muedre (si com dirent li ancien), et c’est ovraiges sens paor; et si a une autre maniere: et est que tu seignes la papiere d’une figure qui soit ausi com li fuelle de mirte, si com nos avons conteit, a III oncines desevrez selonc la forme qui est ci:	And if there is one who needs much of the paper according to how it has been softened; then make on the entire spatumile above the two lines that you have marked, and start from the large lacrimal gland until small; let it be one of the slits near the natural hairs in the size of a root, then pour the ounce into one of the two corners of the keur, then scorch all of it; then assemble the two lips with a seam using an awl and all the thread of thin wool, and wipe away the blood, and do away with the superfluity of threads above the two sorcilz to any sticky things, if you wish to do this; but if not, do not worry about it, then leave the seam and threads until three or four days; afterwards cure the wound without a seam using drying and constraining things, because the paper revives suddenly from the wound and their assembly, but the seam is decayed (as the ancients say), and these are works without fear; and in another way: and it is that you mark the paper with a figure which is as like to the leaf of laurel as we have recounted, three ounces separated according to the form which is here.
puis cope ceu qui sormonte as petites forces igalment selonc la forme qui est ci:	then apply those that surmount small forces equally according to the form which is described here:
Et se tu n’as pooir de tenir les tenailles, et li chose n’est mie igalz, si prent une aguille ou il ait I fil, et la boute emmi la figure; et boute I autre fil delez lou grant larmier, et lou secont fil delez lou petit, et assemble entre tes dois les filz igalment; puis lieve ta main igalment, et lieve tout le cuir sus coi tu as signiet, si com nos avons conteit, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie par costure, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se aposteme vient a ton incision, si l’apaise de cerote et de semblans oignement assouajans; et aucune fois avient que li poil de la papiere sont convertit: si covient que tu uses ceu que nos avons dit de l’incision; mais li costure en l’une et en l’autre est plus artificialz.	And if you cannot hold the forceps, and the things are not equal, take a needle or thread, insert it into the figure; and put the other thread through the large artery, and the second thread through the small one, and join the threads equally between your two hands; then withdraw your hand equally, and withdraw all the skin above what you have signed, as we have recounted, then join the two lips of the wound by suturing, and treat it until it is healed; and if an abscess comes from your incision, soothe it with cerate and similar alleviating ointment; and any time the hair of the paper turns: then you must use what we said about the incision; but the suturing in one and in the other is more artificial.
Li cure des caines si est selonc ceste forme: et est que tu convertisses la papiere et la fent dedens selonc ceu que j’ai dit, et puis fai II caines par art, et II liiens subtilz ausi lonc com li papiere et li largesce dou spatumile est; et cope as II chiés de II pars ou tu tiens les filz; puis assemble l’un et l’autre subtilment sus ceu que sormonte de la papiere de l’oil, et estrain les II cainnes des II parties forment; et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, et li cuir qui iert estrainte morra et nercira et porrira, tant qu’il cherra par lui.	The treatment of boils is according to this form: and it is that you turn the paper inward as I have said, and then make two canes by art, and two thin strings as long as the paper and as wide as the spann; and tie at the heads of both parts where you hold the threads; then join one to the other delicately above what rises from the paper of the eye, and extract the two canes from the parts formed; and let it be thus for some days, and the skin which was constrained will die and nerve and rot, until it falls off by itself.
S’il tarde, si le cope a unes forces, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et quant li plaie iert soudee, et si ert levee li papiere, et ne poindront plus li poil; et c’est li forme des II cainnes que tu feras selonc ceste figure, et selonc ceste quantiteit de lonc et de large:	If it lingers, and you need to apply more force, then treat until it is healed; and when the wound is closed, and the paper has been removed, and the hairs will no longer grow; and this is the form of the two canes that you will make according to this figure, and according to this length and width.
li ovraiges est telz que tu preignes une aguille subtil, et i boute I fil de soie souef et subtil; puis assemble les chiés et noe l’un et l’autre subtilment, et soit li longesce des filz une palme de lonc; puis ordene en la chasse I autre fil subtil de soie briément, et noe les chief dou fil; puis mette li malaides son chief en ton sain; et soit delez lou soleil si que li ovraiges soit declairiez, car c’est uns ovraiges subtilz et menus, puis boute l’aguille a tout la chasse en la racine dou poil ajosteit, et la fai percier en la papiere hastanment tant que tu la traies desus lou poil natureil; puis estrai le poil jusque sus la chasse, et boute en la chasse celui poil, s’il en i a I ou II ou III ou plusors; puis estrai ta main tant que li poilz veigne fuers a tout la chasse en la papiere avec lou poil natureil.	The operations are such that you insert a thin needle, and thread it with fine silk thread; then join the heads and tie both finely, and let the lengths of the threads be one palm long; then set another short fine silk thread in the chase, and tie its head to the thread; then put the patient's head on your healthy side; and keep away from the sun so that the operations are clear, for this is a delicate and minute operation, then insert the needle completely into the root of the added hair, and make it pierce through the paper quickly as you pull it over the natural hair; then extract the hair up to the chase, and put in the chase that hair if there is one or two or three or more; then withdraw your hand so that all the hairs emerge from the chase with the natural hair.
Et se li chasse est traite et li poilz ne vient fuer avec li, si trairas la chasse au desoz a tout le fil que tu i as ordeneit, tant que li chasse veigne fuer dou pertus desus et que tu la voies par la vision de l’oil; adonques si trairas la chasse et le fil, et clo l’oil et lou laisse clo II jors ou III, tant que li poil s’aerde en son leu et naisse li char sus; et se li poilz est petis, si acompaigne I poil lonc des chevoulz naturez, et soit alevez avec celui ou tu le laisse, tant qu’il soit eslongiez et puis le lieve.	And if the chase is treated and the hairs do not come forth with it, you will draw the chase out through all the thread that you have ordered, until the chase has been drawn from above the pertus and you see it by the vision of the eye; then you will draw the chase and the thread, and close the eye and let it remain closed for two or three days, until the hairs grow in their place and flesh appears above; and if the hairs are small, you shall accompany one long hair from the natural hairs, and raise it with that or where you leave it, until it is stretched and then release it.
de la porriture de l’oil	of the corruption of the oil
Quant ceste maladie qui est apelee «aleacrati» ou li porriture vient en l’oil, si en i a de II manieres: l’une natureil, et l’autre innatureil.	When this disease, which is called "aleacrati" or corruption, comes to the oil, it occurs in two manners: one natural, and the other unnatural.
Et avient par soudement de plaie, ou de tailleure ou de cautere, et par semblans choses.	And it happens suddenly from a wound, or an incision, or a fire cautery, and similar things.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige en li est que tu fendes celle soudure, et dessevre les levres de li, et met dedens tentes de lin, et la lie tant qu’elle soit sanee; et ne covient mie que tu uses en la cure de li de choses que sechent et restraignent.	And the manner of the work in it is that you cut open the stitch, and separate the lips of it, and put within tents of linen, and tie it until it is sound; and it does not suit you to use in the treatment of it things that dry and constrict.
Car se tu fais ceu, si revient li maladie pire que li premiere; mais i oevre de choses amollissans, si com fenugreic; et l’arose d’aigue ou altee et semence de lin soient cuites, et oignemens dyaquilon fondut en aucun des oiles, et i envoloupe une tente, et le cure de ceu.	For if you do this, the disease returns worse than the first; but the work of things that soften, such as fenugreek; and the wash with water or urine and linseed cooked, and ointments melted in any of the oils, and wrap it in a tent, and treat it with these.
Et li tresors de ta cure si est que tu te dones en garde qu’ele ne soude mie selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant; et cist ovraiges que nos avons dit nen est fuers que adresemens de ceste maladie, qu’elle ne reviegne selonc la forme qu’elle fut devant.	And the treasure of your cure is that you take care lest it closes not according to the form it was before; and these works that we have said are only remedies for this disease so that it does not return according to the form it was before.
de la char qui vient en l’oil	of the flesh that comes into the eye
Ceste maladie que est desoz qui vraiement est apelee «axacrati», et est naturelz et accidens.	This disease that is truly called "axacrati", and is natural and accidental.
Li accidens vient de plaie et de fendure et de cautere et de choses semblans; et li voie de l’ovraige en li si est que tu preignes un aguille, en coi il ait I fil double, et la fiche en la char, et li fai percier des le senestre larmier tant c’a destre, si que li filz veigne en II chiés de la char; puis estent la char au desus a tout l’aguille, et la cope a I spatumile large.	The accident comes from wounds, cuts, fire cautery, and similar things; and the way of this work is that you insert a needle, in which there is double thread, and fix it in the flesh, and make the thread pierce from left lachrymal gland to right, so that the threads emerge at both heads of the flesh; then the flesh above is pulled by all the needle, and the cloth by the wide spatule.
Et se li figure de la papiere revient selonc ceu qu’il covient, c’est boin; se ceu non, si pren I raseur et le met en la fendure, et torne la papiere, et fent II fendures ou costeit dedens la papiere; et soient li chiés des II fendures des II angles de l’incision que tu as copeit, et soit fais uns angles si que quant elles sont assemblees, que li figure soit ausi com li figure d’une lettre qui a non «I griesche»; puis oste celle char, selonc la quantiteit que ses costez est agus desoz, de ceu qui enseut la papiere, puis ajoste les II parties desevrees, et les cout d’un fil de lainne; puis lou cure de ceu que nos avons dit des medicines mollifians, et de tentes, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the figure of the paper returns as it should, that is good; but if not, take a razor and place it in the crack, turn the paper, and make two cracks inside the paper; and let the heads of the two cracks be at the angles of your incision, and make angles such that when they are assembled, the figure is also as the figure of a letter which has no "I griesche"; then remove that flesh, according to the quantity that its sides are cut from underneath, from what follows the paper, then join the two separated parts with stitches of linen thread; then apply the cure that we have said of mollifying medicines and tents until it is healed.
Et se li maladie vient de fendure ou de costure ou de cautere, si covient que tu fendes une fendure plainne desoz les poilz des papieres, et selonc ceu qui est ci devant; puis desevre entre les II leivres d’une tente, si com j’ai dit; et doit on faire l’ovraige selonc la forme de la maladie, car elle est mout diverse en forme, et li saiges maistres appareille engien de tout som pooir coment il faice revenir la figure a sa forme natureil; et li malaides meisme, selonc ceu qu’il i covient d’ovraige et d’estrumens em plusors dispositions.	And if the disease comes from a crack or suture or cautery, you must make a full crack underneath the hairs of the paper, according to what is said before; then separate between the two flaps of a tent as I have said; and one must perform the work according to the form of the disease, for it is very diverse in form, and master surgeons devise means with all their skill how they may make the figure return to its natural form; and the patients themselves, according to what is needed from the work and instruments in many dispositions.
dou soudement de la papiere	suddenly from the paper
Quant ceste soudure avient a mains homes en teil maniere que li papiere desus est sodee avec le blanc de l’oil, et ne puet movoir ne faire ses ovraiges naturez, si covient donques que tu i boutes la pointe d’un raseur desoz la papiere, et la lieve en haut; et l’estent as pinceures, tant que tu copes ceu qui est aert au spatumile subtil, qui ne soit mie trop agus ne trop trenchans, si que li malaides ne puisse soffrir que li spatumile trop agus ne blecent l’oil; et soit ton incision, dont tu escorche celle assemblee, legierement, si que li papiere reviegne selonc sa forme natureil; et est sanee toute celle assemblee, et font aucune fois en l’oil aigue salee, et le leve d’aigue douce, et de coliere; puis met entre la papiere et l’oil une tente de lin, et met sus l’oil laine moillie en abun d’uef; et aprés le tier jor use dou coliere et des choses soudans tant qu’il soit sanez.	When this缝合发生在人手上以某种方式，纸张上方变得僵硬并用眼睛的白色部分固定，不能移动也无法完成其自然工作，那么你必须在纸上刺入剃刀的尖端，将其拉起；然后用钳子保持，直到你取出那些位于细微脂肪中的东西，既不要太锋利也不要太锐利，以免患者无法忍受太过刺激或使眼球变白；你的切割要轻柔地灼伤它们的集合体，使得纸张恢复其自然形态；整个集合体都痊愈了，并且在眼中含盐水和泪水中不会有任何一次不适；之后在纸上放一层亚麻布，并在眼睛上放置浸过鸡蛋清的羊毛；然后使用紧绷物品直到痊愈。
de l’ungle de l’oil	of the nail of the eye
Saiches que li ungle est selonc II manieres: elle est nervouse et semblans a I dur syfac, et une autre qui n’est mie nervouse, mais est semblans a blainche moistor congelee, que quant on la touche de fer et on la cuide panre as pinceures, si ne puet om; et l’une et l’autre semblance encomence devers le grant larmier, et croist poc et poc tant qu’ele cuevre toute la veue et toute la lumiere et le movement de l’oil.	The nail of the eye is according to two manners: one is nervous and resembling hard skin, and another which is not nervous but resembles white congealed moisture, such that when it is touched with iron and carefully cut with tweezers, it cannot be held; and both resemble starting near the large lacrimal gland, and grow little by little until they cover all sight and light and the movement of the eye.
Et li maniere de l’incision si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz; et lieve la papiere a ta main, puis coil l’ungle as pinceures de petite doubleure, et l’estent au desus; puis pren une aguille, et i met I poil de cheval, ou de vaiche, ou de buef, et I fil fort; et double la pointe de l’aguille un poc et la fiche emmi l’ungle, et la perce a tout l’aguille, et lie l’ungle d’un fil et l’estent au desus, et escorche a tout lou poil le costeit de l’ungle qui enseut la prunele et la soie au poil jusc’au chief, puis cope lou remanant en la racine dou larmier a tout lou spatumile subtil et as petites forces, et laisse la char natureil ou larmier, si que par l’incision ne veigne li cors des larmes acostumeement; et aucune fois s’estent li ungle a l’oncine soulement, et au fil, si com nos avons dit; puis l’escorche on a tout le spatumile souef de coi ci est li forme:	And the manner of incision is as follows: the patient places their head on your lap, then opens their eyes; lift the paper with your hand, then grasp the nail with small tweezers and hold it above. Then take a needle, and place the horsehair, or deer hair, or cow hair, and a strong thread. Fold the needle point slightly and insert it into the nail, piercing it completely through. Secure the nail with a thread and hold it above, then cauterize along the side of the nail where the quill and silk meet to the tip of the hair until just below the lacrimal duct. Cut off the remaining part at the root of the lacrimal gland with very fine forces, leaving the natural skin or lacrimal gland so that no tears are produced through the incision as they are accustomed; sometimes only the nail and thread are cauterized, as we have said; then cauterize along all the fine pores from which this is formed.
Et garde que li spatumile ne touche la toile charnue et la rompe, et que li prunele ne soit percie; et aprés l’incision giete en l’oil un poc de seil broiet, et dou coliere fait de litargire, et le laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; puis le cure de ceu qu’il i covient tant qu’il soit sanez.	And beware that the spatillum does not touch the fleshy membrane and tear it, and that the probe is not pierced; after incision, pour a little powdered salt into the eye, and from cologne made of litharge, and leave it until the next day; then cure with what is necessary until it heals.
Et se li ungle n’est mie nervouse, et tu ne pues bouter l’aguille, et li uncines n’i puet entrer, maintes fois est curee ceste semblance d’ungle de medicines; et naissent sicom j’ai conteit en la division, et se tu la vues coper, si oevre l’oil dou malaide, et pren le spatumile legier poc agut selonc ceste forme:	And if the nail is not nerveous, and you cannot pierce it with the needle, and the forceps cannot enter it, often this resemblance of a nail is treated with medicines; and they grow as I have recounted in the division, and if you see it copulate, work on the eye of the patient, and take the spatillum lightly somewhat sharp according to this form:
Et reis l’ungle desus subtilment, et se tu vois qu’elle amenuise point et li rasion i apresse, si distille de ta bouche en l’oil coliere fait de litargire et dou coliere rouge et seil broiet, et estoupe l’oil jusc’a l’autre jor; puis rencomence l’autre ovraige selonc ceste meisme oevre, tant qu’elle soit toute ostee.	And gently remove the nail from above, and if you see that it thins at all and the root presses in, distill into the eye from your mouth cologne made of litharge and red cologne and powdered salt, and plug the eye until the next day; then restart the other work according to this same method, until it is completely removed.
Se aucune chose ne t’est contraire en l’oil, si com aposteme chaus, adonques la lait, et cure premier l’aposteme chaut tant qu’il soit sanez, puis rencomence l’ovraige si com devant, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If nothing is contrary in the eye, as with a hot abscess, then let it be, and first treat the hot abscess until it is healed, then resume the work as before until it is healed.
Et se li apparance de la chair dou larmier nuit en l’oil par grant nuisement, si la sospent a l’oncine, et en cope une partie et non mie tot, que cors de larmes n’i viegne; puis distille en l’oil coliere rouge qui est fais de litargire.	And if the appearance of the flesh around the eyelid harms the eye by great harm, then suspend it by a wire, and cut off part of it but not all, so that no tears come; then instill in the eye red powder made from litharge.
de la char qui naist sus la prunelle	of the flesh that grows around the pupil
Es eulz d’aucuns homes naist aucune fois char rouge, et cuevre la prunele et restraint sus les papieres et les torne au defuer, et semble une rose de balauste; et li ovraiges si est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, puis li oevre les eulz, et coil toute celle char as uncines convenaubles a ceu, et la sostien a la force; puis cope la premiere char, et vai tout copant au raseur jusc’a la fin, et te garde que tu ne bleces l’oil a l’ovraige; et soit li incision dou spatumile que nos avons dit en l’incision de l’ungle et as petites forces de coi on oste lou sebel, si com li forme aprés cest chapistre lou demostre; et quant li incision est acomplie et ostee toute li char, si emple l’oil de seil broiet ou tu i distille coliere rouge et semblans medicines corrosives, et met sus l’oil defuer coton avec abin d’uef, si qu’il soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut; et s’il i demore rien, et li sans chaus te sormonte, et tu doutes aposteme chaut, si laisse l’oil et cure l’aposteme de choses apaisant aposteme chaut; puis revien a ton ovraige tant qu’il soit sanez, et ensi fai cant chars est ajostee en l’oil par ceste semblance.	Some people's eyes grow red flesh once around the pupil, and cover the iris and are held on paper and turned over, seeming like a water lily; and the work is that the patient places their head on your side, then you turn their eyes, and cut all that flesh with suitable wires and hold it in place by force; then cut off the first layer of flesh, and continue cutting to the edge of the hairline until the end, and beware that you do not injure the eye during the work. And make the incision for the cataract as we said in the incision of the nail and with small forces from which one removes the film, as those who follow this chapter form after show; and when the incision is completed and all the flesh is removed, fill the eye with brine oil or you distill red powder and similar corrosive medicines, and place over the eye a cloth soaked in egg white, so that it is prepared for a hot abscess; and if there remains nothing, and the wound heals above, and you doubt a hot abscess, then leave the eye and treat the abscess with things that soothe a hot abscess; then return to your work until it is healed, and thus do all flesh layers added in the eye by this resemblance.
Mais toutevoie il covient que tu aliges la cure de chescun oil foible de la voie natureil; et de la voie accident, en ovraige de fer; et ne bouter mie ta main en aucun de ces ovraiges tant que tu voies que cist membres soit soffrans celui ovraige.	But nonetheless, it is necessary that you cleanse the cure of each weak eye from the natural way; and from the accidental way, in the work of iron; and not put your hand in any of these works as long as you see that this limb be suffering from that work.
des voines des eulz	of the veins of the eyes
Sebel sont voinnes rouges que sont covertes sus l’oil, et tolent a la veue son ovraige et afoiblissent l’oil toz jors.	If the veins around the eyes are red and cover the eye, and affect the vision with their work and weaken the eye for all days.
Mestier est donques au premier que tu regardes se li oil, en coi sebel est, est fors, et n’i a autre maladie fuers que lou sebel; adonques le coil en teil maniere: comande au malaide qu’il mette son chief en ton sain, puis sospent celles voines a tout l’oncine selonc sa sapience, et soit li oncines subtilz double selonc ceste forme:	Therefore, for the first thing that you observe if the eye, in which the redness is, is outside, and there is no other disease besides the redness; then treat it in this manner: instruct the patient to place their head on your healthy hand, then suspend those veins to all ounces according to your wisdom, and let the ounces be subtly doubled according to this form.
Et soient dui oncine par degrez en I cors selonc ceste forme:	And let there be two ounces by degrees in one body according to this form:
puis c’on coil as forces celles voinnes subtilment, et essue lou sanc houre aprés autre, tant que tu voies removoir celles voines fuers de l’oil; et garde que tu ne blecier l’oil as pointes des spatumiles, et fai cest ovraige a houre de midi devant lou soleil, et soies mout fervans en ton ovraige si que tu ne copes fuer que celles voinnes; et quant tu avras ce fait, si distille en l’oil coliere vert et rouge por corrumpre ceu qui est demorez dou sebel.	then coil the forces of these veins subtly, and wipe the blood hour after hour until you see the veins removed from the eye; and guard that you do not damage the eye with the points of the spatulas, and perform this work at noon before the sun, and be very warm in your work so that you do not harm those veins; and when you have done this, distill colriere green and red into the eye to corrupt what remains of the swelling.
Et se tu n’as pooir de coillir tout ceu en celle houre, si fai emplastre sus l’oil de choses apaisans la dolor des eulz, et le laisse aucuns jors tant que li dolors soit apaisie et soit asseurez d’aposteme chaut, puis rencomence selonc ceste maniere qui est devant tant qu’il soit sanez; et c’est li forme des forces:	And if you do not have the power to coil all of this in that hour, apply a plaster to the eye with things that soothe the pain of the eyes, and leave it for some days until the pains are soothed and assured of the warm abscess, then restart according to this manner which is before until it is healed; and this is the form of the forces.
de la fistule de l’oil	of the fistula of the eye
Li mire si nomment «arissati» fistule: quant tu la cures per cautere et par medicine ague ardant selonc ceu que j’ai devant dit, et elle n’est mie sanee, si est engien en li que tu fendes sus l’aposteme, lai ou il doit meurer, et trai toute la moistor que i est, tant que li os soit descovers.	They are called "arissati" fistula: when you cure it by cautery and with hot aqueous medicine as I have said before, and if it is not healed, then you indeed cut above the abscess, where it should come to a head, and drain all the moisture that is in it, until the bone is exposed.
Et quant li os iert descovers, et tu verras la corruption et la noiror, si la reis a tout l’estrument de coi ci est li forme; et est apelez «aspre chief», et soit fait de feir inde a I chief reont, et soit pointoiez si com une lime si com il est en la presente forme:	And when the bone is exposed, and you see the corruption and the blackness, then clean it with all the instrument of which this is the form; and it is called "aspre chief," and it should be made from a file, and be pointed like a rasp as it is in the present form:
Et met sus lou leu de l’os corrumput, puis le torne entre tes dois, et presse ta main un poc tant que tu saiches que celle corruption est rese; et fai ceu aucune fois, puis restoure lou leu de medicines exiccatives.	And place on the bone that is corrupted, then turn it between your two hands, and press your hand a bit until you know that the corruption has dried up; do this once, then restore the layer of drying medicinal substances.
se li leus est soudez, et char i naist, et li cors de la bowe est soudez, et remaint ensi XL jors, et il ne renovele et n’est mie apostemez, et accidens mavais n’i vient, saiches qu’il est sanez; se ceu non, si n’i a autre engien que de ramener la fistule au pertus dou neif selonc ceste forme: et est que tu descuevre de l’os la seconde fois par fer, et par medicines agues, et quant il iert descovers si prent I foret selonc ceste forme, et soit li chiés de fer a III angles, et li fust soit atenuis jusc’a chief si com tu vois ci:	If the bones are united, and flesh arises, and the core of the boil is united, and remains thus for 40 days, and it does not recur or become an abscess, and no ill accident happens, know that it is healed; if this is not so, there is no other means than to bring the fistula back to the opening of the vein according to this form: and it is that you uncover the bone a second time by iron and with medicines and water, and when it is uncovered take one forester according to this form, and let the head of the iron be at three angles, and the stake be thinned just to the tip as you see here:
puis le met sus l’os delez lou larmier, et esloigne ta main de l’oil I poc, puis torne a tot le foret tant qu’il perce l’os et le sent li malaides par ceu que li vens en ist s’il tient sa main sus son neif; et pues restoure lou leu de medicines seches, si com je t’ai ensigniet, et quant li char naist et endurcist li leus, si vait li matiere au neif; si est plus legiere chose au malaide.	then place it on the bone beneath the eyelid, and withdraw your hand from the eye a little, then turn the whole forester until it pierces the bone, and let the patient feel the pain where the fluid comes in; if he keeps his hand over his nose; and then restore the cover of medicinal powders as I have instructed you, and when the flesh grows and hardens the bones, the matter goes to the nose; this is a lighter thing for the patient.
de l’issue de l’oil	of the issue from the eye
Quant li eulz apert fuer dou tout en tout, et il ne vient point de destorbier au nef, ne amenuisement, si covient que tu lies lou malaide; puis le saine, puis li met ventouses ou haterel sens ferir por succier, puis met sus l’oil I liien fait d’acaice et de aloe et d’encens et de sarcocolle, et puis estrain l’oil, et l’emplaustre sus de bendes et de drapelz; et li maniere des drapelz si est que tu preignes drapelz assez molz, et double chescun en IIII, et puis met l’un sus l’autre selonc la quantiteit que li eulz en ait mestier; puis l’estrain par desus d’un bendeil dur forment, et rencomence les ventouses por succier sens ferir; puis oste les ventouses et laisse l’oil estraint jor et nuit, et se li liiens amolist, si covient que tu l’estraignes mout; puis oste lou liien aprés le jor et la nut, et se tu vois l’oil repairier, c’est boin; se ce non; si rencomence l’emplaustre et les drapelz et lou liien et les ventouses tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the eyes are completely opened and there is no obstruction, nor any amelioration, it is necessary to bind the patient. Then heal them, and apply cups or cautery without piercing to suction. Next, place on the eye a dressing made of myrrh, aloes, incense, and sarcocolla. Then press the eye, and plaster it with bandages and cloths. The method for the cloths is that you take soft enough cloths, double each one four times, and then place them one over another according to the amount needed by the eyes. Then press from above with a hard form bandage, and repeat the cups without piercing to suction. Remove the cups and let the eye be pressed day and night. If the dressing loosens, it is necessary to tighten it much. After removing the dressing in the morning and evening, if you see the eye healed, it is good; if not, continue with the plastering, cloths, bandages, and cups until it heals.
dou derrompement de toile uvee	of the rupture of woollen cloth vein
Quant disruptions vient en la toile uvee, puis apert, et vient fuer des papieres si com I grain de resins, et est espoantauble a veoir; adonques se tu la vues coper, li ovraiges est telz que tu boutes une aguille en la racine des la partie desoz jusc’a celi desus, puis boute une autre aguille ou il ait I fil double des la partie dou larmier; et la fai percier, et laisse la premiere aguille selonc la disposition; puis cope lou leu dou fil double et lie une partie de l’uve entor, et l’estraint bien, puis estrai l’aguille et met sus l’oil lainne moillie en abun d’uef; et le laisse tant que li filz chiece avec l’uve, puis cure l’oil de choses confortans tant que li plaie soit sanee; et aucune fois li plaie est restrainte par l’uve chescune part d’un cercle de drap, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	When disruptions come in the woollen cloth vein, then opened and comes forth like a grain of resin, and is terrifying to see; then if you see it copered, the operations are such that you prick with a needle at the root of the part below until above, then prick another needle where there be double thread from the eyelid; and make it pierce, and leave the first needle according to its placement; then cut through the double thread and tie a part of the vein around, and tightly hold it in place, then remove the needle and put on the eye moistened wool from an egg yolk; and let it be until the threads heal with the vein, then cure the eye with things that comfort until the wound is healed; and any time the wound is restrained by the vein in a circle of cloth around each part, until it is healed.
Et se li eulz done grant apparance, si le perce au spatumile subtil qui viegne em parfont de l’oil, et corre la moistor albuginé et dessende li eulz, et entre ens tantost; puis l’estrai tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the eyes have a great appearance, pierce them with a sharp needle that comes from the center of the eye, and draw out the moisture milky and lower the eyes, and let them enter soon; then extract them until they are healed.
de la bowe de l’oil	from the bow of the eye
Ceste maladie qui est apelee «alcunnati» nen est fuers que bowe qui est assemblee en l’oil, semblant a aigue dessendant, et ce n’est mie aigue; et li maniere de l’apparance de l’ovraige si est que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege appareilliet et droit, puis prent le chief entre tes mains de II pars, et lou muef tant que tu voies la bowe venir au desus a tes eulz; puis soit ens fichie, et ne dessende et soit descombree li lumiere, et voie li malaides les choses si com il soloit; et s’elle ne dessent desoz, saiches que c’est aigue, et se li dessendemens de la bowe n’est appareilliez si com nos avons dit.	This disease which is called "alcunnati" does not come from the bow of the eye that assembles in the eye, seeming like water descending, and it is not water; and the manner of its appearance in the work is such that you make the patient sit on the prepared seat straight, then take the head between your hands from one side, and move the eyeball until you see the bow come above your eyes; then prick it and do not let it descend, and remove the light, and see the patient the things as he should; and if it does not descend below, know that it is water, and if the descensions of the bow are not prepared as we have said, saith that it is water.
si fai seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, puis prent le spatumile subtil et fent sus la toile cornee I poc par la continuation de la conjunctive avec la toile cornee et la corone, tant que li bowe isse; et quant elle ert issue, si distille en l’oil aigue chaude mellee a miel, ou aigue ou fenugreic est boillis et miel, puis soit curee d’autre cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	place the patient between your hands, then take the sharp spatula and make incisions along the corneal membrane with the conjunctiva and the cornea, until the fluid comes out; when it has come out, distill into the eye hot aqueous honey or boiled fenugreek water mixed with honey, then cure with other remedies until it is healed.
des aigues de l’oil	from the fluids of the eye
Nos avons jai les semblances des aigues en la division, et ceu qu’il covient por percier; si en oevre selonc la santeit.	We have the signs of eye diseases in the division, and the proper places to puncture; work according to health.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains croisiet, fuers de la lumiere por le soleil, et li lie l’oil sain et estreint mout fort; puis met la papiere de l’oil a ta main senestre se li eulz est senestres, ou a ta main destre se li eulz est destres; puis prent en ta main destre, se li eulz est senestres, l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda», ou a ta main senestre, se li eulz est destre; puis met la pointe de l’estrument delez la corone par la groissece d’un rait en celle blenchor de l’oil a la partie dou menor larmier, puis boute l’estrument qui est apelez «almagda» vertuousement, et trestorne ta main tant qu’il perce en la blenchor de l’oil, et sente que almagda viegne a la chose vuide; et covient que li mesure de la voie almagda soit au parfont de la mesure des l’espaice qui est des la prunele jusc’a la fin de la noirour; et c’est li corone de l’oil; si verras l’os en celle papiere por la clarteit de la toile cornee, et pues met l’estrument jusc’a leu ou li aigue est, puis l’espresse desoz une voie aprés autre.	It is necessary that you place the patient between your crossed hands, away from sunlight, and tie the healthy eye very tightly. Then place the paper of the eye in your left hand if the eyes are left-eye dominant, or in your right hand if they are right-eye dominant. Next, take with your right hand (if the eyes are left-eye dominant), or with your left hand (if the eyes are right-eye dominant), the instrument called "almagda." Then place the tip of the instrument beneath the cornea by the thickness of a grain in that black part of the eye near the lower eyelid. Push the almagda instrument forcefully, and turn your hand until it pierces through the black part of the eye, feeling when the almagda reaches the empty space. The measure of the almagda passage should be precisely at the same measure as from the needle to the end of the sclera; this is the cornea of the eye. You will see the bone in that paper due to the clarity of the corneal membrane, and then place the instrument until it reaches where the fluid is, and express it through one passage after another.
se li aigue dessent maintenant, si voit li malaides devant lui et l’estrument en son oil.	if the water comes out now, the patient sees before him and the instrument in his eye.
Aprés repose I petit, et se li aigue remonte la seconde voie, met la fuer avec l’estrument, et quant elle est ens fichie et ele ne monte, si estrai almagda legierement en tornoiant ta main poc et poc; et puis remette en aigue un poc de seil gemme, et leive de ceu l’oil dedens.	After resting for a little while, and if the water rises again by the second way, put force with the instrument, and when it is firmly in place and it does not rise, extract slightly around it by turning your hand little by little; and then put a bit of silk thread around it, and remove this from the eye.
Puis met par defuer l’oil estoupes ou lainne moillie en oile roset et en abun d’uef, et lie avec l’oil sain.	Then put behind the eye a plug of moistened wool in rose oil and plenty of egg, and tie with healthy eye.
Nos, et cil qui sont de nostre tens, mettons sus comin broiet avec abun d’uef.	Now, and those of our time, put on with abundant egg.
Et se almagda n’i puet entrer en l’oil par sa duresce, car il i a de teilz homes qui ont trop durs les eulz, si covient que tu preignes l’estrument qui est apelez «alberit», de coi ci est li forme:	And if it hardens so much that it cannot enter the eye due to its hardness, for there are people who have too hard eyes, then you must use the instrument called "alberit", of which the form is as follows:
Et perce donques la conjunctive soulement, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, mais fai I leu subtil, puis i boute almagda, si com nos avons dit; et au complissement de l’uevre appareille au malaide I dorteur avenant, en coi il dorme sus son dos en I leu tenebrous; et soit deveez de toz movemens, et preigne legieres viandes, et ne mueve son chief ne a destre ne a senestre, et soit liiez selonc sa disposition jusc’a tier jor; puis le deslie en cele maison meisme tenebrouse, et esprueve sa veue, et lou fai veoir aucunes choses, et puis li remet lou lien jusc’a septime jor; et ne covient mie que tu faices ceu en l’oure de la cure ou aprés l’incision maintenant, mais il covient que tu aliges ceu, por ceu que li aigue monte hastanment.	And pierce only the conjunctiva, and do not go too deep, but make it subtle, then put in the hardened substance as we have said; and when the work is completed, prepare for the patient to fall asleep on his back in a dark place; and let him be free from all movements, and give light meals, and do not move his head to the right or left, and bind him according to his condition for three days; then release him in that same dark house, and test his vision, and have him show some things, and then rebind him until the seventh day; and it is not fitting that you do this during the time of treatment or after incision now, but you must loosen it, because the moisture rises quickly.
se apostemes chaus vient, que tu desliies l’oil devant le septime jor, et l’adrece de ceu qui assouaige aposteme; et quant il est apaisiez, si deslie la veue et met sus sa faice I orilliet por covrir aucun jor, et soit adés en celle maison tenebrouse.	If abscesses appear, you release the eye before the seventh day, following the treatment for those who alleviate abscesses; and when it is pacified, you release the vision and place on its face an ointment or balm to cover any day, and let it be healed in that dark house.
Et puis isse de la maison poc et poc, et se convertisse en ses cas; et saiches que nulz deciples ne se doit entremettre en cest cas.	And then leave the house little by little, and be cured in his case; and know that no disciple should intervene in this case.
Et uns vint a nos qui estoit de la Yrach, qui nos dist que en som pais faisoit om almagda perciet, a coi on succe l’aigue, mais toutevoie je n’en vis onques nul en nostre terre, ne je ne lou lis onques en livres des anciens; et par aventure c’est une novele chose.	And some came to us who were from the Yrach, who told us that in their country they performed almagda punctet, for which one applies water, but truly I have never seen such a thing in our land, nor do I find it mentioned in books of the ancients; and perhaps it is a new thing.
Et ce sont les semblances des formes de almagda, por ceu que cil qui ne les conoit les voie; et soient d’arain proprement:	And these are the signs of the forms of almagda, for those who do not know them will see; and they are of mercury properly:
Et soient li chief d’aus de ceste meisme subtiliteit, et li derriene en III angles ague.	And let the head of aus be of this same subtlety, and the last in three acute angles.
de la char sor le neis	from the cheek beside the nose
Aucune fois naissent ou neis chars ajostees diverses, de coi il i a aucunes qui semblent scorpions a mout de piez; et si i a de telz ou il ait char enchancree de fuxe color, et si a char souef de bone color.	Sometimes cheeks beside the nose become malformed in various ways, of which some seem like scorpions with claw marks; and there are those where the cheek has a deeply embedded scar of a different color, and where the cheek has a healed scar of good color.
En celle donques de ces chars qui est souef, et ne mie enchancree, covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains encontre lou soleil; et oevre ses narines, et giete l’oncine a celles chars, et les trai fuers; pues cope ceu que tu em pues sostenir au spatumile subtil agut d’une part, tant que tu saiches que celle char est toute ostee.	For those scars that are healed but not deeply embedded, you must place the patient's cheek against the sun; work on their nostrils, and sprinkle the ounce on those scars, and draw them out. Then, cover what you can withstand with a fine sharp point of spatumile (a type of instrument) on one side, until you know that the scar is completely removed.
Et s’il en remaint aucune chose c’on ne puisse coper, si l’ovrez a tout I des estrumens subtil legierement, si qu’il n’i demoure rien; et se sans te sormonte, ou aposteme chaus, si lou secort si com il covient; et se c’est apostemes malignes, si te haste et lou cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez et soient ostees toutes les chars, puis giete ou neis aisil et aigue ou vin.	And if there remains any thing that one cannot cope with, open it completely with all the subtle instruments lightly, so that nothing remains; and if without surmounts or an abscess occurs, give him the help as it should be; and if it is malignant abscesses, hasten and cauterize until the pus is exhausted and all the flesh be removed, then apply a cold poultice of bread or wine.
Se li neis oevre, et moistors en vient jusc’a palais, saiches qu’il est sanez; et se moistors ne perce si com il covient, saiches qu’il i a char nee en l’os desus, a coi li estrumens ne vient mie por taillier: adonques covient il que tu i boutes I fil de lin un poc gros, et soit noez de mains nous, et ait entre chescun nout d’espaice I doit ou moins; et mette li malaides lou chiés dou fil en son neif a som pooir, et traie en odorant tant qu’il viegne par lou neif dedens la bouche; et maintes fois font ensi li enfant as escoles, et c’est legiere chose a celui qui le vuet faire; puis tien le chief qui vient par lou neif a une main, et l’autre chief qui vient par la bouche a l’autre main, et saiche l’un aprés l’autre en soiant as nous qui sont ou fil.	If the poultice works and moisture comes up to the palate, know that it is healed; and if the moisture does not drain as it should, know that there is new flesh grown on the bone above, which the instruments cannot reach to cut: then you must put a somewhat thick piece of flax thread, well knotted by hand, with each knot about an inch or less apart; and place the patient's head where the thread exits into his nose as far as possible, and pull in smelling until it comes out through the nose into the mouth; and many times do so with children at school, and this is a light thing for him who knows how to do it; then hold the head which comes through the nose with one hand, and the other head which comes through the mouth with the other hand, and pull alternately while attending to us who are by the thread.
Fai ceu tant que tu saiches que li nout ont corrompue celle char, puis trai lou filz, essue le sanc, et moille lou fil en oignement egiptien, et le remet derechief au neis si com devant; fai ceu III jors ou plus, tant que li oignemens corrode tout ceu qui est demorez de char; et puis met ou neis une caine de plonc aucuns jors tant qu’il soit sanez, et s’il a mestier de medicines sechans, si en use; et c’est li forme de l’estrument por purgier lou chief, a coi on distille les oiles et les medicines ou neis:	Do this as much as you know that the nerves have corrupted that flesh, then draw the thread, wipe the blood, soften the thread in Egyptian ointment, and put it back in the nose as before; do this for three days or more, until the ointment corrupts all that remains of the flesh; and then put a reed of flax in the nose for some days until it is healed, and if it needs drying medicines, use them; and this is the form of the instrument to purge the brain, to which one distills the eyes and medicines into the nose:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, semblant a une lampe overte, si com une cainne, et li conduis ausi; et se tu vues, si fai une cainne close, et soit li estrumens plains por espurgier lou chief; et ait I mainche au chief por lou tenir quant on chaufe l’oile ou aucune liquor.	And let it be made of silver or lead, resembling an open lamp, like a reed, and guide it thus; and if you see, make a closed reed, and let the instrument be full for purging the brain; and have one hand on the brain to hold it when one heats the oil or any liquid.
de la char sor le neis	from the flesh off the nose
Maintes fois naist au chief dou neis une maladie qui est apelee «telul», et croist et devient grans adés, tant qu’il est vis chose au regarder; et por ceu covient que tu lou copes au comencement, et l’oste tout fuer, puis met sor leu lou cautere ou la medicine ardant; et s’on le tarde a coper tant qu’il soit grans, si pren warde s’il est durs, de fuxe color, de povre sens: si ne lou touchier mie de fer car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, car quant on le cope aucune fois, si en vient grant malice au malaide; et se li apostemes est de soef touchement, non mie de fuxe color, et tu vois c’on le puisse tout coper, si vuide le malaide et lou cope sens paor, et cure le leu de choses sechans et restraignans.	many times a disease arises at the top of the nose which is called "telul" and grows and becomes large over days; and when it is visible to the eye; therefore, you should lance in the beginning, and extract all of it, then place a fire cautery or hot medicine on it; and if one delays lancing until it becomes large, one must observe if it is hard, pale in color, lacking sensation: do not touch it with iron at all because it is an embedded abscess, for when one lances it once, great harm comes to the patient; and if the abscesses are due to dampness touching, not pale in color, and you can see that they can be completely lanced, then empty the patient of it without fear, and treat the wound with drying and constricting substances.
quant li neis est copez et cosus	when the nose is cut off and sewn
Saiches que quant solutions de continuation vient en une de ces cartillagines ovraiges, i profite poc, fuer que en aucuns homes.	When solutions of continuation come to one of these cartilaginous works, it profits little, for in some men.
Il covient donques cant ceu avient a aucun, si regarde se li plaie est fresche a tout son sanc; et adonques ajoste les II levres a une costure, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et se les levres sont ja desevrees d’une part et d’autre, si covient que tu escorches toutes les parties de lor keur tant qu’elles sainent, puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et l’estraint, et poudre sus poudre de sanc de dragon, et encens broiet; et met sus les poudres une piece d’emplaustre de fort ou d’autre emplaustre soudant, et le laisse tant qu’il chiece par lui, puis le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, when this occurs to any, you must examine if the wound is fresh with all its blood; then approximate the two lips with a stitch, and treat until it heals. And if the lips are already dry on one side and the other, you must cauterize all parts of their edges until they heal, then approximate the two lips with a stitch, and bind them, and sprinkle with powder of dragon's blood powder, and powdered incense; and place over the powders a piece of plaster of strong or another binding plaster, and leave it until it dries on its own, then treat with ointment until it heals.
Li maniere de la costure si est que tu assembles la solution: ou par aguilles, si com nos avons dit en la costure dou ventre; ou par fil, si com je le t’ai fait savoir.	The manner of stitching is such that you assemble the solution: or with needles, as we have said in the stitching of the belly; or with thread, as I have made known to you.
des apostemes des levres	of abscesses of lips
A mains homes avient dedens les levres aposteme dur, semblans a grains de veces, et menor et plus grant; adonques couvient que tu tornes les levres, et fendes sus chescun nout, et le prent as pinceures et le cope en chescune partie; puis emple lou leu aprés l’incision de vitriole broiet, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; et puis lou leive d’aisil, et cure lou leu de choses seches tant qu’il soit sanez.	By hand, abscesses in the lips appear, resembling grains of wheat, small and larger; then it must be that you turn the lips, incise each side, take out the pus with forceps, and place in each part; then apply wine after the vitriol is ground, until the blood is stanched; and then apply almond oil, and cure the wine from dry things until it is healed.
de la char des gencives	of the flesh of the gums
Maintes fois naist sus les gencives char ajostee, que li ancien apelent «albulus»; si covient que tu la sostienes as tenailles, et la cope a sa racine, et laisse corre la bowe ou le sanc; puis met sor le leu vitriole broiet, ou autres poudres restraignans et desiccatives; et se celle char revient aprés l’incision, et maintes fois avient, si la cope la seconde fois, et la cauterize: si ne revient mie aprés le cautere; et ce sont les formes des estrumens por coper.	Many times a chapped flesh arises on the gums, which the ancients call "albulus"; you must hold it with tongs and cut at its root, and let the blood or blood run; then place on it vitriolated flux, or other constricting and drying powders; and if this flesh returns after incision, which often happens, you should cop it a second time, and cauterize: it does not return after the cauterization; and these are the forms of instruments for cop.
des sordens	of the sores
Aucunes fois sont assemblees au chief des dens, dedens la bouche entre les gencives, escorces qui sont laides et aspres; et aucune fois sont li dent noir et citrin et vers, tant que li corruption vient a la gencive, et sont li dent puant; si covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide entre tes mains, et ses chiés soit en ton saint, et reis les dens ou les escorces aperent, tant qu’il n’i demore rien; et ensi fai de la noiror et de la verdor, et de la jaunice et des autres taiches, tant qu’elles soient mondees; et s’on oste ceu que i est a la premiere rasion, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence a rere le secont jor et lou tier, tant que tu aies tout reis; et saiches que li dent ont mestier de diverses formes d’estrumens por reire, selonc ceu que li oevre lou demoustre, por ceu que li raseur dont on reit defuer les dens ont autres formes que cil dont on reit entre les dens; et cestes formes et autres soient avec toi appareillies.	Sometimes aches assemble at the root of the teeth, within the mouth between the gums, scabs that are ugly and harsh; and sometimes the teeth become black and yellowish-green as corruption comes to the gums, making them stink; you must place the patient's head in your hands, and their chin on your knees, and remove any teeth or scabs visible, until nothing remains; and do this for the blackness and greenish color, and the yellowness and other stains, until they are all removed; and if what is to be done according to the first reason is good, it is well; if not, begin again on the second day and the third, until you have removed everything; and know that teeth require various forms of instruments to remove them, depending on what work your instrument shows, because those used to scrape out between the teeth have different shapes from those used to scrape out the teeth themselves; and these forms and others should be with you prepared.
Il covient quant tu cures lou dent de sa dolor que tu tardes dou traire tant com tu pues, car ce ne doit om mie faire; car c’est une substance mout haute jusc’a donc c’on n’ait point d’excusation dou raier.	When you treat the tooth of its pain, you should delay the extraction as much as you can, for it must not be done at all; for it is a very delicate matter until one has no excuse to remove it.
Adonques quant li malaides est constrains dou traire, si covient que tu soies certains dou dent doillant.	Then when the patient is constrained to extract, it must be certain that the tooth aching.
Maintes fois desoit li dolor lou malaide, et cuide qu’elle soit ou dent saint, et fait traire le boin dent; et toutevoie ne se depart mie li dolor per ceu, tant que li malvais estrais, car nos l’avons ja veut faire a ces sainors; et quant tu es bien certains dou dent doillant, si covient que tu escorches entor lou dent a tout i. spatumile fort por warder la gencive de toutes pars; puis le mues a tes dois ou as tenailles subtilz au premier poc et poc, tant qu’il soit bien eslochiés, puis i afferme bien les tenailles; et soit li chiés dou malaide en ton saint entre tes genous, et lou tien bien si qu’il ne se mueve.	Many times the pain urges the patient, and he thinks it is a good tooth, and has it extracted. Yet the pain does not depart from him until the bad tooth is removed, for we have already done this to these gentlemen. When you are well certain that the tooth aching, it must be scraped around the tooth thoroughly to prevent gum irritation from all sides; then move it gently or with fine forceps at first and first, until it is well loosened, then firmly set the forceps; and place the head of the patient on your thigh between your knees, and hold him well so that he does not move.
Aprés estrai lou dent droitement sens brisier, et s’il ne saut fuer, si prent aucun de ces estrumens et le boute dedens de chescune part legierement, et lou remuef si com tu as fait premier.	After extracting the tooth correctly without breaking it, if it does not come out, take any of these instruments and push it gently into each part, and move the forceps as you have done before.
Et se li dens est perciez et mengiez, si covient que tu l’emplisses de drapelz, lai ou li pertus sont; et si l’estraint subtilment as tenailles, que il ne brise a l’estraindre; et covient mout saigement ovrer entor la gencive por deschaucier lou dent.	And if the tooth is pierced and broken, you must fill it with wads of cotton, lint, or cloth; and use fine forceps to extract it without breaking it; you must work carefully around the gum to loosen the tooth.
Et te done bien en warde que tu ne le brises, et en remaigne une partie, et reveigne au malaide par la malice de la racine plus grans dolors de la premiere.	And take great care that you do not break it and leave a part of it remaining, as this can cause the patient greater pain than the initial pain due to the malice of the root.
Et te warde que tu ne faices mie ensi com font li ignorant sainor, qui par lor haste et par lor hardiesce brisent aucune fois le charreit, et n’i amenistrent mie ceu que nos avons conteit; mais font venir aucune fois par l’oquison de ceu grant maladie por les racines que i demorent, ou por lou charreit qu’il brisent, si com nos avons sovent veut; et quant li dens est trais, si lavez lou leu de vin ou d’aisil et de seil; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, que sovent avient, si emple lou leu de vitriole broiet; et se ceu ne vaut, si le cauterize.	And take care that you do not act as the ignorant surgeon does, who, through their haste and boldness, break the root once, and do not provide what we have detailed; instead, they bring about great illness one time through cutting, due to the roots remaining or the bone they break, as we often see. When the tooth is extracted, wash the wound with wine or oil of olive and salt; and if there is bleeding, which often occurs, fill the wound with vitriol powder; and if this does not work, cauterize it.
Les formes des estrumens, a coi om muet les dens premier, soient a longes pointes et a gros mainches, qu’il ne doublent mie quant tu trairas le dent; et ce sont les formes:	The forms of the instruments, to which one must fit the teeth first, be long points and thick handles, so that they do not bend when you draw the tooth; and these are their forms.
Et soient de gros membres si qu’il ne ploient mie au traire, et soient de fer inde bien fait, et soient dentez por mues tenir.	And let them have thick handles so that they do not bend when drawing, and let them be of well-made iron, and let them be toothed to hold tightly.
de la racine des dens	from the roots of the teeth
Quant li racine demoure au traire, si covient que tu mettes sor le leu coton moilliet em burre I jor ou ij.,	When the root remains during drawing, it is necessary to place moistened cotton wool in the socket for one or two days.
tant que li leus soit amolis, pues i boute les tenailles qui sont apelees «algefri», de coi li chiés semblet bec de soigne; et soient dedens faites ausi com une lime et c’est li forme:	until the socket is healed, then put in the tongs called "algefri," which the head resembles a doctor's bill; and let them be made inside like a file, and these are their forms:
Et se les racines ne vuellent issir a tout ces tenailles, si covient que tu descuevre la char tot entor la racine, et i met l’estrument qui est apelez «althali», c’est a savoir palainche, de coi ci est li forme:	And if the roots do not wish to come out with all these forceps, it is necessary that you uncover the flesh entirely around the root, and place the instrument called "althali," that is, pailance, of which the form is:
Et soit fors et gros si qu’il ne brise mie, et se li racine saut par ceu, c’est boin; se ceu non, si t’aide de toz les estrumens, de coi les formes vienent ci aprés:	And let it be firm and large so that it does not break at all, and if the root jumps out from there, that is good; if not, you must assist with all the instruments, of which the forms are given hereafter:
Et si s’aide on de cest estrument qui ait II rains, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you need to use an instrument that has two prongs, of which the form is given hereafter:
et d’autres ferremens qui sont devant en la rasion des dens, et de cest estrument qui semble unes grans tenailles, dont ci est li forme:	and other instruments that are before mentioned for the reason of teeth, and of this instrument that seems a pair of large forceps, of which the form is given hereafter:
Et soit cist estrumens fors qu’il ne puisse brisier, et saiches que mout d’estrumens de dens sont; et ausi d’autres estrumens, qui ne sont mie contez; et li saiges maistres subtilz trueve par soi meisme son estrument, selonc ceu que ses ovraiges et li maladie li demoustre, car il i a de teilz maladies ou li ancien n’enseignerent point d’estrument por la diversiteit d’au;s et s’om brise point dou charreit ou des autres os, ou il porrit, si i cerche as estrumens qu’il i covient, que je t’ai dit, et t’aide des gestes, de coi ci est li forme:	And let this implement not be broken, and know that few are implements of the teeth; and also other implements, which are not counted; and the master surgeons find their own instrument by themselves, according to those of their work and the disease that show them, for there are such diseases where the old ones did not teach an implement because of the diversity of jaws and if one breaks a part of the body or of the other bones, or rots, then it seeks the instruments that it suits, which I have told you, and helps with gestures, as is their form:
Et soient gros et bien tenant por tenir l’os, qu’il n’eschaipe, mais le puisse tenir et oster; et puis restoure lou leu de medicines convenant a ceu, et s’il ait en l’os porriture, et elle est petite, si la reis a tout cest estrument:	And let them be large and well-holding to hold the bone so that it does not escape but can be held and removed; then restore the head with medicines suitable for this, and if there is decay in the bone and it is small, it can be treated with all of this instrument:
Quant li dent apperent ne mie selonc lou cors natureil, et li forme est laide, et meismement en femmes puceles, si covient que tu saiches se li dens est neis aprés lou dent, et n’est mie en droit leu, et on ne lou puet soier ne limer: adonques lou raie; et s’il est aers avec lou dent, si prent cest estrument dont ci est li forme, et est semblans a I petit bec, et soit de fer inde agut en som:	When the teeth appear not in accordance with their natural order, and the shape is ugly, especially in maiden women, you must know whether the teeth were born after the others and are not in the right place, and cannot be straightened nor filed: then you should extract them; and if they are beside the other teeth, take this instrument whose form is as described, and it resembles a small beak, and let it be of sharp iron.
Et lou cope poc et poc em mains jors por la duresce dou dent, et por ceu que tu ne mueves les autres, et s’il est apparans c’on le puisse limer, si lou lime d’une teil lime com ci est li forme:	And the cop is rubbed little by little in the hand during the day due to the hardness of the tooth, and because you cannot move the others, and if it appears that it can be filed, then file it with a single-file as its form is described.
et est ausi com li lime de coi on fait les aguilles; et en lime lou dent poc et poc em mains jors legierement, si qu’il ne se mueve tant qu’il chiece; puis la plaine en la fin a tout aucun raseur, et se li dens est trop trenchans et il blece la lengue, si covient limer l’aspreteit tant qu’il soit igalz, si qu’il ne blece la lengue ne ne corrompe la parole.	And it is also like the file with which we make needles; and you file the tooth little by little in your hand during the day lightly, so that it does not move while it hardens. Then in the end, level it entirely with any rasp, and if the tooth is too sharp and discolors the tongue, then you must file away its sharpness until it is equal, so that it does not discolor the tongue nor corrupt speech.
quant li dent lochent	when the teeth chatter
Quant li dent devant lochent, ou par percussion ou par cheoir, et li malaides ne puet presser sus ceu qu’il menjue qu’il ne chient, et tu les as curez de medicines restrignans, et ceu ne vaut; si les covient restraindre d’un fil d’or, car li filz d’argent devient vert et porrit, mais li ors ne se mue onques; et soit li filz moiens ne trop gros ne trop menus, selonc la quantiteit de l’espaice entre les dens; et se tu vues adrecier les dens, si pren lou fil et lou boute double entre les II dens sains, puis met les chiés entre les dens meus, s’il en i a I ou plusors, tant que tu veignes saigement jusc’au dent sain d’autre part; puis rencomence la coverture jusc’a la partie ou tu encomensas, et estrains ta main subtilment et saigement, tant qu’il ne se mueve point; et soit ta lieeure a la racine dou dent si qu’il ne puist eschaper.	when the front teeth chatter due to percussion or falling, and the patient cannot bite down on what they eat without dropping it, you should treat them with restrictive medicines, but this is ineffective; so you must restrain them with a gold thread, for silver threads turn green and rot, but gold never changes; and let the threads be of moderate size, neither too thick nor too thin, according to the space between the teeth; and if you wish to straighten the teeth, take the thread and pass it double between two healthy teeth, then place the heads of the thread between the teeth that need adjustment, whether one or more, until you see clearly to the healthy tooth on the other side; then re-cover starting from where you began, and withdraw your hand subtly and steadily, so that it does not move at all; and let your grip be at the root of the tooth such that it cannot escape.
Puis cope les chiés dou fil a unes tenailles, et les assemble, et les repont entre le dent sain, et le met ensi qu’il ne blece la lengue; et puis le laisse ensi estroit tant com il puet demorer, et s’il deslie, ou li filz ront, si l’estraint d’un autre fil; si demorrait et servira ensi tout son tens, et c’est li forme des dens et li figure de l’adrecement des II dens sains, et des II meus, si com tu vois:	Then cut the head of the tooth with a needle and assemble them, and place them so they do not hurt the tongue; and then leave them so tight as they can stay, and if they come loose or the threads break, tighten them with another thread; if they stay tight and serve like this for all their time, and this is the form of the teeth and the alignment figure of the two healthy teeth and the two mesial surfaces, as you see.
Et quant li dent chiet, si lou remet on en son leu, de fres en fres, si com nos avons dit; et ne s’en entremette mie qui n’est saiges et soffrans, et aucune fois fait on la forme d’un dent d’os de vaiche, et lou met on au leu ou li defaute est, et l’estraint on si com nos avons dit, et demore et sert ensi lonc tens.	And when the tooth falls out, one replaces it in its place, frequently as we have said; and one must not do so except by someone who is skilled and suffers, and only once the form of a bone tooth from a deer is made, and it is put in the place where it is missing, and it is tightened as we have said, and stays and serves for a long time.
de coper lou liien de la lengue	to cover the wound of the tongue
Aucune fois est cist liiens qui vient desoz la lengue ou naturez, que on naist ensi; ou par accident de plaie soudee; et li ovraiges est telz que tu oevre la bouche dou malaide, et ait sa teste en ton sain, et li lieve la lengue; puis cope lou liien nervous dou large, tant que li lengue soit desloie de son tenement, et se il i a duresce ou nout, et c’est de soudement de plaie, si i boute l’uncine et cope dou large celui liement; et garde que li fendure ne soit mie trop em parfont, por l’artere qui est desoz; et quant tu as fait, si leve le leu d’aigue rose et d’aisil, ou d’aigue froide, puis met desoz la lengue une tente de lin; et la teigne li malaides chescune nuit, que li leus ne puisse soder.	no wound from the tongue by nature or accident arises thus; or by an accidental injury to a缝合的伤口；且你操作病人的嘴巴，使其头部偏向健康一侧，提起舌头；然后覆盖大血管附近的神经伤口，直到舌头脱离其正常位置；如果存在硬化或肿胀，并且是由于伤口突然造成的，那么用钩针缝合并广泛缝合该部位；注意不要将切口完全缝合得太紧，以免压迫下方的动脉；做完后，用玫瑰水或芦荟水以及冷水冲洗提起的部位，然后在舌头上放一块亚麻布绷带；让病人每晚更换，以确保伤口不会感染。
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si met sor le leu vitriole broiet; et se li sans te vaint, si le cauterize au cautere lentiginout, qui est boin a ceu; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez,	And if bleeding occurs, place a piece of ground glass over the wound; and if the blood fails to stop, cauterize with the lentiginous cautery, which is good for this; then treat with other remedies until it heals.
et se tu lou vois de fusse color ou noir ou dur, si que li malaides ne lou sent, si n’i touchier point, car c’est chancre; et s’il est declinans a blenchor, et il i a moistor, si i giete l’oncine, et lou fent d’un spatumile subtil, et lou delivre d’une part et d’autre; et se li sans te vaint a ton ovraige, si met sus vitriole broiet tant qu’il soit estainchiez, puis revien a ton ovraige tant que tu traies tout fuer; puis leve lou leu d’aisil et de seil, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it is of a red or black or hard color, and the patient does not feel it, do not touch it at all, for it is a cancer; and if it is turning white and there is moisture, then sprinkle the powder, and cut a small hole with a sharp spatule, and relieve it on both sides; and if the blood does not stop in your work, place a piece of ground glass over it until it cools down, then return to your work as you treat all further matters; then lift the wound from grease and salt, and treat with other remedies until it heals.
des apostemes de la gorge	of the abscesses in the throat
Aucune fois vient dedens la gorge boces qui sont apelees «godath», et les apele on proprement les II amandres, et quant tu les cures, si com nos avons dit en la division, et elles ne sont sanees, si pren garde: se c’est apostemes dur de petit sens et de fusse color, si ne lou touchier mie de fer.	Sometimes there are pouches in the throat called "godath," and these are properly known as the two almonds. When you cure them, as we have said in the division, and if they are abscesses hard with small size and of flesh color, take care: do not let them touch iron at all.
Et s’il est rouges et li racine est grosse, si ne lou touchier mie de fer, ausi por lou decorrement de sanc; mais lou laisse tant qu’il soit meur, et adonques tu lou partiras, ou il rompirait par soi; et s’il est de blainche color reont, et li racine est subtilz, si aies apareilliet l’estrument por coper, mais regarde premierement se li apostemes chalz repose et est apaisiez.	And if they are red and the root is large, do not let them touch iron at all, also for the discharge of blood; but leave them until they are ripe, and then you may cut them out, or they would break open by themselves. And if they are white in color and the root is fine, prepare the instrument to extract them, but first see if the abscess has cooled down and calmed.
Adonques fai seoir lou malaide devant lou soleil, et ses chiés soit en ton sain, et li oevre la bouche et lou preigne li serjans entre ses mains, et presse la lengue desoz a tout l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme; et soit d’argent ou d’arain subtil ausi com uns coutelz:	Therefore, place the patient facing the sun, and his head straight, and let him open his mouth, and have the sergeants hold the jaw between their hands, pressing the tongue under the entire instrument, which is its form; and it should be made of fine silver or brass as thin as a knife.
Cant tu presses la lengue a tout cest estrument, et tu vois l’aposteme, si pren l’oncine et lou fiche en l’amandre, et la trai fuer au desus plus que tu pues; et trai aucune chose des toiles avec, puis la cope a l’estrument, de coi ci est li forme, que semble unes forces; et toutevoie li chief sont corbé, et l’un endroit l’autre, et sont molt agut, et est fait de fer inde ou d’andainne:	You press the tongue with all this instrument, and you see the abscess, take an ounce and the pin in almond shape, and draw force above more than you can; and draw nothing from the threads with, then cover the instrument, which is its form, that seems like strong forces; and always the head are curved, one next to the other, and are very sharp, and made of iron indigotina or antinnea.
Et se tu n’as cest estrument present, si lou cope as tenailles, de coi ci est li forme:	And if you do not have this instrument present, use tongs, of which here is its form:
Et soit trenchans d’une part, et d’autre part nom; et quant tu as copeit l’une des amandres, si cope l’autre selonc cele meisme maniere, et aprés l’incision gargarize li malaides aigue chaude, et aigue et aisil, et se decorremens de sanc avient, si gargarize li malaides aigue, ou escorces de pomes grenates soient cuites, ou fuelles de mirte, et semblans choses, tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois naissent en la gorge autres apostemes que les II amandres, si les cope donques ensi com les II amandres igament.	And let it be sharp on one side, and on the other named; and when you have cut one of the almonds, cut the other according to the same manner, and after the incision gargle the patient with hot, sharp water, or with hot and easy water, and if bleeding occurs, gargle the patient with water, or cooked pomegranate peel, or bay leaves, and similar things, until the blood is stanched; then cure it until it is healed; and sometimes other abscesses arise in the throat besides the two almonds, so cut them accordingly as the two almonds evenly.
Et je medicinai une femme d’un aposteme que li estoit neis dedens la gorge, c’est a savoir I aposteme de petit sens; et avoit jai bien pres close toute la gorge, si que li femme ne pooit expirer por le conduit qui estoit estoupez, et ne pooit ne mengier ne boivre, et fust morte s’elle demorast ensi I jor ou II.	And I treated a woman who had an abscess that had arisen within her throat, specifically the small sens abscess; and I had almost completely closed off the entire throat, so that the woman could not breathe due to the conduit being obstructed, and she could neither eat nor drink, and would have died if she had remained in such a condition for one or two days.
Et li apostemes estoit jai si montez qu’il avoit fuer mis II rains par les II pertuis dou neis.	And the abscess was so swollen that he had to insert two arrows through both openings of the neck.
Je hastai donques tantost, et fichai en l’un I oncine, puis lou traï fuers, et en traï grant porcion de bowe; puis refis autreteil en l’autre pertus dou neis, et li ovrai la bouche et li pressai la lengue; aprés fichai l’oncine en ces apostemes, et en copai une partie, et n’en issit fuers que un poc de sanc; et ensi fut destoupez li conduis de la gorge la femme, et comensa maintenant a boivre aigue et puis vin, et ne cessai de taillier de cel aposteme par lonc tens; et li apostemes recroissoit adés, et remplissoit lou leu que je avoie vuidiet, tant qu’il refut mout gros; adonques je l’engignai et lou cauterizai dedens la gorge: ensi demora sens croistre; et me partis de ces parties, et ne soi que Deus fist de li aprés moi.	I hastened then quickly, and inserted the lancet into one, then drew out a great portion of flesh; then I pierced another in the other opening of the neck, and opened her mouth and pressed her tongue; after that I inserted the lancet into these abscesses, and drained a part of them, and only a little blood came out; and thus was the passage of the throat of the woman cleared, and she began to drink water and then wine, and did not cease to lance this abscess for a long time; and the abscess reformed again, and filled the space that I had drained until it became quite large; then I packed it and cauterized inside the throat: thus it remained without growing further; and I left these parts, and only God decided what would happen to her after me.
de l’uve	of the eye
Quant reume dessent a l’uve, et elle est enflee et elle est longe, si est apelee «perpendiculaire»; et s’elle est desoz grosse et reonde, si est apelee «uve».	When swelling occurs in the eye, and it is swollen and long, it is called "perpendicular"; and when it is very large and round, it is called "eye".
Quant elle est curee si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, et tu vois que li chaus apostemes est apaisiez, et elle est subtilz, si covient que tu la copes; et celle qui est reonde assemblee et n’est mie longe; et elle est sanguine ou de fusse color ou noire, si covient que tu eschues l’incision de li.	When it is treated as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, and you see that the abscesses are calmed and are subtle, then it is necessary to lance it; and that which is round gathered and is not long; and which is bloody or of linen color or black, then it is necessary to avoid incising it.
Car il i a grant peril sus lou malaide.	For there is great danger to the patient.
Il covient donques, quant tu la vois, selonc la maniere que j’ai dit, de sa blenchor et de sa longesce, que tu faices seoir le malaide devant lou soleil, et li presse la lengue a l’estrument dont nos avons fait la remembrance ci devant; puis fiche l’oncine en l’uve, et la trai desoz, et la cope a I des II estrumens que j’ai dit en l’incision des II amandres.	Therefore, when you see it in the manner I have said, regarding its blenchor and length, you should seat the patient facing the sun, and press his tongue with the instrument we mentioned earlier; then place the oncine in the eye, and draw it out, and lance it using the two instruments I described in the incision of the almond.
Et covient que tu ne coper mie fuer que la superfluiteit qui est outre le termine natureil; car se tu en copes plus, si grieves a la voix, et a la parolle; et aprés l’incision, use de ceu que nos avons dit en l’incision des II amandres, et le cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And you must not cope more than the superfluity that is beyond the natural limit; for if you do so more, it grieves to the voice and speech; and after the incision, use of what we have said in the incision of two almonds, and cure until it is sane.
Et se li malaides a paor dou coper, si covient que tu i use d’engien a la cauterization de li sens paor.	And if the patient has fear of coping, you must use an instrument for the cautery to alleviate the fear.
Et li maniere dou cautere si est aigue ague.	And the manner of the cautery is very hot.
Et est que li malaides mette son chief en ton sain, et puis li presse la lengue a l’estrument que nos avons dit ou chapistre de cautere, et confis avec aigue vive chaus, si qu’elle ne soit mie trop espesse ne trop clere; et en emple le chevement de cest estrument, de coi ci est li forme:	And the patient should put their head on your side, and then press their tongue with the instrument we mentioned in the chapter on cautery, using live boiling water that is neither too thick nor too clear; and fill the opening of this instrument as follows:
Et ait ou chief une cheveure ou om met la medecine, si com li chevemens d’une cuillier, et met l’estrument a tout la medicine sus l’uve; et li malaides soit gisans sus son costeit, si que li salive et li muscillaige corre de sa bouche de la medicine dedens, si qu’ele ne dessende a la gorge, et lou blece; puis tien ta main a tout la medicine et la presse sus l’uve, la quantiteit de la moitiet d’une houre, tant que tu la vois nercie et li mordications de la medicine soit apaisie; et se tu vues, pren coton et l’envoloupe sus aucun estrument, et moille lou coton en la medicine, et boute l’estrument a tout le couton en la cainne desus, tant que li coton s’aerde sus l’uve; et fai ceu sovent, tant que li cauteres soit parfais, puis la laisse elle seche, et chiet aprés IIII jors ou V Et se tu as mestier de rencomencier lou cautere de la medicine, si le rencomence, et aprés le cautere l’essue entor l’uve, de couton embut em burre, et mundifie ceu qui est entor de la medicine; et soit arosez d’aigue froide, et soit curez de gargarismes tant qu’il soit sanez.	And let the patient have a head or cheek where one places the medicine, as with the hairs of a spoon, and put the instrument on all the medicine over the eye; and the patient be lying on his side, so that saliva and mucus flow from his mouth into the medicine, so that it does not descend to the throat, and the bile; then hold your hand on all the medicine and press it over the eye, the quantity of half an hour, until you see it congealed and the bites of the medicine are pacified; and if you see, take cotton and envelop it around any instrument, moisten the cotton in the medicine, and insert the instrument into the core above, so that the cotton wicks over the eye; and do this often, until the cautery is perfect, then let it dry, and after four or five days. And if you need to restart the cautery with the medicine, so do it, and after the cautery wash around the eye with cotton stuffed in butter, and cleanse what is around the medicine; and be washed with cold water, and be treated with gargles until it is healed.
Ceste cure est plus save de l’incision, ne que li cautere; s’elle est curee de fumigation selonc ceste maniere, pren calament et ysope et origanum et rue et camomille et avronne et semblans herbes, et les assemble toutes ou aucunes d’eles en I pot, et i met aisil, et fai bullir; et li potz soit bien gluez de fort terre, et enmi le pot ait I estrument cheveit selonc ceste maniere:	This cure is safer than incision or cautery; if it is treated by fumigation in this manner, take reed and yarrow and origanum and rue and chamomile and avron and similar herbs, and gather all of them or some of them in one pot, and place easily, and cause to boil; and the pot be well sealed with strong clay, and amid the pot have the instrument fitted according to this manner:
Et soit d’argent ou d’arain, et soit li uns des chiés boutez en la bouche dou malaide tant que li vapor monte a l’uve par la caine, tant que li uve soit mortifie; aprés lou rencomence sovent, tant que li uve seche, et garde que tu ne faices ceu au comencement de l’avenement de l’aposteme chaut, car plusors choses i avienent; et ne faire mie ceu fuer que a la declination d’aposteme chaut.	And may be of silver or lead, and let one of the heads be inserted in the patient's mouth until the vapor rises to the eye through the cane, until the eye is numbed; after which renew often, until the eye dries, and guard that you do not do this at the beginning of the appearance of the hot abscess, for many things happen; and do not do so during the decline of the hot abscess.
Et se cist estrument n’est presens, si pren une caine et met dedens lou chief une craiffe d’uef, si que li bouche au malaide n’ait mie trop chaut; car li craiffe d’uef ne lait mie la vapor grever la bouche, et c’est bone cure ensamble salut.	And if this instrument is not present, take a cane and put an eggshell inside the head so that the patient’s mouth is not too hot; for the eggshell does not allow the vapor to weigh down on the mouth, and it is a good cure overall for health.
Maintes fois s’aert a la gorge os ou espinee de poisson, ou aucune chose; si covient donc que tu traies ceu que tu pues veoir, et li presse la lengue au soleil a tout l’estrument, si que tu voies mues la chose; et ceu que ne t’apert mie et est reponus en la gorge, covient que tu faices vomir le malaide ainsois que li viande soit cuite en l’estomac; par aventure si istra li chose aerse par le vomissement; ou li malaides englutisse une piece d’esponge, ou une piece de navel, ou une racine de laitue, ou I morceil de pain sec; et lie a l’esponge I fil, et puis la transglutisse; et quant elle venra au leu, si s’aerdra, et puis trairas fuer; et s’elle ne vient fuer de ceu que nos avons dit, si pren I estrument de plonc selonc ceste forme:	Many times, it is applied to the throat with a bone or spiny fish bone, or any other thing; so it is necessary that you treat what you can see, and press the tongue towards the sun with all the instrument, so that you see the thing move; and for what does not become apparent and is lodged in the throat, it is necessary to make the patient vomit as if the meat were cooked in the stomach; by chance, this may be expelled by vomiting; or the patient might swallow a piece of sponge, or a piece of naval, or a root of lettuce, or a morsel of dry bread; and tie the string to the sponge, and then swallow it; and when it comes to the place, it will be applied, and then you will pull out the force. And if it does not come out as we have said, take the plunger instrument according to this form:
Et soit li estrumens corbés au chief si qu’il puist plus legierement entrer en la gorge, et ait le chief en haut leveit; et warde que tu ne touchier l’epiglote, que li tous ne li viegne, ne ne bouter mie l’os dedens; et mues vaut que li malaides i boute l’estrument, por ceu qu’il seit mues ou li chose est aerse; si la boute aval, ou il la traie fuer a tout l’estrument igalment, tant qu’elle soit fuer.	And let the probe enter more easily into the throat, with the head lifted upwards; and beware that you do not touch the epiglottis, lest it be injured or forced inward; and the patient should move when they expel the instrument, because this indicates movement or that the area is clear; if they expel it downward, or force it thoroughly throughout the entire instrument evenly until it is fully out.
de la sansue de la gorge	of the throat discharge
Aucune fois est medicinee li sansue, si com j’ai dit en la division, par la cure de medicines; et quant ceu ne profite mie, adonques regarde en la gorge dou malaide au soleil, puis que tu li presses la lengue a l’estrument que je t’ai dit.	No medicine cures the throat discharge, as I have said in the division, through the treatment of medicines; and when this does not help, then look at the patient's throat in the sunlight, after you press their tongue with the instrument I have described.
Et se tu vois la sansue, si la trai a tout I petit uncine, ou as tenailles subtilz que valent a ceu.	And if you see the blood, draw it off with a very small needle, or with fine forceps that are suitable for this.
Et se ceu ne vaut, si pren une caine chevee, et la boute en la gorge dou malaide, puis boute ou chevement de la caine I fer chaut, et fai ce sovent.	And if this does not work, take a live cane, insert it into the throat of the patient, then blow or shake the cane with hot air, and do this often.
Et se teigne li malaides d’aigue toute jor.	And if the patient is sick with water all day.
puis pren plein I voirre d’aigue froide, et oevre la bouche, et la giete ens sens englutir, et la mueve a sa main sovent; et si tost com li sansue sent l’aigue, si chiet.	Then take a full glass of cold water, pour it into the mouth, and administer it so that it is swallowed, and move it often with your hand; and as soon as the blood tastes the water, let it go.
Et s’elle ne chiet si com nos avons dit, si subfumige lou malaide d’asefetide, a l’estrument que j’ai dit en la fumigation de l’uve; fai ceu maintes fois, car elle cherra sens targier.	And if it does not go as we have said, submerge the patient in arsenic sulfide, using the instrument I described for fumigating the uve. Do this many times, for it will fall without difficulty.
Et li maniere de la fumigation si est que tu preignes I pot ou il ait charbons vis, et soit li pos covert d’un coverseil perciet en mileu, et en celui pertus soit li chiés de l’estrument; puis i giete ta fumigation, et li malaides mette lou chief de la cainne en sa bouche, et cloie la bouche, si que li fumee n’en isse mie, mais viegne jusc’a la sansue; et la sansue cherra maintenant, et s’elle ne chiet, si rencomence la fumigation par maintes fois; et soffre li malaides soif, et menjuce choses salees et als, et ne boive point d’aigue; et adonques li iert mestier qu’elle isse fuer par cest governement.	And the manner of fumigation is that you take a pot which has coals visible, and let it be covered with a coverseil pierced in the middle, and into that perforation are placed the head of the instrument; then you throw in your fumigation, and the patient puts the end of the cane in his mouth, and closes the mouth, so that the smoke does not go out but goes until the blood; and the blood will drop now, and if it does not drop, you must repeat the fumigation many times; and allow the patient to be thirsty, and eat salty and dry things, and do not drink water; and then it is necessary for it to come forth by this governance.
Et li forme de l’estrument a coi on trait la sansue, si est, quant on la puet veoir, semblans a tenailles corbés por mues entrer en la gorge; et ait semblance au bec de soigne, et i ait asperiteit de lime, si que ceu qu’elle prent, elle ne puet lassier; et vez ci la forme:	And the form of the instrument with which one treats the blood, is such that when one can see it, it resembles curved tongs to enter into the throat; and it has the appearance of a doctor's beak, and it has roughness like a file, so that what it takes, it cannot let go. And behold its form:
li chapistres des apostemes	the chapters of the abscesses
Mout de semblances d’aposteme sont, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient ci aprés d’un et d’autre en cest livre, et sont diver en perforation et en taille; et c’est en II manieres dont l’une est en sa semblance meisme, et de ceu qu’il tient moistor.	many of the apparent abscesses are, according to what memory brings after from one and another in this book, and they differ in perforation and incision; and there are two ways of which one is in its appearance itself, and of that which it holds moisture.
Et li seconde maniere si est por les leus ou il sont au cors.	And the second way is for the boils or where they are in the body.
car li apostemes dou chief est autres que cil dou fondement, et li apostemes dou leu charnut est autres que cil qui vient en jointures, et chescuns ait son jugement en l’uevre.	for the abscesses of the head are different from those of the deep part, and the abscesses of the soft flesh are different from those that come in joints, and each has its judgment in the work.
Et si a apostemes c’on ne doit mie percier, tant que li bowe est meure selonc son acomplissement; et si a de telz qu’il covient percier quant il sont crut, et ne meurent mie selonc lor acomplissement, si com aposteme qui sont delez jointures.	And for abscesses, we should not pierce them until the boil is dead according to its completion; and there are some that require piercing when they are ripe, but do not die according to their completion, such as abscesses near joints.
Car quant apostemes vient delez jointures, et on le laisse tant qu’il est porris entor, par aventure si sont corrumput li liien et li nerf de la jointure, par coi ce est cause de contraction en celui membre.	For when abscesses come from joints, and one lets them remain until they are rotten within, by chance the ligament and nerve of the joint may be corrupted, which is a cause of contraction in that limb.
Ou li aposteme est delez lou membre principel, et se tu tardes la perforation tant qu’il soit meurez, si nuira au membre principeil; ou il est delez lou fondement, si le perce on ainsois qu’il soit meurs; et ne covient mie que tu perces aposteme crut sens digestion acomplie, fuers que celui qui est delez lou fondement, qu’il ne porrisse em parfont, et soit alongiez dedens, et i viegne fistule; et ne puisse saner en grant termine.	Or when the abscess is from the principal member, and if you delay the perforation until it is dead, it will harm the principal member; or when it is from the foundation, one should pierce it even if it is dead; and it does not matter that you perforate an abscess that has not completed digestion, provided that it does not rot completely and becomes elongated within, and then form a fistula; and it cannot heal in a great length of time.
Et covient que tu saiches l’oure de la perforation de l’aposteme qui est meur selonc l’acomplissement, et c’est quant li dolor est apaisie, et li departemens de la fievre, et l’amenuisement de la dolor et de la roujor, et dou debatement et de l’aguisement dou chief de l’aposteme, et les autres signes; et covient que tu faices seoir la perforation ou plus dependant leu de l’aposteme, et la ou il apert mues; et soit li perforation dou lonc dou cors, et se li apostemes est as mains ou as piez, ou en jointures et au ners et as arteres, et en toz leus igalz ou il n’a point de ploieure.	And you must know the time for perforating an abscess that is dead according to completion, and this is when the pain is alleviated, and the departure of fever, and the reduction of pain and redness, and of swelling and the sharpness of the head of the abscess, and other signs; and you should place the perforation where more dependent on the abscess, and where it opens most. And let the perforation be as long as the body, whether the abscesses are in the hands or feet, or in joints and nerves and arteries, and in all places equal where there is no pulsation.
En ces que ploient, par selonc celui membre.	In those that bend, according to that member.
Et quant apostemes est en leu charnut, si vaut mues que tu laisses la perforation tant qu’il soit confermez en digestion acomplie, si com nos avons dit.	And when abscesses are in the firm flesh, it is better that you leave the perforation until its digestion is completed, as we have said.
Car se tu lou perces devant ceu, si iert alongiez li cors dou venim de lui, et est plains de mout d’ordure; et par aventure endurcissent les levres et li parfondetez de lui.	For if you pierce it before that, you will spread the poison throughout the body, and it will be full of much filth; and by chance the edges and depths may harden.
Et si a aucun aposteme que sont perciet selonc le large dou cors, selonc ceu que li membres en ait mestier.	And if for any abscess that is pierced according to the size of the body, as the member requires.
Et covient que tu amenistres em petis apostemes, petis pertus; et en grans apostemes, grans pertus, et maintes fendures selonc la semblance de la grandor de l’aposteme; et si a de tels apostemes ou il covient chever lou keur, et coper; quant il est jai devenus ausi com I drapelz, et est amortis, si covient faire ausi com on fait as bubes: et si a de telz que sont fendut en III angles, et si a de telz dont on cope ausi com la fuelle de mirte, si com apostemes des angres; et si a de telz ou on fait une reonde taille, et autres tailles et semblant copeure.	And it must be that you make small punctures for small abscesses, and large punctures for large abscesses, and many slits according to the size of the abscess; and for such abscesses where it is necessary to cut the core and cover, when it has turned yellow and is softened, it must be done as with boils: and for those that are split into three angles, and for those from which one covers like a myrtle leaf, as with angry abscesses; and for those where you make a round incision, and other cuts and similar coverings.
Cil qui n’ont point de chief, si com aposteme souef superficial, il covient que tu lou perces plainnement; et covient quant li apostemes est gros, et il a coillit grant bowe, et tu lou perces, si ne traire mie toute la bowe en celle houre, mais en trai une partie; puis estoupe l’aposteme jusc’a l’autre jor, puis en trai aucune chose derechief; fai ceu par maintes fois de greit en greit, tant que li bowe isse toute; meismement se li malaides est de foible vertut, ou femme portans, ou petis enfes, ou viez hons decrepites.	Those who lack a head, as in a superficial abscess, it must be fully pierced; and when the abscess is large, and has gathered great pus, if you pierce it, do not drain all the pus at once in that hour, but only part of it; then cauterize the abscess until the next day, and again draw out some more; do this many times gradually, until the pus exits completely; similarly, if the patient is of weak constitution, or a woman with child, or small children, or elderly people who are decrepit.
Car li esperis tressaut aucune fois avec l’issue de la bowe, que par aventure muert li malaides, et tu ne t’en persois.	For if the patient jerks even once with the release of pus, by chance killing the patient, and you are not at fault.
Eschuez donques cest chapistre par grant cautele, et quant tu as perciet ton aposteme, si essue la plaie, et regarde se li plaie de l’aposteme est petite; et se c’est une tailleure plainne, si amenistre tentes de lin ou de viez coton; et se c’est uns grans apostemes, et il i a mout de pertus, si covient que tu boutes en chescun une tente si qu’ele viegne l’une contre l’autre; et se tu as copeit en l’aposteme une partie dou cuir, et tu l’as cheveit entor, si covient que tu l’emplisses de viel couton ou de rasure de dras de lin sens moistor, et le lie jusc’au tier jor; puis l’oste, et le cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, handle this chapter with great caution, and when you have pierced your abscess, wipe the wound, and examine if the wound from the abscess is small; and if it is a complete incision, apply strips of linen or old cotton; and if it is large abscesses, and there are many punctures, it must be that you insert one strip into each so they come together; and if you have cut into the skin of the abscess and sewed over it, it must be filled with old cotton or a piece of linen rasure without moisture, and bind it until the third day; then remove it, and treat with ointment until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc avient a ton ovraige, si amenistre aigue froide et aisil, et moille I drapeil, et met sor le leu decorrant par maintes fois.	And if bleeding occurs in your work, apply cold water and balsam, and place a soft cloth over the area where the blood is flowing repeatedly.
Et se li decorremens de sanc persevere, se i amenistre governement et cure, et les poudres que j’ai dit em mains leus en cest livre, et se c’est ou tens d’iver, et li leus ou li apostemes est est mout nervous, si couvient que tu mettes sus tentes et drapelz moilliez en vin et en oile chaut; et se c’est en esteit, et li leus est charnus, si covient que tu mes sus drapelz moilliez en aigue et en oile, ou en vin et en oile froit, jusc’au tier jor, si com nos avons dit; et puis deslie l’aposteme et l’essue et le cure, si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the bleeding persists, apply a government and care, and the powders that I have said to use in their hands in this book, and whether it is or tends toward winter, and the limbs or abscesses are very nervous, then it must be that you place tents and moist cloths on them, soaked in wine and hot oil; and if it is in summer, and the limbs are fleshly, then it must be that you place moist cloths on them in water and oil, or in wine and cold oil, for three days, as we have said; and then drain the abscess and dry it and treat it as it should be until it is healed.
Et ceu covient il conoistre universement en cures des apostemes: or vos ai dit coment on doit aler avant as cures des apostemes, et vez ci le chapistre.	And this must be known universally in the treatment of abscesses: or you have already been told how one should proceed with the treatment of abscesses, and here is the chapter.
des soros	of sores
Ou keur dou chief vienent petis apostemes, et sont manieres de nous que sont en toiles, ausi com li josier d’une geline, et mout en i a de semblances.	Or come from the head small abscesses, and their forms are like webs, as with the threads of a spider's web, and there are many that resemble them.
Il en i a de gras et de telz ou il a moistor ausi com poulz; et si a de telz qui sont dur et pierous au taillier, et n’i a point de doutance se li artere n’i fait contraire.	There are some that are fat and like this with moisture, similar to pulps; and there are those that are hard and stony to the touch, and there is no doubt if the artery does not cause contrary effects.
Et li ovraiges de la taille si est que tu esprueve a tout I estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», de coi li forme vient ci aprés, quel chose il contient.	And the operations of the abdomen are such that you test with any instrument called "entromissoire," from which their form comes after, what it contains.
Car s’il contient moistor, si lou fent par desus dou lonc.	For if it contains moisture, he lets it out from above the long bone.
Et quant li moistor est vuidie, si escorche sens rien laissier la peil qui contient celle moistor, car il revient adés quant on i laisse rien; puis plonge coton en oignement egiptien, s’il est presens; se ceu non, en aigue et en seil, et en emple la plaie, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor; et ceu corront ceu qui est demorez dou nit.	And when the moisture is drained, he cauterizes without leaving any of the skin that contains that moisture, for it repeatedly comes out if left untreated; then he plunges cotton in Egyptian ointment if present; if not, in water and salt, and covers the wound, leaving it until the next day; and this allows what remains from the night to drain.
Et pues rencomence lou coton, si com devant, le second jor, et lou tier, tant que tu saiches bien qu’il ne demoure point dou nit; puis cure la plaie d’oignement a ceu convenauble, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then he resumes using the cotton, as before, the second day, and the third, until you know well that nothing remains from the night; then treat the wound with ointment suitable for it, until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes tient I nout gras, si le cope selonc ceste forme, dou lonc; et i giete tes oncines, et l’escorche de toutes pars, et met toute ta cure de traire fuer la cotte ou il gist; et se li artere te fait contraire, si fai ceu que je t’ai dit aprés.	And if the abscess holds out fat, shape it according to this form, long; and give your oncines, and scorch it from all sides, and put all your effort into drawing out its pus where it lies; and if the artery makes contrary work, do what I have said after.
Et ausi fai de l’aposteme s’il est pierous, et dou taillier et dou curer si com je t’ai dit.	And do the same for the abscess if it is stony, and cut and treat it as I have said.
Et li taille sus l’aposteme pierous et le moiste, si est plus legiere, car il sont de poc de sanc.	And cutting into the stony abscess and its moisture is more gentle, for they contain little blood.
Et si a aucuns de ces apostemes ou chief ou il n’a point de moistor, et de ces fut I apostemes que je copai ou chief d’une vielle femme; et trovai l’aposteme ausi com une piere xourde, aspre et blainche, et ne pooit brisier; et s’on en eust ferut aucun, on li eust ausi bien fait plaie com d’une piere.	And if any of these abscesses or heads have no moisture, and these were the stony abscesses that I treated or from an old woman; and found the abscess as hard as a smooth, rough, and white stone, and could not be broken. And if one had made any from it, one would have also well made a wound from it as from a stone.
En autres apostemes venans ou chief, fuer que ces qui vienent as chief des enfans et as racines des oreilles, li overture si soit toz jors au plus dependant leu, por mues issir la bowe; et les cure si com il covient.	In other abscesses coming from the head or cheeks, these coming from the roots of the ears, the opening should be kept open day and night, depending on the most dependent part, to let the pus out; and the treatment as it should.
des scrophules	of scrofula
Maintes fois avienent cist aposteme au col, et desoz les asseles, et ens angres, et aucune fois vienent autre part ou cors, et sont mout, et sont enjanrees l’une avec l’autre.	Many times this abscess occurs in the neck, under the armpits, and in groins, and sometimes come from other parts or boils, and are swollen, and are joined together with each other.
Et chescune scrophule est proprement dedens sa cote, si com li nout et li aposteme dou chief, si com nos avons dit; et les semblances de ces scrophules sont maintes.	And each scrofula is properly within its own part, like the lump and abscess of the head, as we have said; and the similarities of these scrofulas are many.
Il i a de teles que contienent moistor, et si a de malignes qui ne vuellent obeir a santeit.	There are those that contain moisture, and there are malignant ones that do not wish to obey health.
en celle donques que tu vois de bone disposition au tochier, et est semblans a la color dou cors, et muet de chescune part et n’est mie aerse as ners dou col ne a l’artere ne au conduit, et n’est mie parfonde; si covient que tu la copes par desus, et l’escorche de chescune partie, et estent les II levres dou keur as oncines, se tu en as mestier, si com nos avons dit en apostemes dou chief; et la trai poc et poc, et soies seur que tu ne coper lou nerf ne la voine, et ne soit mie li spatumile agus ne trenchans, que li mains n’eschaipe, et ne voise trop avant, que tu ne coper mie ceu que tu ne dois.	In those that you see in good condition upon touch, and resemble the color of the body, and move in every part and are not burned near the neck nor near the artery nor the vein, and are not deep; it is fitting that you cut from above, and brand each part, and place the two lips of the wound with forceps if needed, as we said for abscesses on the head; and draw a little bit at a time, and be sure that you do not cut the nerve nor the vein, and do not let the pus or sharp instruments out, that your hand does not slip, and does not go too far, so you do not cut what you should not.
Et se tu copes la voinne ou l’artere, et ceu ne te laisse ovrer, si met en la plaie vitriole broiet, ou aucunes poudres que restainchent sanc, et estraint la plaie; et la laisse tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et soit amollie li plaie, et encomence a porrir.	And if you open the vein or artery, and it does not allow further work, put vitriol powder or any other coagulants in the wound, and compress the wound; and leave it until the abscesses are pacified, and the wound becomes softened and begins to rot.
Et quant li sans est estainchiez, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que tu l’acomplisses; puis quier a ton doit indice s’il i demoure nules petites scrophules, si les cope et les munde.	And when the wound is coagulated, return to your work until you complete it; then rest according to your proper indication if there remain any small scrofulous swellings, and drain and cleanse them.
Et s’il a en la racine de la scrophule voinne grant, si ne covient mie que tu copes celle scrophule en sa racine, mais la lie d’un fil double fort, et la laisse cheoir par li, sens nuisement; puis emple la plaie de viel coton plongiet en oignement egiptien, puis la cure.	And if there is a large vein at the root of the scrofulous swelling, it is not proper to open that swelling at its root. Instead, tie it with a double strong thread, and let it fall by itself without doing harm; then pack the wound with old cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment, and treat it.
Et se tu copes toute la scrophule, si covient que tu assembles les II levres de la plaie, et les cout maintenant, puis qu’il n’i a point demoreit de superfluiteit por la grandor de la scrophule.	And if you remove the entire scrofula, it is necessary that you bring together the two edges of the wound, and now suture them, since there has been no excess due to the size of the scrofula.
si covient que tu entendes a coper la racine de li, et traire fuer, et la cout si com nos avons dit.	if it is necessary that you cut the root of it, and draw out the force, and suture it as we have said.
Celles scrophules que tienent superfluiteit, perce lai ou il apert meure; et la perce ensi com celle devant dite, en dependant, puis i amenistre tentes avec oignement et semblans choses, si qu’elle corrompe ceu qui est demorez de la corruption; et quant li plaie est bien mundee, si la cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Those scrofulas that have excess, puncture them where they apert urethra or vein; and puncture them as the one previously said, depending on it, then apply wicks with ointment and similar things, so that it corrupts what is remaining of the corruption; and when the wound is well cleansed, the treatment with ointment and promoting healing continues until it is healed.
de squinance	of scrofula
Li ancien dirent et parlerent de la tailleure de la gorge; mais je ne vis onques en nostre terre qui la feist, et c’est li escripture de lor parole.	The ancients spoke and wrote of the cutting of the throat; but I have never seen anyone do it in our land, and this is their written word.
A ces qui ont squinance, il covient que li fendure de la gorge qui est apelee «epiglote» soit eschuee; et c’on ne faice aide par ceu, por ceu que toutes les voines et li pormon dou malaide sont a ces qui ont aposteme chaut en la bouche, ou en la gorge ou en II amandres.	For those who have scrofula, it is necessary to cut the opening in the throat called "epiglote"; and no help should be given by this method because all the veins and the glands of the diseased are hot in the mouth, or in the throat, or in the tonsils.
Quant li maladie est en la chenal dou pormon, il covient coper l’epiglote por fuir la perdition qui vient de l’estranglement.	When the disease is in the channel of the gland, it is necessary to cut the epiglote to avoid the loss that comes from strangulation.
Il covient donques, quant nos volons fendre l’epiglote, que nos le fendons desoz III cercles ou IIII une petite fendure dou travers, entre les II cercles ou par la quantiteit de la fendure dou syfac, ne mie en la cartillaige; et cil leus si est covenaubles a la section de l’epiglote qu’il n’i a point de char, et li vasseil sont lonc d’enqui.	It must therefore, when we wish to cut the epiglottis, be cut over three or four small cuts across, between the two circles or by the size of the cut through the sypha, not in the cartilage; and those who are thus are suitable for the cutting of the epiglottis so that there is no flesh, and the vessels are long enough.
Et se li maistres est paourous, si covient qu’il estende le cuir de la gorge a tout l’oncine, puis fende lou keur tant qu’il viegne a la cheneil; et eschue les vasselz de sanc, se tu vois aucune chose, et puis cope lou syfac, si com nos avons dit; et est demostrez par la section dou fleume de la cheneil ki saut fuer par le leu qui est rompus, et par la defaute de la voix; et laisse la plaie overte une piece.	And if the master is fearful, it must be stretched from the entire inch of the throat, then cut the skin until it comes to the chain; and avoid the vessels of blood, if you see anything, and then cover the sypha as we have said; and it is demonstrated by the section of the fluid of the chain that flows forth through the broken part, and by the loss of voice; and leave the wound open for a piece.
Et quant li houre est passee de coi on doute l’estranglement, assemble les II levres de la plaie dou keur, et la cout toute soule sens la cartillaige; puis aministre medicines qui font naistre char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the hour has passed since one doubts strangulation, bring together the two edges of the wound in the heart, and suture it well beneath the cartilage; then administer medicines that produce flesh until he is healed.
Albucasim dist c’on ne faice ce jusc’a tant que li gorge est toute estoupee, et li malaides est jugiez a mort, et li defaut li alaine.	Albucasim states that one should not do this until the throat is completely suffocated, and the patient is judged to be dying, then proceed.
Adonques cope on l’epiglote por ceu que li malaides ne puet alener, et il respire par la plaie, et ensi est gardez de mort; et por ce commanderent li anciain a laissier la plaie overte tant que li malice de la maladie soit passee, et elle est passee en III jors ou en IIII Et adonques il comanderent a coudre la plaie et curer, tant qu’elle fut curee; et je vos dirai ceu que je vis.	Then lift the epiglottis because the patient cannot breathe, and he breathes through the wound, and in this way, one is kept from dying; and for this, the ancients commanded to leave the wound open until the malice of the disease passes, and it passes in three or four days. Then they ordered to suture the wound and treat it until it heals; and I will tell you what I saw.
Je vis que une damoisele prist I coutel, et le ficha en sa gorge, et copa partie des chenelz dou pormon; et je fui apelez por li curer, et la trovai ausi com morte.	I see that a maiden took the knife and pierced her throat, cutting part of the vein; and I was called to perform the cure, and found her as dead.
Je descovris la plaie, et trovai le sanc qui en estoit issus, et soi bien qu’elle n’avoit mie copeit voine ne conduit fuer que la gorge, et li vens issoit fuer par la plaie.	I uncovered the wound and found the blood issuing from it. I knew she had not pierced a vein nor cut any artery, but the wind was entering through the wound.
Je me hastai, et cousi la plaie, et la curai tant qu’elle fut sanee; et n’avint a la damoisele fuer qu’elle fut roge de voix, et revint aprés a sa disposition; por ceu di je que en la tailleure de l’epiglote n’ait mie paour.	I hastened, stitched the wound, and cured it until it was healed; and no harm came to the maiden so that she lost her voice, and recovered her strength afterward; for this reason, I say that in the surgery of the epiglottis there is no fear.
de la grosse gorge	of the large windpipe
Cist apostemes est apelez «hernie de gorge», et est uns grans apostemes en color d’une jaisse, et est molt en femmes; et est selonc II manieres: naturez, et accidens; ou natureil n’a point d’engien.	This abscess is called "hernia of the throat," and it is a large abscess in color like that of a hazel nut, and is very common in women; and according to two manners: natural, and accident; or naturally there is no device.
Et li accidens est selonc II manieres, de coi l’une est semblans a gras nous, et li autre maniere est semblans a aposteme qui vient de nous d’artere; et il i ait paour, et ne covient mie ovrer de feir fuers que en celi qui est petite, et le prueve et cerche a tout l’intromissoire: se tu le trueves ausi com I nout gras, et ne pent a nulle voine, si le cope, si com on cope les nous, et le trai a tout sa coife, s’il en i a point; et encerche bien tot, et le cure si com il covient, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	And the accident is according to two manners, of which one is similar to fatty tumors, and the other manner is similar to an abscess that comes from inside the artery; and there is fear, and it should not be operated on by making openings except in those that are small, and he proves and searches at every interloping: if you find it as soft as fat, and cannot be pushed into any vein, then cut it out like one cuts tumors, and draw it to all its roots; if there is any point, seek well immediately, and treat it as it should be treated until it is perfectly healed.
des nous	from us
Maintes manieres de nous sont, dont je dirai toutes les semblances; et or covient que je die toute la difference qui est entre nout et issue.	Many methods we have, of which I will speak of all the similarities; and now it is fitting that I say all the difference there is between us and dislocation.
Je dis que issue est chalors et fievre tenans, tant que li ebulicions est passee, et est acomplie li porriture; adonques repose li fievre et li chalor.	I say that dislocation is heat and fever lasting until the boiling has passed, and putrefaction is accomplished; then the fever and heat cease.
Avec lou nout n’a ne chalor ne fievre ne dolor, et contient I syfac, qui est ses propres sac et est selonc la color dou cors, et encomence ausi com une jaisse, et devient gros; et sont selonc ij semblances, ou grais, ou moiste, et mout de color sont si com j’ai dit en la division.	When the shoulder has neither heat nor fever nor pain, and contains the synovial fluid, which is its own sac and is according to the color of the body, and begins like a swelling, and becomes large; and are according to two similarities, or fat, or moist, and much in color as I have said in the division.
Il covient, quant tu viens a la cure dou nout, que tu esprueves et l’enquier premierement a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «entromissoire», selonc ce que sa forme venra ou chapistre qui est aprés.	It must be, when you come to the treatment of the new wound, that you first examine and inquire about all the instrument called "entromissoire", according to what its form will come or chapter which is after.
Et li maniere de l’inquisicion des apostemes des nous est que tu preignes ou plus moiste leu que tu trueves en l’aposteme, et torne tes dois poc et poc, tant que tu saiches que li estrumens ait perciet le keur, puis que ce soit selonc la grandor de l’aposteme; puis estrai l’entromissoire, et pren garde en ceu que saut fuer.	And the manner of inquisition of abscesses of the flesh is that you probe or more moist tissue that you find in the abscess, and turn your two probes little by little, until you know that the instruments have reached the core; then do this according to the size of the abscess; then extract the entromissoire, and be careful that it not burst.
Se moistor corrans cort, queil color elle ait, si le fent si com j’ai dit des autres apostemes; et se aprés l’entromissoire nen vient moistor, saiches qu’il est gras, si le fent donques en croix, et le prent as pinceures, et l’escorche legierement de chescune part et warde la cotte ou il gist que tu la traies saine avec le nout; et se tu ne la pues traire saine, si la trai par pieces si qu’il n’i demoure rien.	If the moisture comes out clear or of any other color, cut it as I have said for other abscesses; and if after extracting the entromissoire there is no more moisture, know that it is fatty, so cut it in a cross shape, and remove it with forceps, and slightly brand it from each part. Guard the cloth where it lies and treat it healthily with the wound; and if you cannot treat it healthily, remove it piece by piece so that nothing remains.
Car s’il i demoure rien, si revient li nous par maintes fois; et s’il en demore un poc, et li sans te grieve, si emple la plaie d’aucunes poudres corrosives agues, et estraint la plaie, et met sus choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li nous est grans, si cout les II levres de la plaie, et le cure de ceu qui enjanre char.	For if it remains nothing, it returns to us many times; and if there is a little, and the poison grieves the wound, fill the wound with some corrosive powders, restrain the wound, and put on hot abscess-soothing things, and cure it with other cures until it is healed; and if the wound is large, suture the two edges of the wound, and cure those who bear flesh.
et se li voine batans t’est contraire ou autre si te haste et emple le leu de vitriole broiet, et lou laisse liiet II jors ou III, tant que li plaie porrisse, et repose li ebulicion dou sanc; puis revien au coper ceu que i est demoreit dou nout.	And if the vein beating is contrary to you or other so hasten and fill the head with pounded vitriol, and let it lie for 2 or 3 days, until the wound rots, and rest the boiling of the blood; then return to the copper that which has remained from the new.
Vez ci les formes des estrumens entromissoires, et sont de III manieres: grans et moien et petit; et s’en i a III quarrez qui sont apelez «albaret», et I qui est apelez «breb», et s’en i a de III manieres: grant, moien, et petit, por encerchier les apostemes de fistule; et sont ausi com les aguilles dont on cout les sorceles, et sont d’arain citrin, ou de fer, ou d’argent, et mues valent cil qui sont jaune, et sont plus esprovez de plonc noir por encerchier les corbeures de fistule; et sont de III manieres: grans, moiens, et petis, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce des pertus.	Here are the forms of the intromissory instruments, and they are in three ways: great, medium, and small; and among them there are three squares called "albaret," and one that is called "breb"; and there are also three kinds to encircle abscesses from fistulae: great, medium, and small, like the needles with which one sews sinews. They are made of yellow brass or iron or silver, and the ones that are yellow are more tried for encircling black plaques from fistulae; and they are in three ways: great, medium, and small, according to the size of the openings.
Les formes des oncines sont de mout de semblances, si com tu vois ci: grans, moiens, et petis; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures de III manieres ausi; et si a oncines qui ont III corbeures, et sont ausi de III manieres; et si a oncines qui ont II corbeures, et oncines d’une corbeure soulement, et sont de III manieres; et tuit cist sont necessaire en lor leu.	The forms of the claws are similar in appearance, as you see here: large, medium, and small; and among these, some have two notches in three ways; and some have three notches, and are also in three ways; and some have two notches, and claws with only one notch, and are in three ways; and all of this are necessary in their place.
Li chief de ces a coi on fent sont trenchant, et de telz i a qui ne taillent mie fuer que d’une part, dont on escorche les nous, por ceu c’on ne cope la voine ne le nerf; et de ces intromissoires sont les alemeles reponues en mainches, si que li malaide ne s’en persoivent a l’overture des apostemes; et sont de III manieres: grant, petit, et moien, si com tu vois; et n’en use on mie fuer que en leu charnut, si com jambes, et bras, et mameles, et as angres, et en semblans leus; et aucune fois fait on I autre estrument petit, semblant a escorces de fistices, selonc ceste forme, a coi on estainche sanc:	The chief of those for which this is done is sharp, and among these are those that cut only half the way, with which one cauterizes the nostrils, because one does not cut the vein nor the nerve; and from these intrusive ones are the alembics placed in hands, so that the patient does not perceive them at the opening of abscesses; and they are in three ways: large, small, and medium, as you see; and one uses none with force in fleshy places, such as legs, arms, mammary glands, and at the armpits, and similar places; and sometimes one makes another instrument small, resembling shells of pistachios, according to this form, for which one stops bleeding.
et le met on aucune fois au leu qui saine a copement des voines, et as arteres, et aucune fois reont selonc ceste grant forme:	and it is placed once in its place which heals by degrees from the veins, and in the arteries, and once again according to this great form:
Aucune fois enflent les mameles d’aucuns homes quant cil encomencent estre corrumput, tant qu’eles semblent mameles de feme; et demorent laides et enflees, et qui les vuet curer, si le covient soier selonc ceste forme des ceste ligne .b. jusques a .g.:	Once the breasts of some men swell when they begin to腐坏，直至看起来像女人的乳房；并且remain ugly and swollen; and if one wishes to cure them, it must be done according to this form of line .b. from .a. to .g.:
puis escorche la graisse, et emple la plaie de medicine enjanrant char, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie a costure, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee; et se li mamele cline aval, et est amolie por sa grandor si com il avient as femmes, si la fent en II costelz desus, par II semblans fendures; de coi l’une soit tenans a l’autre a la fin de l’une et de l’autre, si que li plus grans ligne conteigne la menor selonc ceste forme, des ceste ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.; puis escorche le cuir qui est entre les II levres, et oste la graisse, et i amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de costure et de poudres, et ceu qui est necessaire en la cure, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, ou li incision n’est mie toute faite, por ceu que li malaides ne vuet reposer, ou por le decorrement de sanc, si covient que tu emplisses la plaie de coton moilliet en oignement corrosif; et le laisse tant qu’il menjuce le remenant et la graisse, puis le cure tant qu’il soit saneis.	then cauterize the fat, and apply the wound with a medicated cloth. Then stitch the two edges of the wound together, and treat it until it is healed. And if the breast swells downward and becomes softened due to its size as in women, cut into the two ribs above, following similar incisions; ensuring that one edge holds the other at the end of each, so that the larger line contains the minor according to this form from line .b. to the line .g.; then cauterize the skin between the two edges, remove the fat, and apply what we have said regarding stitching and powders, as well as necessary treatments until it is healed; if it is not healed or the incision is not fully completed, due to the patient's inability to rest or the continued discharge of blood, you must fill the wound with moistened cotton soaked in a corrosive ointment. Leave it until it consumes the flesh and fat, then treat it until it is fully healed.
des apostemes des asselles	of abscesses and of arrows
Cist apostemes que vienent desoz les asseles sont manieres de scrophules dures ou il ait cotes, et s’en i a que contienent moistor.	These abscesses coming from beneath the arrows are like hard scrofulous swellings with lumps, and some contain moisture.
Cil donques qui contienent moistor covient qu’il soient copez selonc ceste forme, des la ligne .b. jusc’a la ligne .g.:	Those that contain moisture should be lanced according to this form, from the line 2 to the line 7:
Et quant toute li bowe qui est en l’aposteme est vuidie, si emple la plaie de viel coton, et la laisse jusc’a l’autre jor, puis oste tout le coton, et cure d’oignement avenant a ceu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when all the bowe that is in the abscess is evacuated, fill the wound with old cotton, and leave it until the next day, then remove all the cotton, and treat with ointment appropriate for this until it is healed.
Et se li apostemes est de semblances de scrophules, si le fent si com nos avons dit en fendures des scrophules, et se li plaie rent bowe, si amenistre cautere si com nos avons dit devant.	And if the abscesses are like scrofulous swellings, lance them as we have said for incisions in scrofulous swellings, and if the wound contains pus, apply a fire cautery as we have said before.
de la routure de l’artere	of the rupture of the artery
Quant li artere est route, et li cuir est soudez qui est sus, si en vient maintes fois apostemes, et tout aussi avient il a la voine enflee et aposteme; et si le conoist on ensi quant c’est por l’artere, si est li apostemes lons em parfont; et quant tu le sens a tes dois, si sens I estraignement; et quant c’est por la voine, si est reons defuer aparans; et c’est folie de coper cest aposteme, et meismement quant il est desoz les asseles et as angres et ou col et em mout d’autres leus, et est mout grans.	When the artery is ruptured and the skin above is sewn, there often develop abscesses. This likewise happens with a swollen vein and an abscess; and when one recognizes it as being due to the artery, the abscesses are long forming. And when you feel it with your hand, you sense the constriction; and when it is due to the vein, it is visible swelling appearing; and it is foolish to treat this abscess, especially when it is under the armpits, in angles, or near the neck and many other places, and is very large.
Il covient donques eschuir la cure de fer, et celui qui est a chief covient eschuir ausi, et en celui qui est d’enfleure d’artere fent par desus le cuir dou lonc; puis oevre la taille as oncines, et depart bellement l’artere des toiles, tant qu’ele soit descoverte; puis boute desoz li une aguille, et la fai percier jusc’a l’autre costeit, et estraint l’artere d’un fil double en II leus, selonc ceu que je t’ai ensigniet en l’estraction des II arteres qui sont en temples; puis point le leu qui est entre les II liens d’un intromissoire tant que li sans en isse qui i est, et soit deliiez li aposteme; puis amenistre la cure que enjanre bowe, tant que li liien chient; puis cure ceu d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li apostemes est por la taille de la voinne, si covient que tu teignes a ta main ceu que tu pues de l’aposteme a tout le cuir, puis boute l’aguille desoz le leu que tu tiens a ta main, et la fai percier, et i ait I fil double, si que tu le trais de l’autre costeit; puis lie l’aposteme, si com je t’ai dit, ou liien de l’une de II pars as II chiés dou fil; et se tu doutes que li filz n’isse fuer, si i reboute une autre aguille a tout I fil desoz tout l’aposteme a l’incision de la premiere aguille, et estraint les filz en IIII leus; puis cope l’aposteme tant que li superfluitez en isse, puis cope la superfluiteit dou keur et laisse ceu qui est liiez; puis met sus I drapeil moilliet en vin et en oile, puis li amenistre cures de tentes et d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, it is advisable to avoid the iron cure. For those who have a chief injury, this too should be avoided. In one who is swollen due to an artery, make a cut above the skin along its length; then operate the dissection with needles, and cleanly separate the artery from the tissues until it is fully exposed; then insert a needle, and pierce it through to the other side, and clamp the artery with a double thread in two places, as I have taught you in the extraction of the two arteries in the temples. Then pass an intermediate thread between the two ties so that what remains inside comes out, and thus release the abscess; then apply the cure as befits this situation until the threads are secure; finally, treat it with ointment appropriate for such cases until it is healed. If the abscess is due to the opening of a vein, you must stain your hand with as much of the abscess as possible on the skin, then insert the needle under the thread you hold in your hand and pierce it, leaving the double thread so that it passes through to the other side; then tie the abscess as I have said, or the thread from one part to both heads of the thread. If you doubt that the threads will pass, reinsert another needle under the entire abscess along the incision of the first needle, and clamp the threads in three places; then drain the abscess until all excess comes out, then drain the skin and leave what is tied; finally, place a moist cloth of wine and oil on top, and continue with bandages and ointments until it is healed.
des apostemes des ners	of abscesses of nerves
Ausi com aposteme vienent en l’artere et en la voine, vienent aposteme as ners quant il sont ferut, ou par trop grant travail, et semblans choses.	As abscesses coming to the artery and vein, coming from abscesses of nerves when they are injured, or through too great labor, and similar things.
Et ceu avient plus sovent as adjutoires et as dois et en toz leus ou il ait jointures, et c’est I grief apostemes, et sa color semble la color dou cors, et est em plusors dispositions sens dolor; et quant on l’estraint forment, si sent li malaides dolor, et n’est mie em parfont dou cors, mais desoz lou keur; et muet bien de toutes pars, et ne va ne avant ne arrier, ne desoz ne desus, et celui qui est en jointures ne covient mie coper par fer: par aventure i vanroit contraction; et cil qui est ou chief ou ou front, fent le cuir au spatumile.	And this happens more frequently in joints and elbows, and in all places where there are joints, and it is the grief of abscesses, and its color seems like the color of the body, and is in many dispositions with pain; and when one extracts it forcefully, the patient feels great pain, and it is not just a pain throughout the body, but beneath the heart; and moves well from all sides, and neither forwards nor backwards, neither below nor above, and that which is in joints should not be treated with iron: by chance there might be contraction; and that which is on the head or on the forehead, cut the skin at the spatumile.
Se li apostemes est petis, si le tien a unes tenailles, et le cope en sa racine; et s’il est grans, si le sospent a l’oncine, et l’escorche, puis l’oste et assemble la plaie a la costure, et lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the abscess is small, hold it with tweezers and squeeze at its root; and if it is large, suspend it by the thread, burn it, then remove it and join the wound with sutures, and continue the treatment until it heals.
des grosses boces pendans	of large boils hanging
Aucune fois avient en ventres et ne mie autre part thelul, et est une maladie qui est apelee «funge» par la semblance d’aus, et est li racine subtilz, et li chiez gros; et en i a de petis et de mout grans; et je vis I home qui en avoit II ou ventre qui estoient plus semblans a funges que ai autre chose, et n’i avoit point de difference, et estoient blanc, et avoient menue racine, et estoient jai fendut, et en corroit adés moistor.	Sometimes it occurs in bellies and nowhere else thelul, and it is a disease called "fungus" by resemblance to fungi, and it has fine roots and large heads; and within them are both small and quite large; and I saw a man who had two or more bellies that were more like fungi than anything else, and there was no difference, and they were white, and had slender roots, and were split in some places, and within them corroded with moisture.
Je les copai et trovai en l’un XVIII onces pesant, et en l’autre VI З., et li ovraiges en l’incision si est que tu regardes se li malaides est moistes, et li color de l’artelul est blainche et moiste et de subtil racine; si le cope au spatumile large, et soient en ta presence li cautere au feu.	I copied and found in one XVIII ounces weighing, and in the other VI drachms, and the work in incision is such that you should observe if the patient is moist, and the color of the articulare is white and moist and of subtle root; so cop it on the spatumile large, and let the cautery be at your presence.
Car au taillier vient maintes fois trop grans decorremens de sanc, et se li sans te vaint, si te haste donques dou cauterizer; et se tu vois le malaide espoanteit et paourous de l’incision dou fer, si prent I fil de plonc bien fait, et en lie l’artelul si com nos avons dit, et le laisse II jors; et puis le restraint, et ne cesser d’estraindre lou fil de plonc tant qu’il cope l’artelul, et chiece par lui sens travail; et se les racines sont grosses, si a paour au coper meismement por le ventre, mais tu em pues bien coper la moitiet, puis le cauterize qu’il ne reviegne; puis cure la plaie, et garde que tu ne coper le thelul qui est de fuxe color et de povre sens et de lait regart.	For in the tailor, there are often too great outflowings of blood, and if the vein breaks, then you must hasten to cauterize; and if you see the patient fearing and fearful of the iron incision, then take a well-made thread of flax, and place it on the articulare as we have said, and let it remain for two days; and then restrain, and do not cease to strain the thread of flax until it copes the articulare, and work each by itself; and if the roots are large, then fear to cope immediately for the belly, but you can well cope half of it, then cauterize that it does not return; then treat the wound, and guard that you do not cope the thule which is of fugue color and poor sense and looks like milk.
Car c’est uns apostemes enchancrez, et je venrai a la cure de chancre ci aprés.	For this is an embedded abscess, and I will come to the treatment of the chancre after this.
quant li boude ist fuer	when the boil is hard
Se li apparance de la boude vient par cautere de plaie ou de fendure de syfac, et est sus le ventre et en ist aucuns des bouez, si com il avient en autres routures, ou de sanc qui cort de voines ou d’arteres selonc ceu qui est devant, ou de ventositeit; et se c’est par la routure dou syfac et par l’issue dou bouel, si est li color de l’aposteme semblans a la color dou cors, et est legiere chose sens dolor, et apert de diverse issue.	If the appearance of the boil comes from a fire cautery on a wound or a cut in the skin, and is on the belly and near any of the bowels, as happens in other ruptures, or from blood that flows from veins or arteries according to what was mentioned before, or from wind; and if it is by the rupture of the stomach and through the discharge of the bowel, then the color of the abscess appears similar to the color of the body, and is a slight thing without pain, and evident from various discharges.
Et se c’est por l’issue de l’intestine, adonques est il plus divers, et quant on le presse a ses dois si se repont, et puis revient, et par aventure si est sarrez, et agrandist mout a l’entree dou bain et por fort travail.	And if it is due to the discharge of the intestine, then it is more varied. When pressed at its roots, it sometimes rises and then subsides, and by chance it may become swollen, and greatly increases upon entering the bath and through much work.
Et se c’est por moistor, c’est legiere chose, et apert bien quant tu le presses a ta main, ne ne constraint mie; et se c’est por sanc, si apert par ces signes li apostemes gros et dur, et est fichiez selonc une quantiteit; et se c’est por ventositeit, si est souef au tochier, et li ovraiges si est que tu regarde se li apparance est por le sanc de l’artere, ou de la voine, ou ventositeit.	And if it is due to moisture, it is a light matter, and clearly seen when you press it with your hand; it does not constraint much. And if it is due to blood, it clearly shows by these signs: the abscesses are large and hard, and are pierced according to a quantity; and if it is due to phlegm, it sneezes at touch, and the operations are such that you observe whether the appearance is of arterial blood, or vein blood, or phlegm.
Si covient que tu laisses la cure.	Then you must let the treatment continue.
Car il en a doutance et paor, si com je t’ai dit ou chapistre des apostemes, por l’artere et por la voine.	For there is doubt and fear, as I have said in the chapter on abscesses, for the artery and for the vein.
Et se li apparance est por l’intestine ou lou boueil, si covient que tu comandes au malaide qu’il teigne son alaine, et soit estendus tout drois, puis seigne d’enche tout entor la boude; puis le comande a gesir sovin entre tes mains, puis va entor le leu que tu as signiet a tout le spatumile, puis estent la moitiet de l’aposteme au desus a tout le grant uncine; puis le lie entor d’un fil fort, ou d’une corde de fort soie fermement, et soit li nous dou liien assolz; puis oevre la moitiet de l’aposteme estendut sus le liien, et i boute ton doit indice, et quier l’intestine; se tu le trueves pris dou liien, si le deslie, et boute l’intestine au defuer dou ventre; et se tu trueves le boueil, si le prent a l’oncine, et en cope la superfluiteit; et se li artere te fait contraire, ou li voine, si vai belement entor, puis revien a ton ovraige et pren II aguilles, et i boute II fors filz, et boute les II aguilles entor ceu que tu as fait en crois que tu feis percier; puis estrain l’aposteme en IIII leus sus les aguilles, et se tu vues, oste les aguilles, et laisse lou leu tant qu’il porrisse, et chiece li char morte par soi; ou tu la cope quant elle iert subtiliie et porrie, puis le cure de ceu qu’il covient, et cheve l’aposteme si com nos avons dit; et estrai le sanc ou la moistor que tu trueves, puis cure le leu de ceu qu’il couvient, et soude le leu.	And if the appearance is due to the intestine or the bladder, you must instruct the patient to urinate, and be extended fully straight, then urinate completely throughout the bladder; then command him to lie quietly between your hands, then go under the head that you have marked for all spatumile, then place half of the abscess above at the top of the large uncine; then tie it firmly with a strong thread or a rope of strong silk, and keep it tightly bound; then work on the other half of the abscess extended over the thread, and use your index finger to press; if you find it caught by the thread, release it, and let the bladder lie freely in the abdomen; and if you find the bladder, take it with the uncine, and drain its excess; and if the artery opposes or the vein, go gently under it, then return to your operation and take two needles, and put two strong threads through what you made cross where you pierced; then pull the abscess in four parts over the needles, and if you see, remove the needles, and leave the head until it rots, and cut out the dead flesh by itself; or you cut it when it is softened and rotten, then treat the area that needs treatment, and cover the abscess as we have said; and extract the blood or moisture you find, then treat the head with what is needed, and close it.
dou chancre	of the sore
Nos avons dit en la division les semblances de chancre, et coment on i doit ovrer par medicines, et coment on doit eschuer la cure de fer; et disons le chancre enjanreit en la marris, et grant cautele a en la cure, et dirent li ancien que quant chancres est en leu ou on le puet raier si com chancre qui est em mameles, et en la cuixe, et en semblans leus, et le doit tout oster quant il est en l’encomencement; et quant il est grans et anciens, si ne covient mie que tu l’aproches, car je n’en poi onques nul saner; ne nulz n’en sana onques devant moi.	We have said in the division of the signs of the sore, and how one should treat it with medicines, and how one must avoid iron cure; and we say that sores arise in the flesh, and great caution is needed in their treatment. The ancients said that when sores are on the skin where they can be scraped as sores are on the sameles, and on the thigh, and similar places, and one should completely remove them when they are at the beginning; and when they are large and old, you must not approach them, for I have never seen any heal from them; nor has anyone healed before me.
Et li ovraiges, quant il est en leu ou on le puet oster, si com nos avons dit, est que tu purge aucune fois le malaide de cole noire; puis le fai sainier s’il ait manifeste repletion, puis afaite le malaide I boin leu por faire l’ovraige; puis giete tes oncines ou chancre, et le cheve de toutes pars, et l’oste de toutes pars sens rien laissier; et laisse corre le sanc tout fuer, et espreint bien le leu a ta main ou a aucune chose, et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire de l’incision de l’artere ou de la voine, si le cauterize tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the operations, when it is on the skin where one can remove it, as we have said, are that you purge the patient once of black bile; then make him sanguine if he has manifest overfilling, then clean the skin well to prepare for the operation; then throw out the tumor or sore, and the hair from all parts, removing everything completely without leaving anything behind; let the blood flow freely, hold the skin firmly in your hand or with something, and if the bleeding is contrary to the incision of the artery or vein, cauterize until the blood is staunched; then treat with other remedies until he is healed.
de ydropisie	from dropsy
Nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’idropisie, et en queil maniere li assemblee de l’aigue est faite, et les signes de chescune semblance, et la cure qui est faite par medicines, et cele qui est curee par fer: si est eclites soulement; et ne doit on touchier de fer en ces II semblances: c’est a savoir, tympanites et yposarche, car c’est mortelz chose; donques quant tu medicines ceste semblance de ydropisie qui est apelee «eclites» de medicines, et li cure ne profite, si regarde se li malaides est foibles, ou s’il ait autre maladie que ydropisie, si com toust et solution de ventre et semblans choses; si n’i touchier de fer, car il i a doutance; et se tu vois le malaide de fort vertut, et il n’a autre maladie que ydropisie soulement, et il n’est mie trop jones ne trop vielz, si dois ensi ovrer: lieve le malaide droit sus tes mains, et li ministres presse le ventre em boutant l’aigue a la plus basse partie dou pis, puis pren le spatumile espinous selonc ceste forme:	We have already discussed the similitudes of dropsy, and how the assembly of the water is made, and the signs of each similitude, and the cure by medicines, and that which is cured by iron: they are only clarified; and one should not use iron in these two similitudes: namely, tympanites and yposarche, because they are deadly things; therefore when you medicate this similitude of dropsy called "eclites" by medicines, and the cure does not profit, see if the patient is weak or has another disease besides dropsy, such as immediate relief from the belly and similar things; then do not use iron, because there is doubt; and if you see the patient in good health, and he has only dropsy and is neither too thin nor too old, you should proceed thus: lift the patient upright on your hands, and the ministers press the abdomen pushing the water to the lowest part of the foot, then take the thorn spoon according to this form:
Et soit trenchans de II pars.	And let it be cut from two parts.
a pointe, et toutevoie ne soit mie si entrans qu’il puist venir jusc’a l’intestine quant on le fiche ens, et ne le puist blecier; puis regarde se li ydropisie est enjanree devers les intestines: si covient que tu fendes ensus de la boude III dois droit desoz sus lou poignil; et se li ydropisie est por la maladie dou foie, si soit ta fendure au senestre de la boude III dois; et se c’est por la miuce, si soit a destre, et ne covient mie que li malaides gise sus la fendure que les superfluitez ne corrent a celui foible leu; puis perce tout le cuir a l’estrument, et le boute, et lieve ta main a tout le spatumile entre le cuir et le syfac ausi com en escorchant a la quantiteit d’une ungle ou enqui entor; puis perce lou syfac tant que li spatumile viegne au leu vuit, et c’est li leus de l’aigue, puis le trai fuer, et i boute cest estrument de coi ci est li forme:	And let it be pointed, and in any case do not let it enter too deep that it might come to the intestines when inserted, and cannot be withdrawn; then look if the hydropsy is seated towards the intestines: so you must cut beneath the belly three cuts directly over the knife. And if the hydropsy is due to the disease of the liver, your incision should be on the left side of the belly three cuts; and if it is due to the spleen, on the right, and it is not fitting that the patient lie on the cut so that the excess fluids do not flow into that weak place. Then pierce all the skin with the instrument, and let out the fluid, and raise your hand away from all the spatumile between the skin and the syphac as in flaying to the quantity of a finger or nearly so; then pierce the syphac until the spatumile comes to the proper place, and these are the passages of the water, then drain it out, and this is the form of the instrument.
Et est semblans a une caine d’argent subtil, et est d’arain ou d’archaut legier, et a en la partie desoz I petit pertus; et ou costeit d’une part, III pertus; et II d’autre part, et I d’autre; et est li chiés tailliez si com une penne, et c’est li forme de l’incision dont li escrivains taille la penne:	And it is similar to a thin silver needle, made of light brass or iron, and placed under the part below the small hole; and on one side, three holes; two on the other side, and one on another; and the head is cut like a quill, and this is the shape of the incision that writers cut the quill:
au chief desus est li alemele, si que quant li estrumens vient a l’aigue, si dessent maintenant sus l’estrument; vuide la donques la moitiet ou la tierce part, car se tu en vuides plus qu’il ne covient en celle houre, par aventure si muert li malaides por la resolution de son esperit de l’arme, ou il chiet paumez, ou il aproche a la mort; mais en vuide selonc la quantiteit de sa vertut, et selonc ceu que les dispositions de la vertut dou malaide signifient, et ses poulz; puis trai l’estrument et retien l’aigue, et elle est retenue maintenant por le keur qui estoupe le pertus qui est sus le syfac, de coi j’ai parleit, que tu perces selonc ceste maniere; puis rencomence l’estrument l’autre jor, se tu vois le malaide soffrant ceu, et trai de l’aigue une petite quantiteit; fai ce aucun jor, et te garde de foloier tant qu’il ni demore mais c’un poc d’aigue.	Above the head is the alemele, so that when the instrument comes to the edge, it should be placed just above the instrument; then fill half or a third of it, for if you fill it more than necessary in that hour, by chance the patient may die from the resolution of his spirit by the weapon, or he falls senseless, or he approaches death; but fill according to the quantity of its virtue, and according to what the dispositions of the virtue of the patient indicate, and his pulse; then remove the instrument and hold the edge, and it is held now for the cair which stops the hole which is below the sypha, of which I have spoken, that you pierce in this manner; then reapply the instrument on another day, if you see the patient suffering as much, and draw a small quantity of fluid; do this any day, and take care not to follow it too long but only a little while.
Et se tu doutes sus le malaide, et tu i lais mout d’aigue, si le cure de la sepulture ou sablon chaut, et par mout sueir ou bain et au soleil, et se teigne de boivre; et le cure de medicines desiccatives tant qu’il soit sanez, et cauterize sus l’estomac et sus lou foie et sus l’esplen aprés l’estraction de l’aigue, si com j’ai dit devant.	And if you doubt about the patient, and there is much fluid, cure it with hot burial earth or sand, and by much sweating or bathing and in the sun, and make him drink; cure with medicines that are drying until he is healed, and cauterize on the stomach and on the liver and on the spleen after the extraction of the fluid, as I have said before.
de l’estopement de la verge	of the stopping up of the urethra
Aucune fois naissent enfant qui n’ont point de pertus en la verge, ou li pertus est petis, ou il n’est mie en son leu.	No child is born who does not have pores in the urethra, or where the pores are small, or are not in their proper place.
Si le covient tantost qu’il n’aist percier a tout I spatumile molt subtil selonc ceste forme:	If it is necessary to do so quickly before the very fine sperm has completely discharged according to this form:
puis met ou pertus I clo subtil de plonc, et le lie et le tien ensi III jors ou IIII et quant il vuet faire urine, si soit ostez li clos, et faice urine, et puis li remet; et par aventure nen i couvient point, car li urine qui vient fuer ne lou laisse close.	then place or perforate the inner side of the scrotum, and sew it up and keep it so for 3 days or 4, and when it is time to urinate, remove the stitches and allow urination, then put it back; and by chance it may not be necessary at all, as the urine that comes forth does not leave it closed.
Cil de cui li pertus est petis, si est medicinez dou clo de plonc, si com nos avons dit, si s’eslargera.	If the hole in the scrotum is small, it should be treated with a piece of flax, as we have said, and it will enlarge.
Cil qui n’ont mie le pertus en lor leu sont bleciet, car aucun naissent qui ont le pertus au chief de la verge, por coi il ne puient pissier avant s’il ne lievent lor verge en haut; et ne pueent enjanrer por ceu que li matiere ne puet venir jusc’a la marris, et c’est une male maladie.	Those who do not have the hole in its place are bleared, for none are born with the hole at the head of the penis, so they cannot urinate until they lift their penis up; and they cannot copulate because the matter cannot reach the urethra, and this is a bad disease.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, puies estent le chief de la verge et le cope ausi com la taille d’une penne, si ke li pertus chiece em mileu, si com il covient; et te garde de decorrement de sanc qui i vient maintes fois, et s’il avient, si l’estainche de ceu qui estainche sanc, et cure la plaie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the manner of the work is such that the patient lies often on his back, then the head of the verge and the cope are placed as wide as a pen's tail, so that the perforations close in the middle, as it should; and beware of the flow of blood which comes many times, and if it happens, stop the bleeding with what stops blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
des pustules de la verge	of the pustules of the verge
Maintes fois vienent cist albathe en la verge, et est une apparance de char laide; et en i a malignes et non malignes; si covient que tu les preignes a I oncine subtil, et les cope et munde toutes, puis met sus coton moilliet en oignement egiptien; puis le cure d’oignement diafinicon tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many times these pustules come in the verge, and they are an appearance of ugly flesh; and among them there are malignant and non-malignant; so you must treat them with a sharp knife, and cut and cleanse all, then place soft cotton soaked in Egyptian ointment; then treat with diafinicon ointment until it is healed.
Et se li albathe est maligne, de pute color et depuant, si covient que tu i amenistres cautere.	And if the ulcer is malignant, of putrid color and exuding, you must apply a cautery to it.
Quant tu l’as copeit, et se li albathe est en som la verge, et en ait partie dedens la peil et partie defuer, si covient que tu oste l’albathe qui est dedens premier; et quant il est soudez, si le cure defuer.	And when you have cut it out, and if the ulcer is in the groin, and has part inside the skin and part outside, you must first remove the ulcer that is inside; and when it is drawn together, treat the outside.
Car quant tu le cures ensamble, si n’est mie asseurez li chiez de la verge qu’il ne soit perciez, et vient noiror et corruption en son la verge et ou coion; si covient chever tout ceu qui est noir et corrumput, puis lie sus l’emplaustre de miel et de farine qui soit fait d’escorce de poumes grenates et de veces, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you treat it all together, the head of the groin is not assured so as to prevent perforation, and black corruption comes into the groin and wound; you must remove everything that is black and corrupted, then bind with a plaster made from the bark of pomegranate peels and lint, and continue to treat until it is healed.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient, si amenistre le cautere lunaire selonc ceste forme:	And if there is a bleeding episode, apply the lunar cautery according to this form:
Li cauteres si aide as II dispositions ensamble: c’est asavoir, au decorrement de sanc, et a la corruption; et se li chiés de la verge est corrumpus et retrais, si covient que tu boutes ou conduit de la verge une cainne de plonc, et pisse li malaides parmi; et quant li pelz iert aerse au chief de la verge qui avient a ces qui n’ont mie esteit circoncis, ou il avient por plaie ou por aposteme, si covient donques que tu l’escorches a I estrument cheveit, tant que li liiens soit desliiez, et soit delivrez li chiez de la verge de toutes pars; et se c’est grief chose de deviser ceu, si covient que tu l’escorches a I spatumile aucun poc dou chief de la verge et de la peil; puis dessevre belement entre II, et i met I subtil drapeil de lin moilliet an aigue froide, qu’il n’aerse derechief.	The cautery aids in two dispositions together: namely, in bleeding and in corruption; and if the head of the penis is corrupted and retracted, it is necessary to insert a probe of plonc into the penis and let the patient urinate through it; and when the hair is reversed at the head of the penis which happens to those who have not been circumcised, or where there is a wound or abscess, then it must be scalded with a cauterizing instrument until the ligaments are released, and the head of the penis is freed from all sides; and if this is a serious matter to discuss, then it must be scalded with a spatule slightly at the head of the penis and skin; then separate them well apart, and place a thin linen cloth moistened in cold water over them, so that they do not become revesed again.
de la circoncision	of the circumcision
Circoncision n’est mie desliemens de continuation si com les autres plaies; toutevoie quant nos faison ceste oevre de nostre volenteit, et proprement as enfans, si est mestier que nos faisiens la millor oevre, et la plus legiere a salut.	Circumcision is not the dislocation of continuity like other wounds; nevertheless, when we perform this work of our own will, and properly on infants, it is necessary that we do the best work and the most gentle for their health.
Je dis que li ancien ne dirent mie la circoncision de lor enfans, car il n’en usent mie en lor loi, et n’en avons mais que ceu que nos avons aquis par experiment.	I say that the ancients did not speak of circumcising their children, for they do not use it in their law, and we have no reason except what we have acquired through experience.
Car j’ai veut la plus grant partie des maistres et des sainors qui faisoient circumcision entor I dal, et as forces, et a tout une novacule; si fuioit li keurs car il i a II toiles, et par aventure si cope on celi desus et demore celle desoz.	For I have seen the majority of masters and practitioners who performed circumcision using a knife, forceps, and an entire pair of scissors; they found it difficult because there are two blades, and by chance one could cut the upper part and remain with the lower.
Or la recovient coper, et est li dolor double, et a la mundification qui est dou dal n’est mie asseuree li pointe dou membre; et a la mundification de l’ungle par aventure eschaipe li fer, et corront l’uevre, et maintes fois naissent ensi qu’il n’ont mestier de mundification et je l’ai veut.	Or the recovery is coped with, and the pain is doubled, and in the dressing which is from the palm, the points of the limb are not assured; and in the dressing of the nail by accident the iron escapes, and the work runs, and many times they arise thus without needing a dressing and I have wanted it.
De la mondification qui est faite as forces a tout le liien de fil ai je troveit la bonteit de l’experiment, car les forces taillent justement ausi bien desus com desoz.	Of the dressing which is done for the strength to all the thread of hair I have found the goodness of the experiment, for the strength cuts just as well above as below.
Car quant tu presses ta main, si tailles igalment en I tout soul tens; mais que li filz soit bien estrois entor lou cuir; et soit li maniere dou premier ovraige si est que tu faices penser l’enfant, s’il entent, que tu ne li fais fuer que liier le fil entor la verge tant soulement, et pues le fai esjoir en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis le fai ester entre tes mains tout droit, et repont les forces entre tes mains ou desoz tes piez que li enfes ne les voie, ne aucun des estrumens; puis boute ta main a la verge et souffle ou keur, et la trai en haut tant que li chiés de la verge soit ens; puis la mundifie bien de l’ordure qui i est assemblee, puis lie le leu signiet d’un fil double, puis la lie desoz I poc a I autre liien; et la tien as II dois par la seconde lieeure au pouchet et au doit indice, et cope entre les II liiens, puis lieve le keur desus hastanment et trai le chief de la verge; puis laisse corre le sanc poc et poc, car c’est li muedres; et met poudre sus et sus la poudre I drapeil glueit d’un moieuf d’uef cuit destempreit d’aigue rose, confit avec oile roset boin et fres, et lou laisse sus jusc’a l’autre jor, et le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	For when you press your hand, cut equally all along the whole thread; but that the hairs be well thin within the skin; and let the manner of the first work be such that you make the child think, if it hears, that you only tie the hair around the shaft merely, and let him hope in every way that you can; then place it straight between your hands, and put the forces under or over your feet that the child does not see, nor any of the instruments; then put your hand to the shaft and blow where you choose, and pull it up until the heads of the shaft are dry; then well dress from the ordure which is collected, then tie the part signet with a double thread, then tie under one by one the threads; and hold at two doigts by the second hour in pouchet and on the right index, and cope between the two threads, then lift the keur hastily and pull the head of the shaft; then let the blood run little by little, for it is the most important; and put powder above and above the powder a glued drapeil from half an egg cooked untimely in rose water, confited with rose-scented oil good and fresh, and leave it on until another day, and cure with other cure until it is healed.
Li forme des forces a la mundification si est ceste: li dui chiés soient tenves et soient trenchans, et soient li chiés ausi grant com li mainche igalment:	The form of the forceps for delivery is this: the two heads should be held and sharp, and the heads of the forceps should be as large as the fingers are equal.
li error de la mundification si est quant li keurs dedens fuit a l’incision; donques il covient que tu l’estendes a ton ungle, ainsois que li leus faice aposteme; et le cope igalment, et se tu ne lou pues tenir a ton ungle, si le tien as tenailles, et puis le cope.	The error in delivery is when the child within comes to an incision; therefore, you must stretch it with your finger, just as the fingers make an abscess; and keep it equal, and if you cannot hold it with your finger, hold it with forceps, and then stretch it.
Et s’il trespassent III jors, et ceu qui est desoz la verge est enflez, si le laisse tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et l’escorche legierement; si le cope si com tu pues mues, et te garde de la partie de la verge, ce ne li nuira niant.	And if it persists for three days, and that which is beneath the scrotum is swollen, let it be so until the abscesses have calmed, and gently cauterize it; handle it as you can move, and avoid the part of the scrotum, as it will not harm it.
Cure donques le leu de choses soudans plaie de poudre, que nos avons dit ou traitier des poudres, et s’on cope dou keur outre mesure, et il va au desus, si ne nuira point; cure le donques, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Treat therefore the shoulder of sudden wounds from powder, as we have said in treating powders, and if it swells beyond measure, it will not harm; treat it, as we have said, until it is healed.
dou retenement de l’urine	For the retention of urine
Li retenue de l’urine si est d’opilation de piere, ou de sanc congeleit, ou de bowe, ou de char nee, ou de semblans choses, que nos avons dit en la division; et se li urine n’est desliie , et tu vois estre la retenue por la piere qui est jai ou col de la vessie, si covient que li malaides soit corbés sus ses genoulz; et li soient mis li piez sor le dos, et estende son ventre de la partie desus lou dos, et restraigne li malaides s’alainne tant com il puet; et adonques est constrains li colz de la vessie a l’expression de la piere au desus, por coi li urine est desliie e; et s’elle ne vient, si com nos avons dit, et li malaides sent grant dolor, si covient que tu i aministres extraction a tout l’estrument qui est apelez «siringue», de coi ci est li forme: et soit d’argent subtilz legiere chevee, si com li penne d’un oiseil; et soit li caine d’une palme de lonc et demie, et soit subtilz au chief.	For the retention of urine, it is due to stone impaction, or congealed blood, or bowel, or new flesh, or similar things as we have said in the division. And if the urine is not relieved and you see the retention is due to a stone at the neck or opening of the bladder, then the patient should be positioned with their knees bent; place their feet on the back, and extend their abdomen above the back, and restrain the patient so they cannot move as much as possible. This will force the neck of the bladder to express the stone upwards, thereby relieving the urine retention; if it does not come, as we have said, and the patient feels great pain, then you should administer extraction using an instrument called a "syringe," which has this form: it is made of light, thin silver, like the feathers of an eye; its handle is one and a half palms long and very fine at the end.
Et li maniere de l’issue de l’urine si est que tu pren I fil double, et lie au chief I poc de laine ou de couton, et boute le chief dou fil dedens la siringue; et cope la superfluiteit de la lainne et le boute jusc’au chief de la siringue, puis oint la siringue d’oile ou de burre et d’aubin d’uef, et fai seoir le malaide sus I siege, et li arose la vessie et la verge d’oile moiste et d’oile d’olive et d’aigue tede; puis met legierement la siringue en la verge, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la verge, puis double la verge desus devers la boude; puis boute la siringue avant jusc’a la vessie, et la sente li malaides venir jusc’a la chose vuide, et ceu n’est mie fait selonc cest ordre fuer que por ceu que li conduis ou elle vait est tors; puis estent le fil a tout la laine poc et poc, et li urine en suit la laine, puis l’estrai fuer, et fai corre l’urine; et rencomence la siringue tant que li vessie soit vuidie, et soit aligiez li malaides.	And the manner of the issue of urine is that you take a double thread, and tie at the end a little wool or cotton, and insert the thread into the syringe; and clip the excess of the wool and fill it just to the tip of the syringe, then anoint the syringe with oil or butter and egg yolk, and place the patient on a seat, and he arouses the bladder and the penis with moistened oil and olive oil and water; then gently insert the syringe into the penis, until it comes to the root of the penis, then cover the penis above towards the mouth; then fill the syringe before just to the bladder, and let the patient feel urine coming up to the empty thing, and this is not done according to this order because what leads it there is crooked; then pull the thread all little by little, and urine follows the wool, then extract it out, and make flow the urine; and refill the syringe as long as the bladder is emptied, and bind the patient.
des maladies de la vessie	of the diseases of the bladder
Quant escorcheures ou sanc vient en la vessie, ou porriture i est assemblee, et tu i vues distiller aigues et medicines, si fai a tout l’estrument qui est apellé «clepsedre», et c’est li forme:	When burns or blood come into the bladder, or putrefaction is gathered there, and you see it discharge acidic fluids and medications, make use of the instrument called "clepsydra," and this is its form:
Elle est close, et si a III pertus: II d’une part, et I d’autre, si com tu vois; et li leus chevez par coi li medicine cort soit telz qu’il estoupe bien la verge sens adition, si c’on em puisse traire la moistor, et bouter quant mestier est; et quant tu vues giter tes medicines en la vessie, met le chief dou keusteur en la moistor, et trai au traiant qui est ens; si trairas la moistor au kesteur, et puis reboute fort le traiant ens; si entrera li moistors ens, et venra a la vessie maintenant, si que li malaides la sentira; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil dont on clisterize la vessie: si est ci:	It is closed, and has three holes: two on one side, and one on the other, as you can see; and the leashes are attached so that the medicines may be well retained by the verge upon application, allowing for the removal of moisture when necessary. And when you wish to administer your medicines into the bladder, place the head of the catheter in the moisture, and draw it gently through. By doing this, you will draw the moisture out with the catheter, and then firmly reinsert the catheter. The moisture will enter again and reach the bladder, allowing the patient to feel its effects; and this is the form of the subtle clyster used to treat the bladder: as shown here.
Et est d’argent ou d’archaut, et est li chiés plus haut; et desoz a I sein ou li liiens chiet; puis pren une vessie de mouton et i met la moistor dont tu vues clisterizer la vessie, puis la lie entre les II seins forment d’un boin fil double, et chaufe I poc celle moistor sus le feu; puis boute le chief dou clistere en la verge, puis estrain ta main sus la vessie a tout la moistor avenanment, tant que li malaides sente que celle moistor est jai venue a la vessie; et se tu n’as la vessie, si pren une piece de parchemin, et en fai I cercle, et le perce rondement entor; puis boute I fil fort en ces pertus, puis assemble le cercle si com on assemble I dal, et met dedens ceu que tu vues d’oile et de moistor et d’aigue, et le lie en l’estrument; et fai si com tu as fait de la vessie, de presser a ta main tant que li moistor veigne a la vessie.	And it is of silver or of silver alloy, and the head is higher; and below at the chest where the cords hang; then take a sheep's bladder and put the moisture you see to be able to soften the bladder, then tie between the two breasts forming a single double thread, and heat that part of the moisture over the fire; then insert the tip of the clyster into the vagina, then squeeze your hand on the bladder until all the moisture is applied appropriately, so that the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder; and if you do not have the bladder, take a piece of parchment, and make a circle, and pierce it roundly around; then insert the strong thread into these holes, then assemble the circle as one assembles a nail, and put inside what you want of oil and moisture and water, and tie it in the instrument; do so as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture comes to the bladder.
de la piere	from the stone
Nos avons jai dit en la division les manieres de piere, et l’estraction ensamble medicines; et ai dit la difference entre la piere enjanree as rains, et toz les signes, et en queil piere on doit ovrer de taille; et en la vessie, et en la verge; et je le vos dirai apertement et briément.	We have already discussed in the division the methods of stone, and their extraction together with medicines; and we have said the difference between a strangled stone and all the signs, and in which stone one should operate by size; and in the bladder, and in the penis; and I will tell you plainly and briefly.
Je dis que li piere qui est enjanree en la vessie si avient plus sovent as enfans, et c’est signe que li aigue saut de la vessie semblans a aigue en sa subtiliteit; et i apert harene, et graite li malaides sa verge, et li pent maintes fois, et puis enroidist; et a mout de ces saut li fondemens; et est legiere li sanation des enfans jusqu’il ont IIII ans, et est mout grief en viellars, et est as jones moiene, a ces qui sont entre jonesce et viellece; et est li cure plus legiere de ces qui ont la piere grans, que de ces qui l’ont petite.	I say that the stone which is strangled in the bladder happens more often to children, and this is a sign that the urine has jumped from the bladder seeming like urine in its subtlety; and it clearly harms the child's penis, and pierces many times, and then hardens; and most of these jumps are dangerous; and the cure is light for children until they are four years old, and is much more serious in older people, and is medium for those between childhood and old age; and the treatment is lighter for those who have a large stone than for those who have a small one.
Et quant nos venons a la cure, si couvient premier mundifier le malaide per clistere, por traire tout le fiens qui est as intestines.	And when we come to treatment, it is necessary first to purify the patient with enemas, to remove all the filth from the intestines.
Car il encombre aucune fois a querir la piere.	For it obstructs at times in seeking the stone.
Puis prenez le malaide par les piez, et lou deboutez et movez au desoz, si que li piere dessende au parfont de la vessie, et saille aucune fois dou leu haut; puis le fai seoir entre tes mains appareilliet, et ses mains soient desoz ses cuisses, si que li vessie soit toute declinans aval; puis la quier et la touche dedens; se tu sens la piere en l’espaice, si te haste maintenant de taillier sus la piere.	Then take the patient by the feet, and draw them out and move them into place so that the stone descends to the bottom of the bladder and passes out through the urethra; then have the patient sit between your prepared hands, and their hands be beneath their thighs, so that the bladder hangs entirely downward; then wait and touch it from within; if you feel the stone in the space, hasten now to incise over the stone.
Et s’elle ne chiet au touchier dou tout, si moille ton doi indice d’oile de la main senestre, se li malaides est enfes, ou ton doi moien, se li malaides est jovencelz acomplis; et le boute en son fondement, et quier la piere, et quant tu la sens a ton doi, si l’amoine au col de la vessie; puis presse sus a ton doi, et la boute au defuer lai ou tu vues taillier.	And if it does not fall at the touch from top to bottom, soften your index finger of your left hand, if the patient is feeble, or your middle finger, if the patient is a young adult; place your hand on its base, wait and feel for the stone with your finger; when you sense it on your finger, moil around the neck of the bladder; then press above your finger and incise at the point where you see fit to cut.
Et comande au ministre qu’il presse la vessie a sa main, et li comande qu’il estende a sa main destre les coions en haut, et a sa main senestre oste le cuir qui est desoz les coions en la partie ou on fait la taille; puis i boute le spatumile copant, de coi ce est li forme:	And instruct the minister to press the bladder with his hand, and command him to extend his right hand upwards, and remove the skin that is beneath the nails in the part where the incision is made; then pour in the mixture cutting, of which this is its form:
Et fent entre ceu qui est entre les coions et le fondement, ne mie em mileu mais au costeit de la naige senestre; et soit drois sus la piere, et tes dois soit adés ou fondement, et soit li taille dou traver si qu’ele soit large par defuer, et dedens estroite, selonc la quantiteit de la piere, ne mie trop grans; par aventure la presse si li dois qui est ou fondement, qu’elle saut fuer sens travail; et saiches qu’il i a teil piere ou il a angles, et marges: si est griés a issir; et si a teil qui est souez, semblans a une glant, et reonde, dont li issue est legiere.	And cut between what is between the nails and the fundament, not exactly in the middle but on the side of the left thumb; and be straight above the stone, and your two hands should be close to or on the fundament, and make the incision so that it is wide at the back and narrow inside, according to the size of the stone, not too large; perhaps the pressure will cause the hand near the fundament to burst without effort. Know that there are stones with angles and edges: they are easier to remove; and there are others that are underneath, resembling a glans and round, from which the release is gentle.
A celi donques ou il a angles et marge, fai la taille plus grant; et s’elle ne saut, si covient que tu estraignes sus as tenailles qui sont ausi com une lime au chief, por mues estraindre la piere si qu’elle n’eschaipe; ou tu boute desoz li I estrument subtil corbé au chief; et se tu ne la pues engignier ensi, si eslarge I poc lou pertus, et se li sans decort, si l’estrainche de vitriole; et s’il i a plus d’une piere, si boute premier la plus grant au col de la vessie, puis cope sus, puis le trai fuer, et les petites aprés s’il en i a plusors.	For those who have angles and margin, make the size greater; and if it does not pass, you must grip with tongs that are like a file at the head, to move and extract the stone so that it does not escape; or you put under the instrument a subtle curved blade at the head; and if you cannot manipulate thus, you enlarge the hole slightly, and if the skin is undamaged, you extract it with vitriol; and if there are more than one stone, you put the larger one first in the neck of the bladder, then cover up, then pull hard, and the smaller ones afterwards if there are more.
Et s’elle est mout grans, si la covient soier, et faire plus grant plaie.	And if it is much larger, you must sew it up, and make a greater wound.
Car II choses avienent au malaide: ou il muert, ou li urine vient adés par lai que li leus ne puet souder; mais toutevoie t’efforce dou traire, ou dou debrisier as tenailles, tant que tu la traies par pieces; et quant tu as acomplit ton oevre, si emple la plaie d’encens et d’aloe et de sanc de dragon, et l’estraint, et met par sus I drapeil moilliet en oile et en vin, ou en oile et en aigue rose et aigue froide, por apaisier l’aposteme chaut; puis resovine le malaide sus son col, et ne desliier lou lien jusc’au tier jor.	For two things happen to the patient: either he dies, or urine comes out through it so that the legs cannot be sewn up; but nevertheless strive to treat it, or to cut with tongs, as long as you remove it piece by piece. When you have completed your work, fill the wound with incense and aloes and dragon's blood, bind it, and place a wet cloth over it in oil and wine, or in oil and rose water and cold water, to cool the abscess; then restitch the patient on his side, and do not untie the bandage for three days.
Et quant tu le desliies, si arose mout bien lou leu d’oile et d’aigue, puis le cure d’oignement dyafinicon et d’oignement basilicon, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you dislocate it, raise much well the head of the oil and water, then treat with the ointment defninicon and ointment basilicon until it is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient en la plaie et corrosions, et congelemens de sanc en la vessie, et soit par ceu retenue li urine, qui est conue en teil maniere que sans saut avec l’urine: boutes donques ton doi en la plaie, et estrai celui sanc, car s’il i remaint, si corront la vessie, et la porrit; puis leve la plaie d’aigue et d’aisil et de seil, et li aide en toutes les manieres que tu seis, tant qu’il soit sanez; et covient que toutes les oures que tu le cures, que tu li lie les II cuisses, et assemble les medicines sus le leu.	And if abscesses and corrosions in the wound, and clots of blood in the bladder, and so are retained by urine, which is known to pass without jumping with the urine: then pour thy thumb into the wound, and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will rot the bladder; then wash the wound with oil, alum, and salt, and aid it in all ways you see until it is healed; and it is necessary that all ointments you treat it with, thou bind the two thighs, and apply the medicines to the head.
Et se li piere est petite, et ele est ou conduit de la verge, et fichie ens, et li urine ne puet issir; si le cure de ceu que je dis ainsois, que tu lou tailles maintes fois, est on escusez de la taille per ceste cure.	And if the stone is small, and it is lodged in the passage of the penis, and urine cannot pass; then you should cut as I said before, but an excuse can be made for this cutting due to the cure.
Je ai ja ce proveit ensi.	I have proved this thus.
Pren I foret de fer selonc ceste forme et soit a III angles fichiees en I tison:	Take I iron fork according to this form and fix it in the coal:
puis pren I fil et lou lie entor la verge desoz la piere, si qu’ele ne puist venir arrier en la vessie; puis boute le foret en la verge legierement, tant qu’il viegne a la piere; et torne le foret a ta main en la piere poc et poc, tant que tu puisses percier la piere d’autre part; si venra tantost li urine, puis presse ta main sus ceu qui est demorez de la piere qui est dedens la verge.	then take the thread and tie it around the penis over the stone, so that it cannot move back into the bladder; then insert the fork gently into the penis until it reaches the stone; and turn the fork in the stone little by little, as much as you can pierce the stone from another side; then urine will come soon, then press your hand on what remains of the stone inside the penis.
Si est tantost brisie, et saut fuer avec l’urine, et est garis li malaides; et se tu ne pues ce faire por aucune chose qui le deffent, si lie I fil desoz la piere et I autre desus, puis fent la verge endroit la piere entre les II liiens, puis l’estrai fuer, et deslie lou liien, et mundifie lou sanc congeleit qui est en la plaie; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is soon broken, and then jumps with urine, the patient recovers. And if you cannot do this for any reason, tie a thread under the stone and another above, then place the rod at the stone between the two threads, extract the stone, untie one thread, and cleanse the congealed blood in the wound; and cure it until it is healed.
de la piere des femmes	from the stone of women
Poc avient que piere soit enjanree en femmes, et s’il avient aucune fois, si est li cure grief, et est deffendut por III choses: l’une est que per aventure li femme est vierge; et li seconde est c’on ne puet trover femme bien saichant qui se descuevre as mires, meismement quant elle est caste.	Often it happens that a stone forms in women, and if this happens even once, the wound must be cured gently, and is forbidden for three reasons: the first is that perhaps the woman is a virgin; and the second is that one cannot find a well-informed woman who can safely disclose herself to examination, especially when she is pregnant.
Et li tierce maniere si est que par aventure on ne puet trover femme bien saichant en cest art de mains; et li quarte maniere si est que li piere de la femme si est plus em parfont que li piere de l’ome, por coi il i couvient faire plus parfonde taille, et grant paour i a. Et se necessitez semont a ceu, si covient que tu preignes une mieresse bien sachant, et a poines la trueve on, et se tu n’en trueves, point si quier I caste mire subtil; et li presente une baile bien saige en la vie des femmes, ou une femme qui saiche une partie de l’art, et li comande qu’ele faice ceu que tu li comandes de l’inquisicion de la piere; et regarde mout bien se li femme est vierge: adonques li covient bouter son doit ou fondement et querir la piere; et s’ele la trueve, si la constraigne desoz son doit, et li recomande qu’elle boute son doit ou con la malaide, et quiere et presse sa main senestre sus la vessie forment.	And the third manner is that by chance one cannot find a woman skilled in this art; and the fourth manner is that the woman's opening is more tightly shut than a man's, for which reason it requires a deeper incision, and great fear arises. And if necessity demands this of those, you must seek a midwife well knowing, and at points thereof find one; and if you cannot find her, you should consult a skilled surgeon; and present to the woman a guide in the lives of women, or a woman who knows part of the art, and command her to do what you command concerning the inquiry of the stone; and carefully observe whether the woman is a virgin: then she must place her finger or foundation under her and seek the stone; and if she finds it, you should force her to hold fast with her finger or under the sick one, and press and squeeze her left hand on the bladder firmly.
S’elle la trueve, si covient qu’elle la mueve de greit en greit des l’entree de la vessie jusque desoz, tant qu’elle viegne a la racine de la cuisse; puis cope sus la piere en la racine de la cuisse encontre le mileu dou con, lai ou il est mues apparilliet, et sent la piere en celle partie; et ne mueve son doi desus la piere ou desoz, et soit li taille au premier petite; puis boute lou rait en la taille, se tu sens la piere si acroi la plaie tant que li piere puisse issir fuer, et saiches que maintes manieres de pieres sont: c’est a savoir, petites et grans et aspres et souez, longes et reondes, et qui ont rains.	If she finds it, she must move it greatly from the entrance of the bladder until below, until she comes to the root of the thigh; then cut on the stone at the root of the thigh against the middle of the groin, and let what is ready appear in that part; and do not move your hand over or under the stone, and make the cut first small; then put the rag into the incision, if you feel the stone increase the wound as much as the stone can issue forth, and know that there are many kinds of stones: namely, small and large, rough and smooth, long and round, and those with grooves.
si saiches les semblances por savoir l’issue.	if you know the signs to know the issue.
Et se li sans te vaint, si met au leu vitriole broiet, et li tien une houre tant que li sans soit estainchiez; puis revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer, et aies des estrumens que je t’ai dit en l’estraction de la piere as homes por toi aidier en ton oevre; et se li sans te vaint, et c’est de l’artere qui est copee, si met la poudre sus le leu et l’estrain de tentes et de bendelz, et ne rencomencier plus ceu, et laisse la piere et ne la traire mie, que par aventure morroit li malaide; puis cure la plaie.	And if the stone passes, put vitriol on it, and hold it for an hour until the stone is discharged; then return to your work until the stone is passed, and have the instruments I told you about in the extraction of stones for help in your work; and if the stone passes, and it is the artery that has been cut, put powder on it with hemlock and bindworts, and do not repeat this, and leave the stone undisturbed, lest by chance the patient die; then treat the wound.
Et quant li chalor dou sanc est apaisie, et li leus porrist, si revien a ton ovraige, tant que li piere soit fuer.	And when the heat of the blood is pacified, and the swelling permits, then return to your work, until the stone is cured.
de hernie carnouse	of fatty hernia
Ramice aquouse n’est autre chose que assemblee de moistor ou blanc syfac, qui est desoz lou keur des coions, que contient l’uef; et est apelez «syfac», et aucune fois est proprement en la toile de l’uef, si c’on cuide que ce soit I autre oef; et c’est li cuir dou coion entre lou blanc syfac que nos avons dit; et ceu n’avient se poc non.	Aqueous humor is nothing but a collection of moisture or white fluid, which is beneath the heart of the eyeball that contains the egg [eye]; and it is called "syphac," and sometimes properly in the membrane of the eye, if one thinks it is another egg. And it is the skin of the eyeball between the white syphac fluid as we have said; and this does not happen often.
Et li generation de cest ramice si est de foibleteit que vient as coions, et est espandue celle matiere.	And the generation of this humor arises from weakness that comes to the eyeballs, and this substance is diffused.
Et aucune fois si vient de percussion sus les coions, et ceste moistor si a maintes colors: ou c’est color declinans a jaunice, ou c’est sans rouge, ou noir, ou aquous blans, et ce avient plus; et ce sont li signe de conoistre ceste assemblee, car s’elle est ou blanc syfac que nos avons dit, si est li apostemes reons, I poc lonc si com li figure d’un oef, et n’apert mie li coions, car il a moistor tout entor.	And sometimes it comes from percussion on the joints, and this moisture has many colors: or it is a color declining to jaundice, or it is without red, or black, or watery white, and this happens more; and these are the signs to know this assembly, for if it is or whitish as we have said, it is an abscess ripe, not long as the figure of an egg, and does not open the joints, for it has moisture throughout.
Et s’il a moistor en la propre toile, si est li apostemes reons avec une partie de l’uef, et por ceu pense on que c’est uns autres oef; et se li moistor est entre le cuir des coions et le blanc syfac, si le sent om bien; donques quant tu vues savoir la color de la moistor, si esprueve a tout l’intromissoire quarreit, de coi li forme est ci devant.	And if it has moisture in the proper lining, it is an abscess ripe with part of the egg, and because of this, one thinks it is another egg; and if the moisture is between the skin of the joints and the whitish, you sense it well; therefore, when you want to know the color of the moisture, you prove it through the entire intervening square, of which the form was described earlier.
Selonc ceu donques qui vient aprés l’intromissoire, juge de ceu qui est dedens.	According to what comes after the introductory part, judge of what is within.
Et quant nos la curons par fer, si covient que li malaides soit sainiez selonc som pooir et la repletion de son cors; puis le sovine sus son dos, sus une chose un poc haute, et met desoz lui mout de drapelz; puis sié sus sa senestre, et comande au ministre qu’il sié a destre, et estende la verge a l’un des II costelz dou keur des coions; puis pren le spatumile leit, et cope le cuir des coions parmi leu dou lonc jusque delez lou poignil, et soit ta fendure toute droite en devisant le cuir des coions jusc’a syfac blanc, et l’escorche subtilment selonc tom pooir; puis perce lou syfac plain d’aigue a I large pertus, et estrai toute l’aigue, et puis met tes oncines, et estent lou syfac amont; et ne touchier le keur des coions, mais que le syfac soulement; cope tout ou par pieces meismement le costeit de lui subtil, que se tu ne le copes bien saigement, si revenra li aigue; et se l’uef saut fuer a ton oevre, si le ramoinne en son leu quant tu avras acomplit l’uevre dou syfac; puis assemble les II leivres dou keur des coions a une costure, puis le cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when we cauterize with iron, the patient must be anesthetized according to our power and the fullness of his body; then place the sponge on his back, on a spot slightly high, and put a lot of lint over it; sit on his left side, and instruct the minister to sit on the right, extending the staff to one of the two ribs of the heart; then take the cauterizing iron, burn the skin between them long until near the knife, and make sure the cut is straight by dividing the heart's skin up to a white seam, and gently sear it according to your power; then pierce the white seam fully with water through large openings, and drain all the water out, then put in your needles, and raise the white seam upward; do not touch the heart of the ribs, but only the white seam; cut completely or in pieces the rib's edge precisely thin, for if you do not cut it well deeply, the water will return; and if the egg was spoiled during your work, reset it in its place when you have completed the work of the white seam; then join the two flaps of the heart of the ribs with a stitch, and cure it as other wounds until it is healed.
Et se tu trueves l’uef corromput d’autre maladie, si covient que tu lies les vasselz que sont suspensoire, en doutant le decorrement de sanc; puis cope le coion a tout le suspensoire, et estrai l’uef, et le cure si com nos avons dit.	And if you find the egg corrupted by another disease, it must be that you bind the vessels that are suspensive, doubting the bleeding; then scrape the yolk throughout the suspensive part, and extract the egg, and cleanse it as we have said.
Et se aigue est assemblee en II parties ensamble, saiches que ce sont II ramices; si cope l’autre partie si com tu as fait la premiere igalment, puis essue lou sanc, et met en la plaie lainne moillie en oile roset; et met defuer autre laine moillie en vin et en oile, et met sus les II coions, et met desus drapelz doublés, et le lie sus a tout le liien qui est selonc ceste forme:	And if the fluid is collected in two parts assembled, know that these are two branches; then scrape the other part as you have done the first equally, and wipe away the blood, and put in the wound moistened wool in rose oil; and place another moistened wool in wine and oil, and put between the two yolks, and place above folded cloth, and bind it over everything according to this form.
Puis pren II drapelz, et les emple de laine charpie selonc ceste semblance et soient assemblez par cousture en la gorle des braies, et li uns des chiés preigne sus le fondement jusc’au dos, et li autres a la partie dou poignil; et li autre dui chief sus les II angres, et soit toute assemblee li restreinture en la boucle dou braier; et aucune fois est medicinee ceste ramice de cautere en leu de taille de fer, et est que tu preignes I cautere cultellaire subtil, et cope le cuir des coions, et soit eschaufez si com nos avons dit, si que li syfac blanc que contient l’aigue est descovers; si pren lou cautere selonc ceste forme, et perce celui syfac as oncines, et l’escorche a cest subtil cautere chaut:	Then take two cloths, and bind them with strips of torn wool according to this likeness, stitching them in the waistband of the breeches. One shoulder is placed down to the fundament just to the back, and the other to the part of the thigh; and the other two corners over the two angles, and be entirely stitched together at the loop of the breeches; and once this branch is medicated with a fire cautery instead of an iron knife, it should be that you bind the cautery with a sharp small blade, and scrape the skin of the yolks, and heat them as we have said, so that the white syrup containing the fluid is revealed; then take the cautery according to this form, and pierce that yolk at the pricking points, and scorch it with this sharp hot cautery.
Et lou cope en toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que tu esraiches tout; et garde que li feus ne touche l’uef; et saiches que ceste oevre est plus salve; et mues gardans de decorrement de sanc, et muedres que li ovraiges de taille; et se nulle chose te fait contraire, ou aposteme chaus ou decorremens de sanc ou autre chose, si cure ce qui te fait contraire, selonc ceu qui est devant dit.	And the cloth in all manners that you can, until you dry it all; and keep that the fire does not touch the egg; and know that this work is more holy; and move guards against flow of blood, and make sure incisions are clean; and if nothing else causes contrary effect, or abscess forms or blood flow or other thing, so cure what causes contrary effect, according to what was said before.
Et se li malaides est paourous, et ne vuet atendre cest ovraige por son horribleteit, si amenistre perforation, si com je te di, et est que quant tu es bien certains par les significations que nos avons dit que ramice aquouse est lai, si fai seoir le malaide sus I siege leveit; pues perce l’aposteme an la partie desoz a tout le spatumile large, et met la perforation dou lonc dou cors; et soit larges li pertus, si que toute li aigue corre fuer; puis met coton sus le leu, et le lie, et laisse por corre le remenant de l’aigue, puis le cure tant que li plaie soit sanee; et se li blainche toile ne laisse issir l’aigue en la bouche de la plaie, si covient que tu i boutes une penne ou l’estrument dont on trait l’aigue des ydropiques, de coi li forme est ci devant; et eslarge I poc la plaie, et saiches que li aigue revient, et est assemblee aprés VI mois ou enqui entor, et quant elle est assemblee si com devant, et ensi passera li malaides ses jors.	And if the patient is fearful and does not wish to wait for this work because of its horror, then perform perforation as I have told you. This is when you are certain by the signs we have said that a watery abscess is present, so make the patient sit on a raised seat; then pierce the abscess from beneath at the part underneath all the way to the large spatumile, and place the perforation along the length of the body. Make the openings wide enough for all the fluid to flow out. Then place cotton over the opening and bind it, allowing the remaining fluid to drain, and continue to treat the wound until it heals. If the white cloth does not allow the fluid to escape through the hole in the wound, then you must insert a pen or the instrument used to drain fluid from dropsy patients, as described before. Widen the opening of the wound, and know that the fluid will return and gather after about six months or so, and when it has gathered as described before, then the patient's days will pass in this manner.
de l’aposteme des coions	from the abscess at the joints
Saiches que en la section de ceste ramice a paor em plusors dispositions, por coi il me semble que mues vaut c’on la laisse; et je vos dirai l’ovraige et les semblances de l’aposteme.	In this section of the branch there is fear in many dispositions, which is why it seems to me that we should leave it as it is; and I will tell you the work and similar things of the abscess.
Je dis donques que maint aposteme vienent ou cors, et meismement as coions; et c’est par mout de cas.	I say then that many abscesses come from flesh, and especially at joints; and it is by much chance.
C’est a savoir par superfluiteit aigre et ague, qui est espandue as coions, ou de percussion; et est li color de l’aposteme selonc la color dou cors; et ne trueve point de dolor, et est aposteme grief; et par aventure est uns apostemes griés paourous et pierous, et de fuxe color, et aucune fois vient de nout d’artere, ou d’enfleure de voine.	It is to say that they come from bitter and acrid superfluity spread at the joints, or by percussion; and the color of the abscess depends on the color of the flesh; and it does not find any pain, and it is a grievous abscess; and by chance it may be a painful and stony abscess with a flowing color, and sometimes comes from a vein or swelling of a vein.
Quant c’est par nout d’artere, si est conus par la disposition d’aposteme chaut, quant tu la presses a tes dois; et ne covient mie que tu i touches.	When it is from an artery, it is known by the arrangement of the hot abscess, when you press it with your thumb and fingers; and you should not touch it.
Cil qui est fais d’enfleure de voine est conus par sa disposition a l’expression dou touchement des dois, et puet om bien faire la taille sus ceste semblance, et sus les autres chars; et est que tu cope lou keur des coions, puis estent l’uef en haut, et le trai fuer dou blanc syfac, et delivre lou suspensoire de toutes pars de l’uef.	Who is made of venous swelling is known by its arrangement at the expression from pressing with the thumb and fingers, and can well be cut from this appearance and from other marks; and you peel the core of the lump, then the yolk is on top, and the force of the white is soft, and deliver the suspender from all sides of the yolk.
Se li uef est ja sodez avec ces chars nees, si covient donques que tu traies l’uef, et lou cope; et s’il est aers au syfac, ou en ceu qui est dedens les vasselz, si covient que tu delivre toute celle tenve, et la cope reondement.	If the yolk is already firm with these marks, then you must incise the yolk and peel it; and if it is airy at the soft part or within the vessels, then you must remove all that is tender, and peel the core roundly.
Et se li naissance de la char est ou leu derrier, si covient que tu la copes toute, et estrai l’uef, si com nous avons dit.	And if the birthplace of the flesh is rotten behind, it must be cut out entirely, and extract the egg, as we have said.
Et quant tes ovraiges est acomplis, si emple la plaie de laine moillie en oile roset et en vin, puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when your work is accomplished, dress the wound with moistened wool in rose oil and wine, then treat it with other salves until it heals.
de l’aposteme des coions	of the abscess of the groin
Cis est uns apostemes envoloupez d’un envoloupement semblant a I borjon, avec le mollifiement des coions, et se muet li malaides griement quant il vait; et li cure de ceste maladie si est bien pres ausi paourouse com ceste ci devant, et toutevoie nos vos dirons l’ovraige de li, selonc ceu que li ancien firent.	This is an abscess wrapped in a wrapping resembling a gourd, with the groin area softened. The patient will experience pain as it changes; and the treatment for this illness should be well applied like the one mentioned earlier. We will describe the work of these treatments according to what the ancients did.
Il covient que tu faices seoir lou malaide sus I siege aleveit, puis li boute le suspensoire des coions aval a tes dois, a tout le vasseil qui sont prochien a la verge, et les teigne li maistres, et les estende forment; puis cope au spatumile trenchant large dou traver endroit les vasselz, tant qu’il soient descovert, et puis escorche de chescune part, si com nos avons dit en l’estraction des arteres qui sont en temples; puis i fiche une aguille ou il ait I fil double, et le lie au premier leu ou li vis est venue, et le lie derechief a l’autre chief; puis les cope em mileu droitement, selonc la longesce dou cors, et en trai les moistors corrumpues; puis cure la plaie si com les autres ou on enjanre bowe, si que aucun vassel chiecent que norrissent l’un des coions; car par ceu n’i vient point de mal, et se a toz les vasselz vient vis, si covient traire les coions a tout les vasselz; si que li oes ne perde son norrissement por l’incision des vasselz, et sechent et ne se puient aidier.	It must be that you place the patient on an elevated seat, then apply the suspensory ligament below the hips to your thighs, covering all the vessels near the groin, and you must master the technique, stretching them fully; then cut along a sharp spatulum through the vessels, until they are exposed, and then scrape from each side as we have said in the extraction of arteries in temples; then insert an awl with double thread, attaching it to the first spot where the vein has come out, and again attach it to another end; then cover centrally straight according to the length of the body, removing corrupted moisture; then treat the wound as for other cases where there is a large opening, ensuring no vessels that nourish one of the hips are severed; because from this no harm comes, but if it happens at all the veins have the same condition, then you must remove the hip at all vessels; so that the eye does not lose its nourishment due to incision of the vessels, drying out and unable to be helped.
de la routure dou syfac	of the rupture of the seam
Li avenemens de ceste ramice si est par la section que vient ou syfac, ou l’estension sus le ventre en la partie des angres, por coi li intestine dessendent de celle routure a l’un des coions; et ceste routure est ou dou syfac, ou de l’estension de li, et vienent ces II manieres de mout de causes: ou de percussion, ou de saut, ou de braire, ou de levement de grief faix, et par semblans choses; et li signes quant c’est de l’estension dou syfac, si est qu’il avient poc et poc, en lonc tens, et ne vient mie soudainnement; et est li apostemes igalz jusque vers le parfont, por ceu que li syfac apresse l’intestine.	The events of this ramification are by section that comes from the rupture of the seam, or the extension on the belly in the part of the inguinal region, for which reason the intestines descend through that rupture to one of the iliacs; and this rupture is either of the seam or due to its extension, and come in these two manners of causes: by percussion, or jumping, or shouting, or lifting a heavy burden, and similar things; and the signs when it is due to the extension of the seam are that it happens little by little, over a long period of time, and does not come suddenly; and the abscesses are equal until near the perineum, for the seam presses on the intestines.
Et li signes est quant c’est de la section dou syfac, qu’elle fait venir a l’encomencement dolor soudaine, et est li apostemes divers apparans, desoz le cuir pres, et c’est por l’issue de l’intestine et le cors au defuer dou syfac.	The signs are when it is due to the section of the seam, which causes a sudden onset of pain, and the abscesses appear varied and beneath the skin, for the release of the intestines and the core outside the seam.
Et aucune fois dessent li cirbes avec l’intestine, et est retenus enqui, et fait grant dolor soffrir au malaide, meismement quant il est pressez.	And sometimes with the circle [of the wound] around the intestine, it is retained in question, and causes great pain to the patient, especially when it is pressed.
Et en ces cures de fer a paor, por coi il s’en covient eschuir.	And in these treatments with iron, for which it is advisable to avoid.
Et li maniere de l’ovraige si est que tu comande ou malaide qu’il ramoine l’intestine a sa main au dedens en la plaie, s’il i puet rentreir; puis soit sovinez sus son col. entre tes mains, et lieve les cuixes; puis estent le keur au desus, et cope tout le cuir des coions dou lonc; puis boute dedens les leivres de la taille uncines selonc ceu que tu en as mestier por ovrir la plaie, et soit telz que li oes em puist issir; puis escorche lou syfac que est desoz lou cuir des coions, tant que li blans syfac dur soit descovers de toutes pars; puis boute ton doi indice en ceu qui enseut lou coion, en ceu qui est entre lou blanc syfac qui est desoz lou cuir de l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac, et depart ceu qui est derrier l’uef, et entre lou secont syfac; et pues muef a la main destre dedens lou keur des coions, et estent lou blanc syfac en haut a ta main senestre, et lieve l’uef a tout lou syfac devers la taille; et comande au ministre qu’il estende l’uef en haut, et deslie ceu qui est aers derrier le liement; et quier a tes dois s’il a point de l’intestine envoloupeit ou blanc syfac dur, et se tu en trueves aucune chose, si le boute au ventre desoz; puis pren une aguille ou il ait I gros fil fait de X filz, et la boute en la derriere partie dou syfac, qui est aprés lou cuir des coions; aprés la taille, puis cope les chiés qui apperent des filz, tant qu’il i ait IIII filz; puis les assemble l’un sus l’autre en maniere de croix, et en lie lou syfac, dont nos avons dit qui est desoz lou cuir des coions, d’un fort liien de II pars; puis envoloupe les chiés des filz, et les lie forment de II pars, si que nuls des vasselz que les norrissent ne puissent entrer en ous, que aposteme chaus n’i viegne; et met derechief le liien selonc le premier liien lonc II dois de celui, et aprés ces II liiens laisse dou syfac qui est desoz lou keur des coions le grant d’un doi; et aprés tout l’autre selonc la rondesce que li euf porte; puis cope en la partie qui est desoz le cuir des coions, tant qui li sans corre, et li bowe, si com nos avons dit ci devant; puis amenistre laine moillie en oile, et met em plaies, et i amenistre le liien que nos avons dit.	And the manner of this treatment is that you command the patient to remove the intestine with his hand inside the wound if it can enter; then anoint around his neck and lift his legs; then place the keur above, and cut all the skin from the long length; then insert the leaves of the taille uncines according to what you need to open the wound, making sure they are such that the oes can issue forth; then scrape the surface beneath the skin of the keur until the white surface is uncovered on all sides; then place your index finger where the keion should be, between the white surface which is under the skin of the egg, and between the second surface, and depart what is behind the egg, and between the second surface; and then move the hand with the keur of coions with your right hand, and bring the white surface up to your left hand, and lift the egg towards the entire surface of the syfac towards the taille; and command the minister to extend the egg upwards, and release what is behind the ligament; and keep your fingers quiet if there is any part of the intestine enveloped or hard white surface, and if you find anything, place it in the belly under the skin; then take a needle with a thick thread made of ten strands, and insert it into the rear part of the syfac, which is after the skin of the keur; after the taille, then cut the heads that appear from the threads until there are four strands; then assemble them one over the other in the shape of a cross, and fix the syfac where we said it was under the skin of the keur with a strong thread of two fingers' length; then cover the heads of the threads, and fix them firmly with two fingers, so that no vessel that nourishes them can enter into them, and the abscess may not come back; and put the thread again according to the first long thread for two fingers, and after these two threads leave from the syfac under the keur of coions the size of a finger; and then cut the rest according to the roundness that the egg carries; then cover in the part that is under the skin of the coions until it does not corrode or rot as we said before; then apply moistened wool, and put it on the wounds, and apply the thread as we said.
Et aucune fois est cauterizez li blans syfac que nos avons dit, aprés l’incision, par doutance de decorrement de sanc.	And sometimes the whites of the eyes are cauterized after the incision, out of doubt about bleeding.
Car ce avient maintes fois, et laisse le liien tant qu’il chiece per lui; et s’il tarde au cheoir, si soit arosez d’aigue chaude, et met sus ceu que nos avons dit, tant qu’il chiece; puis cure la plaie d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez parfaitement.	For this happens many times, and leave the thread until it falls on its own; and if it delays in falling, then soak it in hot water, and put on what we have said, until it falls; then treat the wound with another dressing until it is healed perfectly.
de hernie carnouse	of hernia carnosa
En ceste ramice ne vis je onques nul qui osast faire la cure par fer.	In this branch I have never seen anyone dare to perform the treatment with iron.
Et li ancien dirent qu’ele est faite si com li ramice qui est ensamble la vis, en teil maniere que tu lie les vasselz, aprés la taille sus ous legierement au desoz; puis cope em mi, et cure l’aposteme de ceu qui oevre, tant que li vasselz chient; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the ancients said that it is made like the branch which is twisted together at the vice, in such a manner that you tie the vessels, after lightly incising the dislocation; then cut it in half, and treat the abscess of those who work, until the vessels close; and treat it as we have said until it is healed.
Aucune fois vient routure ens angres, si com nos avons dit, et apert li leus; et ne dessent nulz des intestines as coions, et s’il en i dessent, c’est poc, et repaire toutes houres; et toutevoie s’il demoure trop en cest point, si croit li plaie ou syphac, tant que li intestine dessent; et ceu avient par l’estension dou syfac qui est as angres, si com nos avons dit, car il est estendus, puis est mollifiez et enflez li leus et apert; et li cure si est par cautere, si com nos avons devant dit; et aucune fois est curee par fer en ceste maniere: et est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos entre tes mains, puis cope le leu de la routure enfleit dou large selonc la quantiteit de III dois; et puis estrai le syfac qui est desoz le cuir que l’ensuet, puis pren lou rait et lou met sor le leu apparant dou syfac; et lou presse au parfont dou ventre, puis cout les II leus apparans dou syfac sus lou chief dou rait, et cout l’un et l’autre; puis estrai le chief dou rait, et ne coper point dou syfac ne n’estendre l’uef n’autre chose, si com je t’ai fait savoir en la cure de la ramice des intestines; puis le cure par la cure des plaies.	Sometimes there is a rupture in the groin, as we have said, and it opens the veins; and no parts of the intestines come out through the wound, and if they do come out, it is little and returns every hour; and yet, if it remains too long in this spot, it causes the wound or syphilis, as much as the intestine comes out; and this happens due to the extension of syphilis which is in the groin, as we have said, for it extends, then softens and swells the veins and opens them; and the cure is by cautery, as we have previously said; and sometimes the wound is cured with a piece of iron in this manner: and that the patient lies often on his back between your hands, then cut the vein from the large swelling edge according to the size of three fingers; then remove the syphilis that is under the skin that follows, then take the rod and place it over the apparent vein; and press firmly against the belly, then sew the two apparent veins on top of the head of the rod, and sew one and the other; then remove the head of the rod, and neither copulate nor extend the wound in any other way, as I have told you in the cure of the intestine ramification; then cure it by the method of wounds.
Et quant tu copes les filz, si le mundefie et cure la plaie, tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And when you cut the threads, it relaxes and treats the wound until it is healed.
Li syfac est constrains, et n’a point d’apparance en la routure, et li cauteres est muedres en cest leu, et plus prochiens a salut.	The soothing is constrained, and shows no sign in the rupture, and the cauterizations are healed in this place, and closer to salvation.
de l’amollissement dou cuir des coions	of the softening of the skin around the shoulders
Maintes fois est amollis li cuirs des coions en aucuns homes, por ceu que les chars que sont dedens sont mollifiees, et est lait a veoir; et est mestier, quant on le vuet curer, c’on faice gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li cope le cuir qui est mollifiez sus le cuir natureil; puis assemble les II levres a une costure, et se tu vues, cout premier la superfluiteit dou cuir mollifiiez a III costures ou IIII fermement; puis cope entre les costures, et lou cure si com les autres plaies, tant qu’il soit sanez, et chient li fil.	Many times the skin around the shoulders becomes soft in some people, because the flesh within is softened, and it is to be seen; and when one wishes to treat such a wound, one should have the patient lie on their back, and cut away the soft skin above the natural skin; then join the two edges with a缝合线，如果软化皮肤的多余部分需要更牢固地缝合，则用三针或四针；然后在这些缝线之间切开，并像其他伤口一样处理，直到痊愈，剪去线。
dou chastrement	by punishment
Saiches que chastremens est escomeniez en nostre loi, et por ceu il me plairoit que je n’en parlasse mie en cest livre; et n’est necessaires fuer que por II manieres: dont l’une est que li mires en saiche respondre quant on li demandera, et en saiche la cure; et li autre, por ceu que nos avons sovent mestier de chastrement d’aucunes bestes por nos aidier, si com de bouc et de mouton et de chait et d’autres bestes.	Punishment is prescribed in our law, and for this reason, I would like to avoid speaking of it in this book; and it is necessary only for two reasons: one, that you may know how to respond when asked about it and how to treat it; and the other, because we often need to punish certain animals to aid us, as with goats, sheep, dogs, and other animals.
Je dis donques que chastremens est fais selonc II manieres: ou par atraction, ou par fendure.	I say then that punishment is done in two ways: either by attraction or by splitting.
En celle que nos faisons par attraction, faisons nos seoir la beste en aigue chaude, tant que li coion soient mollifiez et pendant; puis les preing a ta main, tant qu’il soient remis et que tu ne les sentes plus.	In the method where we do punishment by attraction, seat the animal in hot water until the joints become soft and relaxed. Then grasp them with your hand while they are thus softened and you no longer feel any resistance.
Du chastrement de taille: covient que tu teignes la beste, et li presse le cuir des coions a ta main senestre, puis lie le suspensoire, et cope sus chescun oef a I cop, quant tu les avras bien escorchiez; et i laisse aucun poc dou syfac et lou subtil syfac qui est sor les vasselz; et ceste maniere de chastrement est muedre que cele qui est faite par attraction, por ceu que a l’atraction demoure par aventure aucune chose des coions, par coi li beste desire luxure; puis cure la plaie tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Of castration: You must castrate the beast, and press the scrotum with your left hand, then tie the suspender, and cut above each testicle one by one when you have well seared them; and leave a little piece of fat and the subtle fat which is under the vessels; and this way of castration is better than that done by suction, because in suction some part of the scrotum may remain, causing the beast to desire lust; then treat the wound until it heals.
des hermofrodites	Of hermaphrodites.
Hermofrodie est selonc II manieres as homes: l’une si est que entre les II coions apert ausi com li figure de la nature d’une femme, ou il ait poil, et aucunes fois en cort li urine.	Hermaphrodites are according to two manners in men: one is that between the two testicles, it appears as the figure of a woman's nature, or it has hair, and sometimes for urinary purposes.
Et li autre maniere si est en femmes, et ait sus lou poignil ausi com une verge et II coions.	And the other method is for women, and is done with a knife as with a rod and two clamps.
Et li cure de l’ome et de la fame si est que tu copes les chars ajostees toutes, et les cure si com autres plaies; en la seconde maniere, des homes dont li urine saut par lou cuir des coions, si n’a point de cure.	And the care of the man and woman is that you clean all the set bones thoroughly, and treat them as other wounds; in the second manner, for those whose urine jumps through the skin of the scrotum, they do not need treatment.
de la tentigene	of the excrescence
Tentigene est une chars ajostee sus la partie natureil, tant qu’elle est trop laide a veoir; et aucunes femmes l’ont ausi grant com une main, et c’est li cure.	Excrescence is a set bone on the natural part, to such an extent that it is too ugly to see; and some women have them as large as a hand, and this is how they are treated.
Il covient que tu teignes la superfluiteit de la tentigene a ta main ou as oncines, et la cope legierement; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, puis le cure d’autre cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et a une autre char que naist a la bouche de la marris, et l’emple, et par aventure saut fuer, et est selonc la semblance d’une kowe, et por ceu l’apelerent li ancien «maladie kowee».	You must dye the excrescence with your hand or claws and clean it gently; and do not apply too strongly, lest blood flow. Continue treating it until it heals. For another bone that grows at the mouth of the vein, fill it and sometimes it will protrude, resembling a cow's hoof, hence they called it the "cow disease" in ancient times.
Si covient que tu la copes, si com nos avons dit la tentigene, et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	If it is necessary to cut it, as we have said regarding the texture and treatment until it is healed.
de erratique	of erratic
Erratique si est quant li nature de la femme n’est mie percie, ou li pertus est petis; et est naturez par naissance, ou accidens par maladie que venue i est; ou c’est par char ajostee, ou dou syfac subtil ou espés, et est fais em parfont en la marris, ou en costez, ou desoz, ou que soit; et deffent le concevoir, et l’enfantement, et par aventure les flors a avoir; et li connoissance de ceu si est par le regart de la baile.	Erratic if it is when the nature of the woman is not known, or the perforation is small; and it is natural by birth, or an accident caused by illness that came about; or it is due to a mistaken cautery, or a thin or thick syphon, and is made perfect in the loins, or in the sides, or beneath, or elsewhere; and it prevents conception, and childbirth, and sometimes the flowers to have; and the knowledge of these is by the sight of the midwife.
Se li estoupemens est prochiens apparans, si quier a tes dois ou au rait.	If the stoppages are close and apparent, feel with your fingers or the rod.
S’il est dou syfac subtil, et il est prochiens as II leivres, si te haste, et la ront ensi: met tes II dois indices ensamble, et li femme soit sus son dos, espandues ses jambes; puis estent les II leivres forment, tant que li subtilz syfac soit rons, et soit overs li estoupemens; puis pren laine, et la moille en oile, et la met sus le leu, et gise li femme a home chescun jor, si qu’il ne puist souder.	If it is a thin sweat, and it is near the two flanks, hasten, and roll thus: place your two index fingers together, and let the woman be on her back, spreading her legs; then form the two flaps, so that the thin sweat is rolled, and over the stoppers; then take wool, and the fat in oil, and put it on the wound, and let the woman lie on her side each day, so that it does not scab.
Et se li syfac est dur et espés, si covient que tu lou copes au spatumile semblant a foille de mirte.	And if the sweat is hard and thick, it is necessary that you fold it with the spatula resembling a leaf of juniper.
Se li estoupemens est de char nee, si la sospent a l’oncine et la cope; et aies les medicines estainchans sanc, si com acaice, sanc de dragon, encens, ensamble abun d’uef; puis amenistre une caine de plonc large, si que li plaie ne puisse souder; et ensi soit longement, et li amenistre une tente de lin sec; puis soit curez d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	If the stoppers are of new leather, suspend them with a needle and thread; and have the medicines that staunch blood, such as myrrh, dragon's blood, incense, together with many eggs; then apply a large piece of lint, so that the wound does not scab; and thus leave it long, and give him another linen bandage; and continue to treat with other dressings until it is healed.
Et quant en la marris vient char nee, si la covient coper selonc ceste maniere, se ce n’est apostemes enchancrez.	And when in the sore comes flesh grown, you must treat it according to this manner, if it is not embedded abscesses.
Car a l’aposteme enchancreit qui est en la marris, ne doit on touchier de feir.	For the embedded abscess in the sore, one must not touch it to cut.
des emorroides	of hemorrhoids
Emorroydes sont overtures de voines dont sans cort acostumeement, et quant les emorroydes sont vielles si devienent thelul; et nos avons jai dit en la division les semblances d’aus, et les signes, et je dirai ci celles qui resoivent curation.	Hemorrhoids are openings of veins that, without treatment, commonly recur. And when hemorrhoids become old, they turn into warts; and I have already described their appearances, signs, and symptoms in the division of similar cases, and I will now describe those that can be cured.
Je di que les emorroides et li thelul, quant il sont em parfont en la marris, et il n’aperent au sentir, si n’est mie li cure par fer.	I say that hemorrhoids and warts, when fully inflamed in the sore, do not appear by touch; they are cured only with iron.
Cil qui sont a la bouche de la marris, c’on puet sentir, sont cil c’on puet curer.	Those who are at the mouth of the abscess, which one can feel, are those one can treat.
Il covient donques que tu mettes la femme en une maison froide, puis estent l’altelul as tenailles, et le cope en ses racines, puis poudre sus medicines restraignans sanc, si com acaice et sanc de dragon et encens, et semblans choses; puis boute ses piez a la paroit une houre, puis la met en aigue froide; et se decorremens de sanc i vient, si la fai seoir en une decoction de sumac et d’escorce de pomes grenates et de gales et de semblans choses, et puis pren farine d’orge, et la confis avec miel et aisil, et en fai I emplaustre sus son dos.	Therefore, you should place the woman in a cold room, then heat the altar root with tongs, and pour it into its roots, then sprinkle medicines that restrain blood, such as aloe, dragon's blood, and incense, and similar things; then let her sit against the wall for an hour, then immerse her in cold water; and if bleeding continues, make her sit in a decoction of sumac and the bark of pomegranate peels and galingale and similar things, and then take flour of barley, mix it with honey and garlic, and apply it as a plaster on her back.
Et se il estainche, c’est boin.	And if it stops bleeding, that is good.
Se ceu non, se li fai aerdre ventouses au dos et as mameles sens ferir; puis pren lainne, et la moille en jus de plantain ou en jus d’aglentier avec vin viel, et fai aerdre au leu.	If not, if they make you apply suction cups to the back and breasts without injuring; then take wool, and grease in juice of plantain or juice of agrimony with old wine, and apply to the place.
Et quant li aposteme repose, si cure lou leu d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez; et celle qui est apelee «albathir» est rouge, et est semblans a I chief aspre, si le covient coper si com j’ai dit le thelul; et puis lou cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when the abscess rests, cure the place with ointment until it is healed; and that which is called "albathir" is red, and resembles a rough head, so you should cover it as I said for the thigh; and then cure it until it is healed.
des apostemes de la marris	of abscesses of the armendaris
Maintes manieres d’aposteme vienent en la marris, si com chancre et aposteme pierous et herpes et estiomenes et fistules et emorroides et aposteme chaut, et plusors autres maladies que j’ai dit en la division.	Many kinds of abscesses occur in the armendaris, such as chancre, stone abscess, herpes, cysts, fistulas, hemorrhoids, and hot abscess, as well as many other diseases that I have mentioned in the division.
Il covient donques que je die en cest traitier l’aposteme chaut qui vient en la marris, qui n’est mie des apostemes que coillent bowe; et se tu vues savoir l’ovraige de fer, si regarde se li apostemes est agus en l’encomencement de sa venue, et plain de chalor et de fievre, et s’il devient rouge se tu le pues veoir.	Therefore, I must say in this treatise on the hot abscess that comes from the armpit, which is not among those abscesses that boil; and if you wish to know the iron work, observe whether the abscess is active at the beginning of its appearance, and full of heat and fever, and becomes red if you can see it.
Adonques ne te haster mie de percier, mais lou fais meurer tant que li dolor soit apaisie; et puis fai seoir lou malaide sus I siege, et ait II petis sieges ou il se cline, et apoie sus son dos et assemble ses piez as parties defuer la jambe; et soient ses cuixes espandues, et mette ses braz desoz ses genous, et les lie bien d’un boin liien; puis succe li baille devers lou destre costeit, et i amenistre l’estrument dont on oevre la bouche de la marris, de coi ci aprés vient li forme; et covient que quant tu i vues amenistrer cest estrument, que tu fiches le rait premier ens por savoir la parfondeté de la marris, si que ceu qui entre ens de l’estrument n’i viegne plus em parfont qu’il ne doit, et qu’il ne blece la malaide; et se li estrumens est plus grans, si covient covrir la parfondesce de la marris de drapelz, si que li estrumens ne li grieve; et covient qu’il mette le cornet de l’estrument au desus, et qu’il teigne l’estrument.	Therefore, do not hasten to pierce; but let it die until the pain is appeased; and then seat the patient on a chair, and provide two stools for him to recline, supporting his back and bringing his feet together below the knee; and let his thighs be spread, and place his arms beneath his knees, binding them well with a good bandage; then apply the bale towards the right side, and lead it to the instrument used for opening the armpit, of which we shall speak later in form; and it is necessary that when you see this instrument being applied, you insert the rod first to know the depth of the armpit, so that what enters from the instrument does not go more deep than it should, and does not harm the patient; and if the instruments are larger, it is necessary to cover the depth of the armpit with cloths, so that the instrument does not cause pain; and it is necessary that he place the horn of the instrument above, and touch the instrument.
Et quant li apostemes apert, et on lou fent a la main mol, si le covient coper au chief, au spatumile leit; et quant li bowe est vuidie, si covient que tu mettes en la plaie tentes moillies en oile roset, ou en oile vert sec; et met la tente fuer de la plaie au parfont de la marris, et met par defuer sus la marris et sus le poignil lainne nette moillie en aigue ou malves soient cuites; puis le cure aprés II jors d’oignement avenant a ceu, tant qu’il soit sanez; et aucune fois leve on la marris et la plaie par clistere d’aigue et de miel, et puis d’aigue ou racines de lis et aristologe longe soient cuites; puis reveigne a l’oignement.	And when the abscess is opened and they make it soft by hand, it must be dressed at the head, with linen soaked in rose oil or green fat oil; and place the dressing well inside the wound, and on top of the wound and on the handle of the knife a clean piece of linen moistened in water or honey that has been cooked; then cure after two days of suitable ointment until it is healed; and at any time lift the wound and the area around it with a clyster of water and honey, and then of water or roots of lily and aromatic long-cooked.
Et se li plaie est reponue en la marris, si covient que tu te gardes de cuire de fer, mais cure la si com nos avons dit en la division.	And if the wound is placed on the abdomen, you must guard against using iron to cook it, but dress it as we have said in the division.
de l’enfantement	of childbirth
Mestier est premier a la baile qu’elle conoisse la figure de l’enfantement natureil, et li signes si est quant tu vois la femme apresser aval, et desire odorer l’ar: adonques se haste li enfes de fuer issir; adonc saiches que cil enfantemens est selonc la figure natureil, et est li issue soz son chief, et li secondine avec lui; et quant tu vois ces signes, si covient presser legierement son ventre, si que li enfes isse tost; car quant il dessent sus son chief, si ist li secondine avec lui, et est mondee li marris de ses superfluitez par bone mundification; et cist qui vient autrement ne vient mie naturelment.	Master it first in the dance that she know the figure of natural childbirth, and the signs are when you see the woman press down below, and desire to smell the air: then hasten for the child to be soon born; know then that this childbirth is according to the natural figure, and comes out with its head, and the second follows with it; and when you see these signs, you must gently press her belly, so that the child comes forth quickly; for when it descends above its head, the second follows with it, and is cleansed of its superfluities by good purification; and who comes otherwise does not come naturally.
Car il vient aucune fois sus ses piez, et vient fuer li cors ou li chiés, et les mains, ou il vient sus son ventre, ou sovin, et est convertis par aventure sor son col, et par autres figures malvaises; si est mestier a la baile qu’elle soit saige et subtilz en ces choses, et se warse d’error et de decevement, et je vos mostrerai toutes les figures coment on li doit aidier.	For it comes sometimes above its feet, and is born into the body or shoulder, and the hands, or if it comes above the belly or spine, and is turned by chance over the neck, and in other harmful shapes; it is necessary for her that she be wise and subtle in these matters, and beware of error and deception, and I will show you all the shapes how one must aid them.
Se li enfes vient sus son chief par issue natureil, et li femme enfante griement, et li vertus de li est foible, si la fai seoir sus une selle, ou les femmes la tienent; et arose sa nature d’oile ou fenugreic soit cuit, et puis boute li baile entre ses dois le petit spatumile dont ci est li forme:	If the child comes down on his head by natural means, and the woman gives birth easily, and the virtue of her is weak, then let it sit on a saddle, or where women keep it; and from its nature, take oil or fenugreek that has been cooked, and then pour the balm between her two little spatumiles as they are formed.
et fende la secondine, et cope a son ungle tant que li moistors qui est ens corre fuers; et preint lou ventre de la femme tant que li enfes dessende, et s’il ne dessent, si covient clisterizer la femme de muscillaige de fenugrec avec oile de sisament; puis la fai preindre et esternuer de condisi, et tien sa bouche et son neis une houre: si istra maintenant l’enfes.	and cut the secondine, and cut away its membrane until the moisture that is within comes out; and compress the woman's abdomen until the child descends, and if it does not descend, then you must administer a suppository to the woman with fenugreek muscilage and olive oil; then let her take snuff of condisi, and hold her mouth and nose for an hour: then extract the child now.
Et se les II mains issent fuer, si covient que tu les ramoinne legierement poc et poc; et s’elles n’i puent entrer, si met la femme sus I siege, et li lieve les piés en haut; puis deboute le siege sus terre, et teigne on la femme, qu’elle ne chiece au deboutement; et se li mains n’i puet entrer, et li enfes muert, si li cope les mains au couteil qui est ci devant mis, et estrai l’enfant, et ramoine igalment.	And if the two hands appear swollen, you must gently reduce them little by little; and if they cannot enter, place the woman on a seat, and lift her feet high; then move the seat to the ground, and shield the woman so she does not cry at the reduction; and if the hands cannot enter, and the child dies, cut off the child with the knife placed before, and extract the child, reducing them equally.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses piés	from the issue of the child at his feet
Quant li enfes vient sus ses piez, si lou covient bouter en haut; et puis le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit igalz; puis preigne I des piez et l’estende poc et poc.	When the child comes at his feet, you must lift it up; then turn it little by little, until it is equal; then dress the feet and extend them little by little.
Cant il saut jusc’as cuixes, si la comande a preindre, et la fai esternuer de condisi; si saut fuer, se Deus vuet.	If it jumps to the thighs, instruct him to press, and make him sneeze by means of sniffing; if it is worse, let God will it.
Et s’il n’ist fuer si com nos avons dit, si le torne poc et poc, tant qu’il soit selonc la figure natureil.	And if it is not worse as we have said, turn it little by little, until it is according to the natural figure.
Car adonques ist il legierement.	For then it is lightly.
Et s’il ne vient fuer si com nos avons, dit si pren muscillaige de altee, et oile de sisament, et gomme fondue, et broie tout en I mortier; et met sus la nature de la femme dedens et defuer cest oignement, puis la fai seoir en aigue tede jusque desoz les costelz; et quant elle est moillifie desoz, se li fai I coliere de mirre, et li met desoz, et li laisse une houre; puis la fai seoir sus I siege, puis la fai esternuer et estraint sa bouche et son neis, et li preint le ventre legierement, car li enfes saut maintenant.	And if it does not come worse as we have said, take muscillaige of althea, and oil of sesamum, and melted gum, and grind them all in a mortar; and put the nature of the woman inside and above this ointment; then make her sit in hot water until under the ribs; and when she is softened underneath, give her a collar of myrrh, and put it under, and let her keep it for an hour; then make her sit on a chair, then make her sneeze and press her mouth and nose, and gently rub her abdomen, for the child now jumps.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus ses genous	of the issue of the child above his knees
Quant li enfes vient en ceste forme, si i mette li baile ses mains poc et poc; puis soit sovinee sus son col, et li pendent li piez aval, et soit gisans sor I lit; et plie ses mains poc et poc, et puis li preint les mains sus lou ventre, et li oste les cussins desoz, tant qu’elle soit appareillie aval; et se li enfes ne saut, si pren ses piez et li muef forment, puis li muef lou ventre amont, puis i boute tes mains; et ewe l’enfant poc et poc; et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse.	When the child comes in this form, one should gently place their hands little by little; then it should be bathed on its neck, and its feet should be hanging down, and it should lie on the bed; bend its arms little by little, and then put its hands on the abdomen, and remove the cushions below until it is prepared to hang down; and if the child does not cry, take its feet and move them into shape, then lift the abdomen upward, and then place your hands; and gently guide the child; and command the woman to press until the child passes.
de l’issue de l’enfant qui vient dou large une main pendant	of the issue of the child who comes with one hand wide open
I covient engignier a ramener la main: s’on ne la puet ramener, si fai lever la femme, et aler; s’elle ne puet aler, si la fai gesir sus I lit, et li deboute les jambes forment; puis amenistre lou muscillaige que j’ai conteit; et s’elle n’enfante, si la fai seoir sus I siege, puis estudie au rameneir la main; et ewe l’enfant selonc la figure natureil, et la fai esternuer, et li comande qu’elle se preigne tant que li enfes isse fuer.	I must devise to bring back the hand: if one cannot bring it back, make the woman stand and walk; if she cannot walk, lay her on the bed, prop up her legs, then administer the ligature as I have recounted; and if she does not miscarry, make her sit on a chair, then study to bring back the hand; and withdraw the child according to its natural position, and command her to sneeze, and tell her to bear down until the fetus has passed.
de l’issue de l’enfant sus son col, et ait espandues ses mains, et sa faice tornee devers lou dos sa mere	From the issue of the child at its neck, and have spread its hands, and its face turned toward its mother's back.
I covient que li baile teigne sa main, puis le torne poc et poc, et l’ewe legierement; et quant il est igalz, si met sus la nature muscillaige de altee et oile, si com nos avons dit, puis li comande qu’elle se mueve poc et poc; et quant tu avras ce fait, si la fai seoir sus I siege, et li comande k’elle se preigne; et la fai esternuer.	I must have the midwife grasp the child's hand, then turn it little by little and gently; and when it is aligned, place the natural ligature of thread and oil on it, as we have said, then command her to move it little by little; and when you have done this, make her sit on a chair, and command her to bear down; and make her sneeze.
de ceste meisme maniere a tout la secondine	in this same manner for all the second part
Quant il vient fuer en ceste maniere a tout la secondine, si cope la secondine a ton ungle, tant que li moistors soit vuidie; et se li enfes pent sus sa faice et sus son col, si la cope des la boude, qu’elle ne soit retenue, et muere li enfes; puis boute l’enfant dedens, tant que tu l’aies mis si com il covient, et comande a la femme qu’elle se preigne aucune fois: adonques si istra legierement.	When it comes to the second part in this manner, cut the umbilical cord with your nail until all the moisture is drained; and if the child can be placed on its face and neck, cut the cord from the mouth, without holding it back, and strangle the child; then put the child inside, placing it as you see fit, and instruct the woman to do this once: then gently extract.
de l’issue des gemelz	from the extraction of the twins
Saiches que gemeil naissent maintes fois, et aucune fois en naissent III ou IIII; et ceu n’est mie estrainge chose, et poc avient.	Know that twins often are born, and sometimes three or four are born; this is not an uncommon thing, and it happens frequently.
Dui sont estrainge chose, et ne vivent mie, se poc nom; je sai ceu, qu’il soient multipliiet, et sont desevrez par lou syfac qui les devise, qui est liiez a la boude; et aucune fois issent ausi naturelment com uns tous sous, si com nos avons dit.	Two are extracted things, and do not live much, if at all; I know them, that they be multiplied, and are deprived by the syphilis which devises them, which is linked to the brain; and sometimes issued also naturally like unto those under it, as we have said.
Et s’il issent griement, si la cure si com nos avons dit, et soit li baile subtilz, et faice tost et legierement ceu qu’elle fait; et faice ensi com il vaut mues a salut.	And if they issue properly, the treatment as we have said, and let the subtle bile operate quickly and easily; and proceed thus as it best serves for salvation.
de plusors enfans	of many children
Aucune fois sont formez en la marris I ou II ou III ou IIII ou V ou VI ou VII, ou plusors jusc’a XV, et sont tout formeit en forme d’enfant par le mesurement dou saige glorious, et couvient que li baile saiche tout ceu, car par aventure semblans chose li avient; si faice selonc ceu qu’il covient.	Sometimes they are formed in the womb I or II or III or IV or V or VI or VII, or more up to fifteen, and are all formed in the shape of a child by the measure of the glorious sage, and it must be that the bile know all this, for similar things may happen; do so according to what is appropriate.
de l’enfant mort	of the dead child
Quant tu cures la femme de l’enfant mort ou ventre, si com j’ai dit en la division, et il ne vient fuers, et tu es constrains d’ovraige de mains; si covient que tu saiches se li femme est de saine vertut, et n’ait accident ou elle ait paor de mort; si covient que li femme soit sovinee sus son dos, et soit ses chiés enclins aval, et les jambes levees; et li ministre la teigne de II pars, ou elle soit liie au lit si qu’elle ne soit traite au dessendement de l’enfant; puis frotez la bouche de la marris d’oiles moistes avec muscillaige de altee et de fenugrec et semence de lin, puis oigne li baile ses mains de ces oiles et de ces muscillaiges; puis les boute en la marris legierement, puis quiere I leu ou elle boute les oncines que soient covenaubles a ceu, et pren warde se li enfes est apparilliez qu’il dessende sus son chief; si fiche les oncines en ses eulz ou en son col ou en sa bouche ou en som palais ou desoz la barbe ou en la forcele ou pres des costez, et se li dessendemens est sus piez, se li fiche ou poignil et as costes moienes; et covient qu’il teigne l’oncine a sa main destre, et mette la corbeure entre ses dois de la senestre main, et li boute a tout sa main legierement, et fiche l’oncine en aucun de ces leus que nos avons dit, tant qu’il viegne a la chose vuide; et c’est li forme de l’oncine:	When you treat the woman who has lost a dead child or is pregnant, as I have said in the division, and there is no expulsion, and you are constrained to perform manual labor; it is necessary that you know if the woman is of sound health and has no accidents or fears of death; she should be fanned from behind, and her head inclined forward, with her legs raised; and the minister should be on two sides, tied to the bed so she does not move during the descent of the child. Then rub her mouth with moist oils mixed with muscilage of alethe and fenugreek and linseed, then apply these mixtures to her hands. Gently place the fingers in her mouth or throat or palate or under the beard or on her temples or near her sides, and if the descent is through the feet, insert the needle or dagger between the middle ribs; it must be that she holds the finger on her right hand, placing the cord between her left thumb and first finger, and gently rubs this to her right hand. Insert the finger where we have said, until it reaches the empty place; and this is the form of the finger:
puis fiche encontre I autre oncine, ou le tier se tu en as mestier, si que li estractions soit igalz; et puis l’estent igalment en movant d’une part et d’autre, por mues issir, et soit li oncines dentez por mues tenir, si com ci est li forme:	then pierce against the other arrow, or the third if you need it, so that the extractions be equal; and then stretch equally by moving from one side to another, to let them out, and let the arrows have teeth to hold them, as is shown here:
Et s’il en demoure une partie, si oigne li baile aucuns de ses dois d’oile, et les boute en celle partie, et traie l’autre partie; et s’il en i demoure point, si met cest oncine ou plus haut leu, et fai ceu tant qu’il s’en isse tout fuers.	And if a part of it remains, open with any of his eye teeth, and push it into that part, and cut the other part; and if there remains no part, set this arrow or higher up, and do this until it all comes out.
Et se l’une mains vient devant l’autre, et il ne puet ramener por l’estreignement, si covient que tu envoloupes sus I drapeil, tant qu’il isse tote; puis la cope en la jointure de la plante ou au coute, et ensi covient que tu faices en l’autre main, et as II piés.	And if one hand comes before the other, and it cannot be brought back due to constriction, you must wrap it with a cloth, until it all comes out; then cut the cloth at the sole joint or with scissors, and do this likewise for the other hand, and for both feet.
Et se li chiés de l’enfant est gros et il est estrois en l’issue, ou il ait ou chief aigue assemblee, si covient que tu boute le spatumile espinous entre tes dois, et fent le chief et estrai l’aigue; ou tu la ront a l’estrument qui est apelez «almidach», de coi li forme vient avec les estrumens ou chapistre qui est aprés cestui; et ensi meisme faice se li enfes a grant chief naturelment; et puis traie fuer les osses as tenailles, et se li chiés saut fuer et il estraint a la forcele, si soit fendus, tant que li moistors qui est ou pis issue fuer; et s’elle ne puet issir, si le cope par pieces au mues que tu pues; et s’il est enflez au ventre ou desoz les costez, si covient que tu lou perces tant que li moistors corre.	And if the head of the child is large and the birth canal is narrow, or it has a sharp head that assembles, then you must insert the spatumile spine between your two fingers, cut the head, and extract the sharpness; or you can rotate it with an instrument called "almidach," from which form comes with instruments or chapter after this one; and thus similarly make so that the child has a large natural head; and then pull out the bones with tongs, and if the head breaks free and is restrained by force, split it until the moisture that is or more issues; and if she cannot issue, cut her apart into pieces as you can; and if it is swollen in the belly or under the ribs, then you must pierce her until the moisture runs.
Et se li enfes est sus ses piez, si est li attraction legiere, et li adrecemens a la bouche de la marris est legier.	And if the injury is on his feet, the traction is light, and the direction to the mouth of the vein is light.
Et s’il est estrois au ventre ou au pis, si couvient que tu l’estraies a I drapeil envoloupeit sus la main; et fent le ventre ou le pis, tant que li moistors qui i est corre; et se li autre membre sont osteit, et li chiez demoure, si boute li baile sa main em parfont de la marris, et le traie jusc’a la bouche de la marris; puis i boute I oncine ou II, et le trai fuer; et se li bouche de la marris est retrecie por aposteme chaut qui i est venus, si n’i covient mie travillier, ains covient amenistrer choses moistes et grasses; et li amenistre emplaustres, et siece en aigue mollifians et amoistans.	And if it is narrow in the belly or the breast, it is fitting that you extract it with a flying cloth wrapped around the hand; and cut the belly or the breast until the moist parts are removed; and if the other limb has been removed, and the head remains, then bind the hand fully with the vein; and draw it until the mouth of the vein. Then give an ounce or two, and draw forcefully; and if the mouth of the vein is narrowed by a hot abscess that has come, it is not fitting to work on it, but you must administer moist and greasy things; and apply poultices, and a wetting sitz bath with mollifying and moistening substances.
Et se li enfes est sus son costeit, et tu le pues mettre igal, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit en l’enfant vif; et s’on nen ait pooir, si lou trai fuer par pieces, et n’i laissier rien de la secondine.	And if the patient is on his side, and you can place him level, then administer what we have said for the living child; and if it is not possible, then stretch with pieces, and leave nothing of the secondine.
Et quant tu avras ce fait, se li amenistre ceu que nos avons dit ens apostemes chaus que vienent en la marris; et se decorremens de sanc vient, si soit mise en aigue restraignant, et li amenistre autres cures.	And when you have done this, administer what we have said for abscesses that come in the thigh, and if bleeding occurs, it should be placed in cold water restraining, and administer other dressings.
Et je vis une femme en cui ventre uns enfes avoit esteit mors, puis consut I autre sus celui, et refut mors li autres.	And I saw a woman in whose belly an infant had died, then sutured the other [infant] over it, and expelled the dead one.
Aprés lonc tens li vint uns apostemes en la boude, et enfla tant qu’il ovrit, et comensa a grant porreture.	After a long time, abscesses formed in the mouth, and swelled so much that they opened, and caused great pain.
je fui apelez a la cure, et i pensai lonc tens, et ne pot soder li plaie.	I was called for the treatment, and I thought long, and could not staunch the wound.
Je mis sus emplaustre de fort attraction, et en issit uns os, et aprés aucuns jors uns autres.	I applied a plaster of strong吸引力，and it brought out some bones, and after several days, others followed.
Je me mervillai mout, por ceu c’ou ventre n’a point d’os.	I marvelled much, for the belly has no bones.
Si pensai que c’estoit des os d’un enfant mort.	I thought that these were the bones of a dead child.
Je quis la plaie, et en traï mains os, tant que li femme fut em millor point; et vesquit li femme lonc tens ensi, et issoit adés un poc de bowe dou leu; et je n’ai recordeit cest chapistre fuer que por ceu que, quant li maistres trueve une estrainge chose, qu’il i saiche mettre aide.	I examined the wound and found bones there, so that the woman was much improved; and the woman lay there long thus, and still had a bit of swelling from it; and I did not recall this chapter because whenever a master finds an unusual thing, he should know how to provide aid.
dou ramener la marris a son leu	to bring back the joint to its place
Ci aprés vient li forme dou pressor, a coi on ewe les livres; et a II tornans as II chiés des II liiens.	After comes the form of the presser, to which the books refer; and to two turns of the two heads of the ligaments.
Toutevoie, li cornes soit plus subtilz dou restrictoire, et soit fais de ebene ou de bux; et soit li bouche dou fust I doi de large, et li marge des arbres I doit, et de lonc une palme et demi; et enmi les II liemens soient dui ajostemens de cest meisme fust, qui soient fermeit en l’un et en l’autre, de demi palme de lonc ou un poc plus; et cist dui ajostement sont bouteit en la bouche de la marris por ovrir quant on torne les II cornes.	Firstly, the horns should be finer than those of a restrictor, and made of ebony or boxwood. The hole in the wood should be two fingers wide, and the edge of the holes one finger long, and each should be as long as half a palm or slightly more. These two adjustments are inserted into the hole in the joint to open it when the two horns are turned.
Une autre forme, a sa semblance plus subtilz et plus legiere, soit faite de fust de ebene ou de bux, selonc la semblance des tenailles; et ait as II chiés II ajostemens, si com tu vois, d’une palme de lonc, et II dois de large; et quant tu vues ovrir la marris a tout l’estrument, si fai seoir la femme sor I lit, les piez pendant et les jambes overtes, puis boute les II ajostemens ajostez ensamble en la marris, et tien le chief de l’estrument desoz entre ses cuixes; puis oevre ta main a tout l’estrument, si com tu as fait as tenailles igalment, selonc la quantiteit que tu vues ovrir la bouche de la marris, tant que li baile faice ceu qu’elle vuet.	Another form, finer and lighter in appearance, should be made of ebony or boxwood, resembling tweezers. It should have two adjustments at the heads, as you see, each one finger long and two fingers wide. When you wish to open the joint completely with this entire instrument, place the woman on a bed, with her feet hanging and legs spread apart, then insert the two adjustments together into the joint, holding the head of the instrument under her thighs. Then work your hand on the entire instrument as you did with the tweezers equally, according to the amount you wish to open the mouth of the joint until the hinge does what it wills.
Cist estrument sont tuit sormontez, et sont multiplies lor semblances; et quant li mires les ait apareilliez, tant est plus hastans li oevre, et plus haute as homes por lor quantiteit.	This tool is entirely mounted, and its images are multiplied; and when the mirrors have been arranged, the work is more speedy, and higher for their quantity.
Si ne despire mie l’estrument que tu ne l’aies apparelliet, car lor necessitez n’est mie escusauble.	If you do not arrange the instrument, you must have it ready, for its necessity is not excusable.
Quant li secondine est retenue a l’enfantement, si covient que tu comandes a la malaide qu’ele reteigne son alaine, et puis la fai esternuer de condisi, et li estraint tes mains a la bouche et au neis; et s’elle saut per ceu, bien est.	When the secondine is retained during childbirth, you must instruct the patient to grip her tail, and then make her inhale condisi, and hold her hands over her mouth and nose; and if she passes through this way, well it is.
Se ceu non, si prent I pot, et fai I pertus ou cuvercle, et i met herbes que puissent ovrir la bouche de la marris, si com calament, rue, anis, camomille, cassialigne et centoire; toutes ces herbes, ou aucunes d’eles, soient cuites ou pot en aigue sus le feu; puis met une caine ou pertus dou pot, et l’autre chief en la bouche de la marris, et la teigne tant que li vapors viegne dedens la marris; puis la fai esternuer, si com nos avons dit.	If this does not work, take a pot and make a hole or coverlet in it, and put herbs that can open the mouth of the mare inside, such as calamus, rue, fennel, chamomile, cinnamon, and centaury; all these herbs, or any of them, be cooked or placed in water on the fire. Then place a reed or hole in the pot, and the other end in the mouth of the mare, and hold it until the vapors come inside the mare. Then make her inhale as we have said.
Si saut li secondine hastanment.	If the second joint moves quickly.
Et s’elle remaint aprés ceste cure, et n’ist mie fuer, si comande a la baile qu’ele moille sa main senestre en oile de sesement ou en muscillaige de altee, et puis la boute en la nature, et quiere la secondine; et quant elle l’avra trovee, si la preigne et l’estende poc et poc droitement, si que li marris ne chiece a l’estraction; mais la covient movoir legierement a destre et a senestre, et puis traie; si venra et se desaerdra.	And if it remains after this treatment, and is not already healed, command the maid to moisten her left hand in sesame oil or in almond oil, then put the bottle back into nature, and seek the second joint; and when she has found it, take it and extend it little by little straight, so that the tendons do not tear during extraction; but it must be moved slightly from side to side, then cut; it will come and resolve itself.
Et se li bouche de la marris est jai estrecie, nos avons dit la cure d’esternuer, et de fumigation des herbes; et s’elle n’ist de tout ceu que nos avons dit, si garde que tu ne foloies au traire; mais il couvient que ceu qui est a la bouche de la marris, que tu le lies a la cuixe de la femme, puis la clisterize d’oignement tetrafarmaçon; si la porrira et remettra, et venra fuer; mais toutevoie, quant elle porrist si en vient male odor au stomac et au chief, et blece la malaide.	And if the mouth of the tendon is narrowly strangled, we have already said the treatment for sneezing and fumigation with herbs; and if it is not cured by all that we have said, guard that you do not follow the extraction; but it must be that what is at the mouth of the tendon you tie to the thigh of the woman, then catheterize with tetrapharmcon ointment; she will take it and restore it, and it will become healed; but still, if it comes ill-smelling to the stomach and head, and blisters the patient.
Si covient donques fumigations covenaubles a ceu: aucun des anciens ont esproveit fumigation de cresson et de figues seches.	If therefore suitable fumigations are needed for it: some of the ancients have proven the fumigation of cress and dried figs.
Li forme de l’estrument a coi on fumige la femme a la retenue des flors et de la secondine si est ceste:	The form of the instrument with which one fumigates the woman for the retention of flowers and secondine is this:
Et est de voirre semblant a une caine, et met on le chief subtil en la nature, et les chiés larges sus le feu; et soit li fumigations sus les charbons, et la teigne tant qu’elle soit gastee, et rencomence une autre.	And it is made of glass resembling a cane, and one places the fine end in the nature, and the broad heads above the fire; and let the fumigations be over the coals, and the scab until it is eaten away, and begin another.
de percier lou fondement	to pierce the foundation
Maint enfant naissent qui n’ont mie le fondement perciet, ains l’ait estoupeit uns subtilz syfac: si covient donques a la baile qu’ele perce celui syfac a son doit, et ne lou perce mie de spatumile agut, et garse le lacement qu’elle ne le touche; puis met sus lainne moillie en vin et en oile, puis la cure d’oignement tant qu’il soit sanez.	Many children are born who do not have the foundation pierced, but have a soft syfac: then it is necessary for the baile to pierce that syfac in the right place, and not pierce the spatumile too deeply, and take care that she does not touch it; then put on wet wool soaked in wine and oil, and cure with ointment until it is healed.
Et se tu doutes qu’il ne restoupe, si met ou pertus une caine de plonc, et li laisse mains jors, et soit ostee quant li enfes vuet aler en chambres.	And if you doubt that it will not return to place, put or insert a pledget of wool, and let it remain in place, and be removed when the child wants to go into rooms.
Et aucune fois vient cist estoupemens de soudement de plaie ou d’aposteme; si covient coper celui soudement: si soit curez, si com nos avons dit de la caine de plonc.	And sometimes this plug comes suddenly from a wound or abscess; then it must be handled suddenly: it should be treated as we have said for the pledget of wool.
de la fistule dou fondement	from the fistula of the fundament
Fistules qui vienent desoz le fondement sont nodation, et groissor que vienent delez lou fondement defuer, ou en l’espaice des II parties, si a une fistule ou plusors; et quant celle nodation est anciene, si aoeuvre, et encort moistor awouse blainche ou subtilz bowe, et aucune fois sont ces fistule persans; et sont conues par ceu qu’il en ist ou egestion ou ventositeit quant li malaide fait egestion, et par aventure en saut uns vers.	Fistulas that come from the fundament are nodes, and grow larger as they proceed from the fundament down, or in the space between two parts, either one or several; and when this node is old, it works, and exudes moist white or subtle liquid, and sometimes these fistulas are Persian; they are known by those who have them through evacuation or windy discharge when the patient evacuates, and by accident through a passing urine.
Et si a fistules que percent jusc’a la vessie, et jusc’a la moitiet de la verge; et parvienent jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, et jusc’a nout de la kowe.	And if the fistulas extend to the bladder, and to half the length of the penis; and reach to the knee joint, and to the ankle.
Et ensi conoist on la fistule persant au fondement, et ne mie persant: et est que tu boutes ton doi indice ou fondement, et boute une aguille subtil d’arain ou de fer en la fistule quant il n’i a tortuositeit.	And thus one knows whether the fistula ends at the anus, and not at all: it is that you insert your index finger into the anus, and insert a fine needle of brass or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
Et s’il ait tortuositeit, si i boute une tente de plonc subtil, ou I poil de cheval, tant que tu sentes la tente ou le poil a ton doit; et se tu ne le sens, et il ne vient dou pertus egestion ne ventositeit ne ver, si com nos avons dit: saiches qu’elle ne perce mie; si te haste dou curer.	And if there is tortuosity, insert a fine probe of linen or horsehair, as far as you can feel the probe or hair with your finger; and if you do not feel it, and no excretion or wind or vermin come out, as we have said: know that it does not reach; hasten to treat.
Et quant li fistule est persans jusc’a la vessie ou jusc’a conduit de l’urine, si en saut li urine, et ne puet soudeir par medicines.	And when the fistula is infected up to the bladder or up to the urinary duct, it will drain urine, and cannot be healed by medicines.
S’elle est percie jusc’a la jointure de la cuixe, si est li tente venans jusc’au leu; s’il n’i a tortuositeit et li invention de la dolor entor, si est qu’il en ist adés bowe, et n’i vaut medicine ne soudement par oignement; et en ces fistules persans n’a point de cure fuer que labor, et vaniteit des folz mires qui s’en entremettent.	If it is cut up to the joint of the thigh, the infection comes up to the place; if there are no twists and turns and the location of the pain is within, if it is deep seated and not reachable, then neither medicine nor immediate treatment with ointment helps; in these infected fistulas, there is no cure other than hard work and the vanity of foolish people who intervene.
En celle qui n’est mie persans et n’est mie anciene, a esperance de saniteit par fer, si com j’ai esproveit, et est que li malaides gise entre tes mains sus son dos; et li lieve les jambes jusque sus ses cuixes, et ait ses cuixes enclinees a son ventre; puis boute une tente d’arain, ou de plonc s’il i a tortuositeit, tant que tu saiches ou li tente vient.	For those that are not infected and not old, with hope of healing by iron, as I have experienced, and where the patient lies on their back; lift the legs up to the thighs, and incline the thighs toward the abdomen; then place a tent of wax or pitch if there are twists and turns, as long as you know where the infection is coming from.
Se li malaides la sent entor le fondement, si covient que tu i boutes ton doi indice, se sens adonques que li tente l’ait perciet; et soit descoverte ou tu sens entre ton doit le syfac ou la char, adonques saiches qu’elle est persans; si n’i travillier mie c’on ne la puet saner.	If the patient feels pain deep within the fundament, you must place your index finger there; if you then feel that the tendons have been pierced, know that it is purulent; if you do not work on it, it cannot be healed.
On dist toutevoie c’on em puet bien saner aucuns, mais ce avient poc; et li aide c’on i fait, si est c’on eschaufe le cautere subtil selonc la largesce de la fistule, si com il est devant dit; et le boute tout chaut en la fistule, tant qu’il viegne delez le fondement; et faice ceu II fois ou III, tant que tu saiches que ces chars fautrees soient arses, qui sont semblant a une penne d’oiseil; et puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre, tant que celle chars isse fuer, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char et soudant.	One can properly heal some cases, but this happens rarely. The aid we apply, one must heat the fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as was previously said; and place it hot in the fistula until it comes from the fundament; and do this two or three times, until you know that the charred flesh has been thoroughly burned, which resembles a bird's feather; and then cure with ointment-soaked cloths until the charred flesh is gone, then treat with an inflamed ointment to close the wound.
S’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If it is thus healed, that is well.
Se ceu, nom autrement ne puet estre sanez; et se li tente entre, et ne perce jusc’au doit qui est ou fondement, et a entre ton doi et la tente une coverture espesse de char ou de syfac, et tu vois la fistule a ceu qui enseut la coverture dou keur; si le cope des l’encomencement de la fistule, et boute adés avant la tente, et pues le cautere aprés, tant qu’il viegne au chief de la tente; et sera delivré li tente, et cherra; puis mondefie celles chars fautrees que semblent une penne d’oisel, et n’en remaigne niant.	If it is thus healed, and the tent comes out, and does not pierce just to the depth which is the foundation, and between your thumb and the tent there is a thick covering of flesh or fat, and you see the fistula at that which follows the covering from the heart; scrape from the beginning of the fistula, and apply something before the tent, and cauterize after it until it reaches the top of the tent; then the tent will be delivered and fall; then defray those flesh wounds that seem like a bird's feather, and there remain none.
Et si li sans te vaint, et cort entre toi et l’uevre, si le cauterize de feu ou de medicine ague.	And if the wound becomes infected and cuts between you and the work, cauterize with fire or with a watery medicine.
Car li cauteres de feu assemble II bones choses: c’est a savoir, l’arsure de ces chars ajostees, et l’esteinchement de sanc et la sechor de la moistor; puis le cure de tentes moillies em burre ou en choz broiez, tant que li leus giete bowe, et isse fuer li chars arse en la bowe; puis cure la plaie des oignemens soudans enjanrans dure char, et sont les medicines seches.	For the fire cautery, it comprises two good things: namely, the burning of these edges adjutant, and the stopping of blood and drying of moisture; then the treatment of wounds soaked in butter or ground cheese, until the eyes emit pus, and remove the burnt edges in the pus; then treat the wound with ointments thickening hard flesh, and are dry medicines.
Car quant il est restoree, si est sanee et ne revient mie.	For when it is restored, it is healed and does not return.
Et se fistule vient jusc’a parfont dou fondement, et est esloigniez dou cors, se li boute ton doi ou fondement, et enquier ceu.	And if the fistula comes just to the point of the foundation and is distant from the body, then probe the point or foundation, and inquire there.
Se tu sens la tente, et entre II est li toile ou li syfac ou chars, ou il est pres a percier, si n’i ait fuers que voie de fiance et d’esperance, par l’aministrement de l’une des III manieres: ou tu le cauterizes si com nos avons dit, ou tu le cope jusc’a fons, ou se tu pues si i met tentes et cure si com premier; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, que tu ne coper le tenement qui tient le fondement, et viegne li egestions par lai sens volenteit; puis le cure, si com nos avons dit; par aventure si sera sanez, ou tu esloigne celle coverture et la munde puis qu’elle est copee delez lou fondement, ou par tente ou par autre estrument apointé; puis mondefie cele char fautree qui est en la plaie, tant com tu pues; puis estudie a restorer la plaie, et a demorer la fistule en la partie defuers le fondement: si iert plus legiere chose au malaide.	And if the fistula comes just to the point of the foundation and is distant from the body, then probe the point or foundation, and inquire there. If you feel the tent, and between them is cloth or skin or edges, or it is about to perforate, then there should be no ways other than a path of faith and hope, by administering one of the three methods: either you cauterize as we have said, or you cut down to the root, or if you can, put tents and treat as first; do not go too far from the point, lest you cut the tissue that holds the foundation, and allow the passages by their own will; then treat, as we have said; perhaps it will be healed. Or you remove that cover and cleanse since it is cut close to the foundation with a tent or another pointed instrument; then depurate the affected flesh in the wound as much as you can; then study to restore the wound and keep the fistula above the foundation: this would be a lighter matter for the patient.
Et aucune fois sont fistules selonc ceste maniere: et est quant tu boutes la tente en la fistule, et elle est ou costeit dou fondement delez lou cuir desus, si pren une tente percie au chief selonc ceste forme:	And sometimes fistulas are treated in this manner: and it is when you puncture the fistula, and it is located near the base beneath the skin, so take a needle pierced at the top according to this form:
Et i boute I fil tort en II, et boute la tente a tout le fil en la fistule tant qu’il soit au chief.	And you wind the thread twice around it, and insert the needle with the thread into the fistula until it reaches the top.
S’elle est persans en la marge dou fondement dedens, adonc estrai lou fil de celui pertus, ensi que tu boutes ton doi ou fondement; et trai le chief dou fil, et assemble les II chiés ensamble, et estraint l’un a l’autre, et le laisse I jor ou II; et le restraint aucune fois, tant que li filz cope ces chars que sont entre dous, et chiecent; puis cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit soudee et sanee.	If it is near the margin beneath the base, then extract the thread from that punctured area, as you would puncture the base; and pull the top of the thread, and join the two heads together, holding them against each other, and leave them for one or two days; and hold them together once until the threads close the gaps between them completely. Then treat the wound until it is healed and sound.
Se li fistule ne perce, si la fai percier en toutes les manieres que tu pues, s’ele n’est trop em parfont.	If the fistula does not perforate, make it perforate in all ways that you can, provided it is not too close to the surface.
Car il ne covient mie faire por le lacement coper si em parfont, et puis le cure, si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	For it is not fitting to cauterize for the ligature too close to the surface, and then treat it as we have said, until it is healed.
Li forme dou spatumile espinous dont on fent la fistule si est mout agus d’une, part et trenchans; et d’autre part non, por ceu c’on ne cope mie ceu c’on ne doit mie copeir, si com tu vois ci:	The form of the spinal bone from which a fistula is made is very hard on one side and sharp; and on the other side not so much, because what should not be cauterized should not be cauterized, as you can see here:
des emorroydes	of hemorrhoids
Emorrydes sont selonc II manieres: ou elles sont dedens le fondement, ausi com grain de resin, et s’en i a petites et grans, et en cort adés sanc, et s’en i a une ou plusors, et sont defuer le fondement et au chief dou fondement; mais celles qui sont defuer si ont poc de moistor, et encort adés ou un poc d’aigue citrine ou un poc de sanc, et ont la color dou cors; et li cure de ces qui les ont dedens le fondement, si est que tu comandes au malaide qu’il s’espreigne por aleir en chambres, tant que li fondemens li isse fuer, et c’aperent li filz; si te haste, et le pent as tenailles, ou tu le tien a ton ungle, puis le cope en ses racines; et se li uncine ne les pueent tenir por ses moistors, si les prent a I drapeil, ou a couton, ou d’une piece de chamelot; et les estrai a tes dois, puis les cope, et poudre desus aucunes chaudes poudres que soient en leu de cautere; ou tu les cauterize si com il est dit ou chapistre de cautere, pues les cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li fondemens ne puet issir, si clisterize le malaide de clistere mordant et aspre por laver ceu qui est ou fondement, si qu’il puist issir apertement; cant li malaides se preint, et se li fil sont fuer dou fondement, si est li cure legiere; et est que tu les preignes a ton ungle ou as tenailles, et les cope, puis les cure si com nos avons dit, tant qu’il soit sanez, et qu’il redoute l’incision par fer.	Hemorrhoids are of two kinds: either they are within the fundament, like grains of resin, and there may be small or large ones, and some have much moisture, while others have little, sometimes only a bit of yellowish water or a bit of blood, and have the color of the flesh. The treatment for those within the fundament is to instruct the patient to lie down to relieve himself in chambers until the fundament passes them, and you can see the threads; if you are in a hurry, use tongs or your finger to remove them, then cauterize at their roots. If the moisture prevents them from being held by the fingers, remove them with flax, or cotton, or a piece of camphor. Then extract them with your fingers, cauterize, and dust over them with some warm powders that are in place of cauterization; or you can cauterize as is said in the chapter on cauterization, and treat them with other remedies until they are healed; if the fundament cannot pass them, apply astringent and bitter ointments to the patient for washing what is within the fundament, so that it may pass openly. When the patient presents, and the threads are passed from the fundament, the treatment is light; this is done by extracting them with your fingers or tongs, then cauterize as we have said until they are healed, and there is no fear of incision with iron.
Si covient que tu amenistre la costure selonc ceste maniere: pren I fil tort, et le boute en une aguille, et puis trai le fil au desus et fai percier l’aguille d’autre part, et torne les II chiez dou fil desoz l’aguille, et si soit dou large; et estraint le fil forment, puis noe le fil, et estrai l’aguille, et fai ensi de toz les autres, et en laisse I por corre la superfluiteit dou sanc; puis met sus le fondement I drapeil moilliet en oile roset ou en cerote, et met sus le fondement, et comande au malaide k’il repose; et puis le laisse tant qu’il chiecent, et quant il seront cheut, si les cure d’oignement et d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	If you must administer the suturing in this manner: take a twisted thread and put it into a needle, then draw the thread over and make the needle pierce from the other side, turn both ends of the thread under the needle, and leave them loose; tightly form the thread, tie the thread, remove the needle, and do so for all others, leaving one loose to control the excess of blood; then place a wet cloth in oil or cerate on the foundation, put it over the foundation, and command the patient to rest; and let him lie until he mends, and when they are healed, apply ointment and other treatment until he is well.
dou sechement dou fiens ou fondement	dry the foundation or wound steadily
Maintes fois avient sechement de fiens en l’intestine, et par constrignement de nature, et quant li maladie est vielle et medicine n’i vaut.	Many times there is a dry cough in the intestine, and by constraint of nature, and when the disease is old and medicine does not help.
Si covient que tu reses a la point d’un spatumile ou a ton ungle l’escorce desus, qui ne le laisse a moistir; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sodez si com il covient; et s’il ne puet soder, si rencomence la rasure plus fort que devant, tant qu’il saine mout, et soit escorchiez; puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	If it is necessary that you reset at the point of a spatule or under your nail the bark above, which does not leave moist; then cure it until it dries as it should; and if it cannot dry, then renew the scraping more forcefully than before, until it heals much, and be scorched; then cure it until it is healed.
dou fremit	of trembling
Formice est une petite apparance fautree antor le cors, et va mout em parfont; et aucune fois la trueve li frois, et le sent on ausi comme mort de fremit, et vient en tout le cors, et plus as mains que autre part.	A formice is a small false appearance on the body, and goes much beyond it. Sometimes one finds coldness, and feels like death by trembling, and comes over the whole body, more in the hands than elsewhere.
Et li cure si est que tu pren une cainne d’une penne d’oie, ou une penne de vultul fort, et met celle caine sus le fremit, tant que li cercles porpreigne le fremit tot entor; puis torne ta main a tout la cainne tant que tu copes tout entor le fremit, et le met em parfont, et esraiche le fremit de ses racines.	And the cure is that you take a needle from an ostrich feather, or a very hard vulture feather, and place that needle on the tremor, so that the purple circles completely surround it; then turn your hand with all the needle until you cover the tremor entirely, and put it perfectly, and root out the tremor from its roots.
Et se tu vues, si fai ceu d’une caine d’arain ou de fer selonc ceste forme, et soit subtilz desoz et traians desus:	And if you see, do this with a needle of silk or iron according to this form, and make it thin beneath and drawing over:
ne mie perciet, por mues tenir au doi, et mues presser Et se tu vues, si cauterize lou fremit, si com il est devant ou chapistre de cautere.	Not piercing it, for you to hold with the two fingers, and press. And if you see, cauterize the tremor, as is described in the preceding chapter on cauterization.
de la forme dou clistere	of the shape of the shoulder
Aucune fois fait on clistere d’argent ou d’archaut, ou d’arain fondut ou mailliet; et aucune fois fait on de ces estrumens petis et grans, selonc ces a cui il sont amenistrez.	Any time the shoulder is dislocated using a silver or copper mold, or one made from melted iron or metal; and at any time these instruments are made, whether small or large, according to those for which they are intended.
Cil donques c’on amenistre en la cure des enfans et qui sont foible et dolorous, sont petis.	Those instruments that are used in the treatment of children and who are weak and painful are small.
Li forme dou clistere petit et grant si est desus large, ou li ventres est liiez selonc ceste maniere:	The shape of the shoulder, whether small or large, is broad, or the stomach is tied in this manner:
et i ait une desevrance ou li ventres soit liiez, si com tu vois, et li chiez soit dedens perciez; et ait a l’un des costez II pertus, et en l’autre I; et soit li ventres ou om met les medicines d’une vessie de beste ou de parchemin, et soit perciez tout entor de menus pertus, et ait entre chescun pertus I doit d’espaice, puis boute en ces pertus I fil fort de fil crut tort en X ou enqui entor, et assemble le ventre si com est une chievre; et quant li medicine est dedens, si la lie a l’estrument devant d’un fil fort, puis clisterize; et c’est li forme dou cercle:	And let it have an opening or the stomach be tied as you see, and the shoulder be pierced through; and let it have two perforations on one side and one on the other. Let the stomach contain the medicines in a bladder of beast or parchment, and be pierced all around with small openings, with one digit's breadth between each opening. Then insert a strong thread of sinew twisted ten times or several times into these openings, and join it together like a sheep. When the medicine is inside, tie it in front with a strong thread, then reset it; and this is the shape of the circle:
Et soit li medicine ne trop chaude ne trop froide, et oint le chief dou clistere d’oile ou d’aubun d’uef, ou de semblant chose, puis le boute ens legierement; puis l’espreigne li ministres a ses II mains ensamble, tant qu’il soit toz vuis, puis estrai lou clistere, et lieve li malaides ses jambes a la paroit, et se li medicine vuet issir, si la teigne tant com il puet; et s’il dort une nuit atot, si est plus grans aide.	And let the medicine neither be too hot nor too cold, and anoint the head of the cistern with oil or yolk of egg, or something similar, then insert it gently; then the ministers withdraw their hands together until it is all visible, then remove the cistern, and lift the patient's legs to the wall, and if the medicine sees fit to come out, so let it come forth as much as it will; and if he sleeps a whole night, it is greater help.
Et se tu le clisterizes em maladie de decorrement de ventre, et li medicine se haste d’issir, si le rencomence tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you cisternize for a disease of diarrhea and the medicine hastens to come out, then repeat it until he is cured.
Et se li emorroide sont ou fondement, ou aposteme, si soit li clistere ausi subtilz com por I enfant; et c’est li forme dou clistere subtil sus coi li cuir soit estraint:	And if the hemorrhoids are internal or in the foundation, or abscess, then use the cistern as subtle as for a child; and this is the form of the subtle cistern on which the skin is constrained.
des plaies	of wounds
Nos avons jai dit en la division la cure des plaies; or vos dirons les cures de mains et de medicine, selonc l’acomplissement.	We have already spoken about the treatment of wounds in the division of wound care; now we will discuss hand treatments and medicines according to their effectiveness.
Je dis que les plaies sont diverses selonc ceu qu’elles sont faites, et selonc les leus ou les plaies sont faites, et de coi elles sont faites.	I say that wounds are diverse according to how they are made, and according to the joints or parts where they are made, and by what means they are caused.
Les choses par coi plaies sont faites sont par gitement de piere, et taille d’espee et de couteil, ou de lance ou de fust ou de siette, ou de semblans choses; ou que sont faites selonc les leus dou cors, si com plaie que chiet sus le col, ou sus le chief, ou le peis, ou le ventre, ou le foie, et semblans membres; et je vos dirai la cure de chescune plaie, et encomencerai as plaies dou chief simples, car li remenbrance venra en son chapistre.	The things by which wounds are made are by the impact of a stone, and cuts from a sword or knife, or a lance or pole or arrow, or similar things; or they are made according to the joints of the body, such as a wound that falls on the neck, or the head, or the shoulder, or the belly, or the liver, and similar limbs; and I will tell you the treatment for each wound, starting with simple wounds of the head, because their chapter will come later.
Je dis que quant simple plaie vient ou chief, et li os n’est brisiez, si pren garde se c’est de gitement de piere ou de semblans choses, et li cuir est toutevoie rompus et est li plaie grans, et tu doutes levement d’aposteme chaut: si le fai tantost sainier de la cephalique meismement s’il vient poc de sanc de la plaie, et soit li sainie au contraire de la partie navree; et eschuisse li malaides repletion de vin et de viandes grosses.	I say that when a simple wound comes or a head injury, and the bone is not broken, then take care if it is from a stone impact or similar things, and the skin is fully torn and the wound is large, and you slightly doubt an abscess hot: so do this immediately with the cephalic sinner itself if little blood comes from the wound, and let the sinew be on the contrary from the damaged part; and avoid the patient's wine overfilling and large meat.
Et s’il ne vuet sainier, si soit amenuisie sa viande, et ne boive point de vin, ne ne menjuce point de char; et met sor la plaie, se apostemes chaus i vient, coton moilliet en oile roset soulement, ou en vin stiptice; et s’il n’i a aposteme chaut, si met sus la plaie, s’elle est fresche a tout son sanc, et elle n’est muee par l’air, poudre, que je dirai un poc ci aprés; et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucuns oignemens, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it should not be sinned, let the flesh be diminished, and do not drink wine nor eat meat; and place on the wound, if hot abscesses come, only wet cotton in rose oil, or in styptic wine; and if there is no hot abscess, place on the wound, if it is fresh with all its blood, and has not dried by air or powder, the powder I will say a little later; and if the fire has dried it, place some ointments until it is healed.
Et se li plaie est grans si com de tailleure d’espee et de semblans, et les levres ne se pueent assembler par tentes, si les assemble par cousture, si com je dirai as plaies dou ventre, de la costure.	And if the wound is large, like a sword cut and similar, and the edges cannot be brought together by stretching, stitch them together, as I will say for wounds of the belly, regarding stitching.
Se li plaie est descoverte de l’os, et pent, et ne tient mais que a un poc, si le cope; puis cure la plaie de medicine, et restoure char dure en leu de cuir, et comande au malaide a mengier grosses viandes, si com testes et froment cuit, ausi com poulz, et semblans choses.	If the wound is exposed to bone, penetrable, and holds together only by a little, sew it; then treat the wound with medicine, restoring hard flesh in place of skin, and instruct the patient to eat solid meats, such as heads and cooked wheat, like pulses, and similar things.
Et se tu trueves ou cuir porriture, et il n’aert a l’os, si cope lou porrit tot, et giete fuer, puis le cure; et se il ait artere en la plaie ou voine, dont sans cort, et il ne puet estainchier par medicines, si quier l’artere, et se tu la trueves desloie, si la lie d’un fil; et se ceu ne profite mie, si la cauterize.	And if you find rotted skin, and it does not reach the bone, sew it completely, apply salve, then treat it. And if there is an artery in the wound or vein, cut without cutting deep, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then tie the artery with a thread; and if this does not help, cauterize it.
Et se ces plaies sont petites et simples, si est li cure legiere: et est que tu mettes ens ceste poudre qui soude ainsois que li ars l’ait muee.	And if these wounds are small and simple, the treatment is light: and it is that you put this powder which binds as though the arsenic had burned them.
Et li maniere de la poudre si est: pren encens une partie; sanc de dragon II parties; chalz vive III parties, et le poudre subtilment, et emple la plaie, et l’estraint forment, tant qu’elle s’aerse bien et se joigne a tout son sanc; et puis la lie bien, et la laisse sens desliier, s’elle n’enfle; car on n’oste la madicine tant qu’ele soit sanee.	And the manner of the powder is: take incense one part; dragon's blood two parts; live resin three parts, and powder them subtilly, and apply it to the wound, holding it firmly until it burns well and joins with all its blood; then bind it well, and leave it undisturbed unless it swells; for the medicine is not removed until it is healed.
Et aucune fois fait on ceu de chalz soulement, quant on n’ait l’encens ne lou sanc de dragon, mais que li ars n’ait muee la plaie.	And sometimes one does this with resin alone when one lacks incense or the dragon's blood, but allows the arsenic to burn the wound.
Et se li ars ait mueit la plaie, meismement en esteit, si n’i met om mie ceste poudre; mais met sus aucuns oignemens digestis, ou poulz de farine d’orge faites d’aigue et de miel, tant qu’ele giete bowe; puis le cure d’autres cures tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the art has changed the wound, even while it was, one does not put this powder there; but apply some digested ointments, or pulses of flour of barley made with water and honey until they exude dew; then cure with other cures until it is healed.
Et se li brisure d’os vient avec la plaie, et elle est petite, si l’estrai as pinceures subtilz; et je vos dirai ci aprés les brisures dou chief.	And if the bone fracture comes with the wound and it is small, extract it with fine forceps; and I will tell you about the fractures of the head later.
de la plaie dou col	of the wound of the neck
Se plaie vient ou col et elle est simple, si n’a point de difference entre li et celi dou chief, mais se li ners dou col ou li artere est copee.	If the wound comes to the neck and it is simple, there is no difference between this and that of the head, but if the nerves of the neck or the artery are cut.
Se c’est li ners, si n’i a autre engien que laissier la cure, et n’i mettre nulle chose restraignant, car il nuit as ners et les fait retraire; et ne mettre sus la plaie rien froit, car li substance des ners est froide, et li continuation d’aus si est avec le cerveil, qui est li plus haus membres; mais soit li medicine souez, si com chalz lavee en aigue douce, et mellee avec oile roset, et cucie lavee ausi en aigue douce, et autres pieres de mine selonc ceste maniere, et oignemens moistes.	If it is the nerves, there is no other way but to leave the treatment alone and put nothing restrictive on them, for it harms the nerves and causes them to wither; and do not apply anything cold to the wound, because the substance of the nerves is cold, and their continuation lies with the brain, which is the highest member; but use medicines above, such as boiled wax in sweet water, mixed with rose oil, and boiled cucumbers in sweet water, and other mine stones in this manner, and moist ointments.
Et se li plaie est grans, si la cout et lie de bendes, puis la cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the wound is large, stitch and bind it with bandages, then leave it to heal.
Et se les plaies sont parfondes et ele est chevee et pleinne de bowe, si la perce ou plus bas leu; et se li artere est copee, et decorremens de sanc en vient, si la desoivre, et la loie, et la cauterize se mestier est; et se li espinee de la gorge est copee, ou li keurs, et li conduiz est gardez, par coi la viande va, si cout le keur sus la cainne de la gorge, et ne touchier la gorge mais la remet selonc sa figure naturel; et puis l’estraint avenanment, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le cure d’oignemens desechans tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li plaie a fait empression en l’os, si la quier; et s’il i a pieces d’os, si les trai fuers toz se tu pues, et ces que tu ne pues avoir, si laisse tant que li plaie porrisse, et soit desevree et aligie li issue; et se li plaie est fresche, si poudre sus la poudre que j’ai dit.	And if the wounds are deep and filled with pus, pierce or cut lower in the limb; and if an artery is severed, and bleeding occurs, stop the bleeding, ligate it, and cauterize if necessary; and if the spinal cord of the throat is severed, or the vessels, and the passage through which the flesh flows is guarded, so that the flesh can flow, stitch the vessel above the throat canal, but do not touch the throat itself, placing it according to its natural form; then bind it properly, and let it for a few days, then treat it with drying ointments until it heals; and if the wound has made an impression in the bone, set it; and if there are pieces of bone, remove all that you can, and leave what you cannot have to rot, allowing the pus to drain out; and if the wound is fresh, sprinkle it with the powder I have mentioned.
Et s’il a en la plaie os et il i a fistule, si la cure ensi com j’ai dit en son chapistre.	And if there is bone in the wound and there is a sinus, the treatment should be as I have said in my chapter.
de la plaie de lance ou de coutel	of the wound from a spear or knife
Se c’est cop de lance ou de coutel, et li plaie est parfonde, si regarde se de la plaie saut ventositez cant li malaides alainne: saiches adonques que li plaie est mortelz; et s’elle n’est parfonde, et elle est fresche a tout son sanc, si n’i mettre mie a la premiere houre la poudre, ne ne la liier mie por le sanc que ne demorse em parfont, et reviegne au cuer, et ocie lou malaide; mais i met oignement atractif, et le lie II fois le jor; et se tu n’as oignement, si met en la plaie viel coton por succier fuers la moistor, et fai dormir le malaide sus la plaie III jors, ou IIII, ou plusors; si n’i venra mie spasme, ne tremor male de cuer n’estraingnemens d’alainne; et quant tu vois les bones dispositions, si saiches que li plaie est sauve.	If it is a wound from a spear or knife, and the wound is deep, examine whether from the wound there are any signs that the patient will die: then know that the wound is fatal; and if it is not deep but fresh with all its blood, do not apply powder at the first hour nor leave it uncovered for the blood to stop properly and return to the heart, which would kill the patient; but apply an attractor ointment and change the dressing twice a day; and if you have no ointment, put old cotton in the wound to drain out the moisture, and let the patient rest on the wound for three days, or four, or more; so there will be no spasm, nor male heart tremor from deep pain; and when you see proper healing signs, know that the wound is saved.
Cure la donques de tentes et d’autres cures, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’elle ne puet saner, et oevre, adés saiches que il i a fistule; si la cure si com on doit.	Treat the sores and other treatments until they are healed; and if they cannot be healed, operate, then you know there is a fistula; treat the wound as it should be.
Et se li plaie est d’incision d’espee ou de coutel, et elle est simple, ou pis ou au dos, si la cure de ceu qui est devant; s’elle est grans, de cousture; et s’elle est petite, de poudre, et s’elle est empressee en l’os, et en a copeit pieces, si quier la plaie, et les trai fuers s’il sont desevrez; et s’il ne sont desevrez, si laisse porrir la plaie, si aligera li estractions; et des autres plaies as autres membres est li jugemens si com nos avons dit.	And if the wound is from a sword or knife incision, and it is simple or worse or on the back, treat the one in front; if it is large, stitch it; and if it is small, powder it; and if it is near the bone and has cut pieces, clean the wound, and remove any loose threads; and if they are not loose, let the wound drain to lighten the extraction; and for other wounds on other limbs, make judgments as we have said.
dou derrompement dou ventre	for the rupture of the belly
Li derompemens dou ventre est grans et moiens et petis; de la grant plaie saut aucune fois li intestine, ou li ners des intestines, par coi li intromission d’aus; et li costure est plus malaisie, et aucune fois vaut pis li petite plaie que li grans, por ceu c’on remet plus a poinnes les intestines en, s’on ne les i remet de chaut en chaut; por ce que li intestine enflent tantost qu’il sentent le froit, si rentrent plus a poinnes, et por ceu vaut mues li moieinne plaie, por ceu c’on ramoine mues l’intestine a son leu que as autres II Et saiches que li routure dou ventre est selonc IIII manieres: les II costures communes avienent en la costure dou ventre, et li costure des autres plaies dou cors et II autres costures propres sont communes as autres plaies; et toutevoie elles sont plus propres avec la costure dou ventre, et je dirai une chescune et declairerai.	The ruptures of the abdomen are great and medium and small; from a large wound, sometimes the intestines or the nerves of the intestines come out; and the stitching is more difficult, and sometimes a smaller wound proves worse than a larger one, because we cannot easily put the intestines back in place without warmth; for when they feel cold, they swell quickly and are harder to position, and thus a medium-sized wound is better managed, as we must reset the intestines to their proper place. And know that the rupture of the abdomen occurs according to four ways: the two common stitches happen at the abdominal wall seam, and the stitches for other body wounds and the other two specific seams are commonly used with other wounds; yet all the same they are more suitable with the abdominal stitch, and I will say each one and explain.
Je di que quant li plaie est petite, et aucune chose de l’intestine ist fuer, et griés chose est dou remettre, ceu est par l’une des II manieres: ou por la petitece de la plaie, si com nos avons dit, ou por ce que li intestine est enflez por le froit.	I say that when the wound is small, and no intestinal matter is present, and there is nothing to remove, this can be done by one of two methods: either due to the smallness of the wound, as we have said, or because the intestine is swollen due to cold.
Et quant il est frois, eschaufez lou en teil maniere: moillie une esponge ou I mol drapeil en aigue tede soulement, ou tu cuis en aigue squinant et cipre et spique, et arose l’intestine tant que li enfleure soit ostee; et aucune fois fait ce vins restraingnans, et est muedre que awe soule por desenfler.	And when it is cold, warm it in a proper manner: moisten a sponge or a cloth with only hot water, or you can boil it in water with cinnamon and cypress and spike, and wash the intestine until the swelling is removed; and after doing this several times with constricting wines, let it be reduced to relieve the swelling.
Et quant tu vois l’enfleure departir, si amoiste l’intestine d’aigue ou altee et malves soient cuites, car par ceu est aligie li entree a poc de chose; et s’il n’i puet entrer, si fent un poc la plaie a l’estrument de coi on cope les emorroydes; et li premiere cure est muedre que li taille, que nus n’i doit taillier sens grant necessiteit n’i ait; et c’est li estrumens por le fendre: si trenche dedens en la corbeure et defuer non, et vez ci la forme:	And when you see the swelling depart, moisten the intestine with water or with cooked ale and mead, for by these it is alleviated when a small amount can enter; and if nothing can enter, make a small incision in the wound with the instrument used to treat hemorrhoids; and let the first cure be reduced that it not be cut unless there is great necessity; and this is the tool to make the incision: so cut inside along the curve and do not exceed, and see here the form.
Et quant li plaie est enlargie, et li intestine saut fuer, si le remet arer selonc la forme naturel en son leu propre, se tu en as pooir, car ce vaut mues.	And when the wound is enlarged, and the intestine has slipped out, put it back in place according to its natural form in its proper location, if you have the ability, for this requires movement.
Quant li plaie est large, et elle est en la partie desoz lou ventre, si covient que tu faices gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et met ses jambes plus haut que son chief; et s’elle est en la partie desoz le ventre, si met le chief et le pis plus haut que les parties desoz, et ausi se li routure dou ventre est en l’une des II parties si met t’entente en ceu que li partie navree soit plus haute que li autre; et ensi covient amenistrer ceu que je dis en plaies grans et moienes.	And when the wound is large, and it is in the area below the abdomen, you should make the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the area above the abdomen, you should raise the head and buttocks higher than the other parts. And if the abdominal rupture is in one of the two areas, you should place the part that is intact higher than the other part; and thus you should administer as I say for both large and medium wounds.
Es plaies petites met ceu que t’est apparilliet, puis aies entre tes mains I ministre pitous ki teigne toute la routure a sa main, et assemble les levres; et c’est la maniere commune de costures, et est que tu preignes une aguille ou plusors, selonc la quantiteit de la largesce de la plaie, puis laisse des le chief de la plaie I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une aguille ou il ait I boin fil fort; et perce les II chiés dou cuir avec les II chiés dou siphac, qui est desoz le cuir dedens, tant que tu la faices percier de celle partie, et assemble les II chief dou siphac les IIII ensamble; puis l’estrain d’un fil double entor l’aguille de II pars, puis assemble les II chiés de la plaie avenanment, et puis laisse I doi d’espaice, et i fiche une autre aguille; puis la lie dou fil si com tu as fait la premiere aguille, et ne cesser de ceu faire selonc ceu que tu as mestier des aguilles, tant que toute li plaie soit restrainte; et soient les aguilles moienes, entre subtilz et grosses, car les aguilles subtilz copent toute la char, et les trop grosses si ne pueent mie bien entrer: por ceu covient qu’elles soient moienes; et ne covient mie bouter les aguilles trop au defuer de la char et dou cuir, k’elles ne copent et oevrent la plaie devant la soudure; et puis cope les chiés des aguilles, qu’elles ne blecent lou malaide au dormir, et i met tentes ou drapelz au chiés des aguilles por mues tenir, et les laisse tant que li plaie soit soudee; et ceste maniere de costure as aguilles est plus covenauble en petites plaies, car il i soffist une aguille ou II Li seconde costure si est commune, et est que tu assemble les II chiés dou cuir et les II chiés dou syfac ensamble a une aguille ou il ait I fort fil moien; et quant tu avras perciez ces chiez toz IIII ensamble, si ramoinne l’aguille a la partie ou tu as encomenciet, en la maniere c’on cout les dras; et met d’espaice entre chescune costure la grossece d’un menor doi; ceste costure sevent li home, et je cousi une plaie c’uns hons avoit ou ventre, qui estoit navrez d’un coutel, et estoit li plaie plus d’une palme de grant, et issoit des intestines bien II palmes de grant, et estoit li plaie enmi le ventre.	For small wounds, use what is at hand, then have at your disposal the minister of pittous who can reach the entire rupture with his hand, and close the lips; this is the common method of suturing, where you take one needle or more, according to the size of the wound. Leave a space of two finger breadths from the head of the wound, and insert a needle with a good strong thread; pierce both sides of the skin with the needles inside, so that it is pierced from this part, and assemble the three heads of the needles together. Then pass a double thread through the needle from both sides, then bring the two sides of the wound together properly, and leave the space of two finger breadths, and insert another needle; then tie the thread as you did with the first needle, and continue doing this according to your need for needles until all the wound is secured. The needles should be medium in size, neither too fine nor too thick, because very fine needles cut through the flesh entirely, and those that are too thick cannot enter well: therefore they should be medium; do not insert the needles too deep into the flesh and skin so that they cut the wound before suturing; then remove the heads of the needles so they do not irritate the patient during sleep, and place small cloths or napkins at the needle heads to keep them in place, leaving them until the wound is healed. This method with needles is more suitable for small wounds, as one needle suffices for a second stitch; this is where you assemble the two sides of the skin and the two sides of the siphac on one needle with a medium strong thread. When you have pierced these heads all four together, retract the needle to the part where you began, in the manner we sew cloth; and place the size of one finger between each stitch. This method is recognized by people, and I sewed a wound from which a man had been cut on his belly, which was more than a palm's length large, and contained intestines twice the length of a palm, and it was located in the abdomen.
Je li ramenai l’intestine puis k’il ot esteit XXIIII houres fuer, et fut li plaie soudee jusc’a XV jors, et le curai, et fut sanez.	I brought back the intestine after twenty-four hours, and the wound healed in fifteen days, and I treated it, and he was cured.
Et li mire l’avoient jugiet qu’il morroit, et ce fut miracle; et ne le curai mie d’oignement, car je estoie en I leu ou on n’en trovoit point, ne nule medicines; et metoie sens plus sus la plaie coton viel II fois le jor, et le lavoie d’aigue de miel tant qu’il fut sanez.	And the priest had judged that he would die, and it was a miracle; and I did not treat him with ointment, for I was in a place where none could be found, nor any medicines; and placed old cotton on the wound twice a day, and washed it with honey water until he was cured.
Or vos dirai les II propres manieres de cousture: pren l’aguille, et la boute des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens; quant elle a perciet le keur de droit en droit, si lai le chief dou siphac ou cousteit ou tu as bouteit l’aguille, et la fai percier d’autre part des la partie dedens jusc’a celi defuer; et li entendemens de ceste costure si est que tu cous ausi com li peletier font les pelz, et que tu laisses une fois le syfac d’une part, et le reprent d’autre, tant que li costure soit toute acomplie.	Or I will tell you the two proper methods of suturing: take the needle, and thread it from outside in; when it has pierced through directly opposite, leave the end of the needle or the suture thread on the syphax or where you have threaded the needle, and pierce again from inside out. The understanding of this suture is that you sew as a tanner would sew hides, leaving the syphax on one side and returning to it from another until the suture is completely completed.
Li seconde maniere de costure, que Galiens dist proprement, si est si com aucun font, qui assemblent les II parties ensamble naturelment, et apploient l’un des chief dou syfac a l’autre chief, en teil maniere: fiche une aguille ou chief dou mirach prochiene, et fai percier celui leu soulement, et laisse les II chiés dou syfac; puis torne l’aguille, et la fai percier des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, as II chiés dou syfac; puis fai percier l’un et l’autre des la partie defuers jusc’a celi dedens, en II autres chiés dou mirach que sont on l’autre costeit; et c’est li muedre maniere de costure et li plus commune.	The second method of suturing, as Galen precisely describes, is such that no one does it differently. They join the two parts naturally and apply one end of the needle to the other's edge in this manner: pierce a thread with an end of the needle closely, then pierce only that side, leaving both edges of the tissue; then turn the needle, and pierce from the opposite part inward to those edges of the tissue; then pierce one and the other from the opposite part inward, in two other holes of the needle on the other side. This is the finest method of suturing and the most common.
Galiens si dist ceste parolle, et aucun le tesmoignent, c’on doit coudre le ventre a II aguilles, ou il ait fil en chescune; et doit on bouter l’une aguille d’une part, et l’autre d’autre, en la maniere de ces qui cousent corroies; et saiches que quant li routure est enmi lou ventre, si est li cousture plus griez que des autres leus dou ventre.	Galen says this word, and no one testifies against it, that we must stitch the belly with two needles, where there is thread in each; and we must put one needle from one side, and the other from the other, in the manner of those who sew wounds. And know that when the rupture is within the belly, the stitching is more grievous than on other parts of the belly.
Li jugemens de la plaie si est telz com li jugemens des autres plaies: et est que quant tu trueves la plaie fresche a tout son sanc, ainsois que li ars l’ait muee, si remet arer l’intestine, et lou cout; puis met sus la poudre enjanrant char, et se li ars l’ait muee, si met sus aucun oignement que soit present, tant que li plaie bowe; et chicent li fil, et soient soudez li sifac, et li mirach; puis cure la plaie si com les autres, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu n’as medicines, si met sus, tantost qu’ele comance a giter bowe, coton viel, et le remue II fois le jor tant k’il soit sanez.	The judgment of the wound is such as the judgments of other wounds: and it is that when you find the wound fresh with all its blood, as the surgeon has drawn it, you remove the intestines and the skin; then put on powder for growing flesh, and if the surgeon has drawn it, you put on any ointment that is present until the wound heals; bind the threads, and let the sponges and the lint be sewn; then cure the wound as with others until it is healed; and if you have no medicines, you put on old cotton soon as it begins to exude fluid, and change it twice a day until it is healed.
Car tu n’as mestier d’autre medicine en plusors dispositions cant les plaies sont simples; et se tu doutes que li plaie ne faice communiteit as membres principelz, si covient ke tu moilles lainne legiere en oile de tempree chalor, ou en oile roset, et la met entor les angres, et desoz les asselles; et s’il sent dolor ou porriture en bouelz, et maintes fois avient, si les clisterize de vin noir tede, et meismement se li porriture vient jusc’a l’intestine; et le perce dedens, et saiches que quant c’est li gros intestines, si est plus legier a saner que li petis.	For you have no need of other medicine in many situations where the wounds are simple; and if you doubt that the wound does not communicate with the principal members, it is right that you moisten fine linen in tempered warm oil or in rose oil, and put it between the layers, and under the stitches; and if there is pain or putrefaction in boils, which often happens, then use enemas of black tawny wine, especially if the putrefaction comes to the intestines; and puncture within, and know that when it is the large intestines, it is easier to heal than the small.
Li intestine qui est apelez «jeun» ne puet saner quant il est navrez, et c’est por la planteit des voinnes que i sont, et por la subtiliteit de tout le cors, et l’aprochement de sa nature des ners.	The intestine that is called "jeun" cannot heal when it is severed, and this is due to the closeness of the veins there, and the subtlety of the whole body, and its proximity to the nerves.
Et si li zirbe saut de la plaie, si le remet arrier ausi com l’intestine, tandis qu’il est fres; et s’il est vielz et devenus vers ou noir, si covient que tu lies le leu qui est noir, que decorremens de sanc n’i viegne, car il i a voinnes et arteres; puis cope ceu qui est entre le liien, et met les II chiés pendans des la partie desoz la plaie jusque defuer por aligier l’estraction quant li zirbes chiet, et li plaie bowe.	And if the shoulder jumps from the wound, reset it back as with the intestine while it is fresh; and if it is old and turned to brown or black, you must tie the part that is black, to prevent blood flow, for there are veins and arteries there; then cut what is between the ties, and place the two heads down below the part of the wound until above to ease the extraction when the shoulder falls, and the wound heals.
de la routure dou boueil	of the rupture of the bone
Quant li intestine est rons, et li plaie est petite, si la puet on restorer en aucuns homes, por ceu que je vis que uns hons fut navrez ou ventre d’une lance; et estoit li plaie au destre de l’estomac, et fut envillie et devint fistule, et en issoit li egestion et li ventositez; je i mis cure selonc ceu que je poi, et ne cessai de subtilier tant qu’il fut sanez, et li leus soudez.	When the intestines are intact, and the wound is small, one can restore it in some people, for I saw that a man was wounded or cut by a lance; the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and became fistulous, and there issued from it excretions and flatulence; I treated it as best I could, and did not cease to cauterize until it healed, and the tissues were sutured.
Et quant je le vis souder, je doutai que li malaides n’eust mal en son ventre; et il n’i ot point de mal, mais demora en millors dispositions, et menjans et bevans; et dirent aucun experimentors que quant il a petite plaie en l’intestine, qu’il doit estre liiez en teil maniere: pren fremis a grans testes, puis assemble les levres de la plaie, et quant li fremis ait overte la bouche, si la met sus les II levres, si qu’elle estraigne sa bouche sus; et puis li cope la teste, et ce se tient si qu’il ne puet desliier, puis met I autre fremit aprés en celle maniere que devant, tant que li plaie soit toute porprise; et cout la plaie.	And when I saw it heal, I doubted that the patient would have pain in his abdomen; and there was no pain at all, but he remained in better condition, eating and drinking. And some surgeons said that when a small wound is on the intestine, it should be tied in such a manner: take thread of large needles, then gather the edges of the wound together, and when the thread has opened the mouth, put it on the two edges so that it clamps its mouth shut; then cover the head, and this remains so that it cannot be untied. Then put another thread after in that manner as before, until the wound is completely filled; and suture the wound.
Cil chief si s’aerdent en l’intestine, et ne vient nulle nuisance au malaide, et se puet on liier l’intestine d’un fil subtil qui est copez de l’intestine d’une beste, en teil maniere: pren le chief de cest fil d’intestine que soit mout descharnez, et puis lie au chief de cest fil I fil de lin subtil tort, puis boute le fil en l’aguille, et en cout l’intestine, et le ramoinne en la routure; et ceste maniere de costure de fremis nen est fuers que selonc la voie de fiance et d’esperance; et se li plaie est grans et large, meismement quant elle est en l’un des grailes intestines, si n’i a engien ne santeit, fuer que subtiliteit.	If the chief is seared in the intestine, and no harm comes to the patient, and one can sew the intestine with a thin thread cut from the intestine of an animal in this manner: take the head of this intestinal thread that be most unshrunk, and then tie at the head of this intestinal thread a fine linen thread twisted, then put the thread into the needle, and suture the intestine, and tighten at the wound; and this method of suturing for a tremor is not removed except according to the way of faith and hope; and if the wound is large and wide, especially when it is in one of the larger intestines, there is nothing that can be done but with subtlety.
de fistule ou qu’ele soit	Of the fistula or if it be
Saiches que toute plaie ou aposteme, quant il enveillist, si est apelee universement «fistule», et meismement quant elle est chevee et rent bowe.	Know that any wound or abscess, when it has formed, is universally called "fistula", and especially when it is closed and round.
Et fistule est selonc la verteit nodation fautree dure et blainche, ou on ne sent dolor, et est ausi chevee com li penne d’un oiseil; et aucune fois en saut clere bowe, et autre fois espesse; aucune fois poc, et autre fois assez; et je en ai jai parleit en la division des plaies, que toute plaie que n’est sanee, et il n’i a char, ce n’est fuers que par une des VIIII causes: c’est a savoir, par la petitece dou sanc ou cors; ou por sa malice; ou por ceu qu’il i a char dure dedens, et sus les levres, que n’i laisse naistre char; ou il i a trop de bowe; ou li leus est porris, et li matiere est de male qualiteit; ou li medicine n’est mie bone en la cure; ou por ceu que li corruption est maniere de pestilence; ou por la proprieteit en la region est tardive li digestion, et tarde li santeit, et enflee par nature; ou il i a voinnes ou os: et j’ai ja mostreit toutes ces causes, et les signes, et les cures de medicines en la division.	And fistula is according to the true nodation hard and white, where one does not feel pain, and it is also closed like the feathers of an eye; sometimes clear round, and at other times thick; sometimes small, and at other times large; and I have spoken of this in the division of wounds, that any wound that is not healed and has no flesh, can only come forth through one of the nine causes: namely, by the smallness of the blood or flesh; or by its malice; or because there is hard flesh within, and above the edges, which does not allow flesh to grow; or there is too much pus; or the bones are rotted, and the matter is of bad quality; or the medicine is not good in the treatment; or because the corruption is like a pestilence; or due to the property in the region where digestion is delayed, and health is slow, and naturally swollen; or there are veins or bone: and I have already shown all these causes, and their signs, and treatments with medicines in the division.
Or covient que je te faice a savoir la cure de fistule qui est faite par oevre de mains.	Or it must be that I teach you the treatment of an abscess caused by manual intervention.
Saiches que fistule avient en tous membres dou cors; car il i a fistules que vienent as grans voines, et as arteres, et as ners, ou au syfac, ou a l’intestine, ou a la vessie, ou a aucunes des costes, ou a l’espinee dou dos, ou a aucune jointe des mains ou des piez; et si a teil que vient a la proprieteit dou membre principeil, et as semblans leus.	Know that an abscess can occur in all parts of the body; for there are abscesses that come from large veins, and arteries, and nerves, or in the throat, or intestines, or bladder, or some of the ribs, or the spine of the back, or any joint of the hands or feet; and so they affect the principal part of the limb, and similar ones.
Et toutes les fistules que sont de ceste maniere sont de grief sanation, et n’i a fors que labour, et ignorance; et se il i a aucune fistule que ne veigne mie jusc’a leu que j’ai dit, et tu as fiance de la cure, et tu la vues conoistre, si pren une tente d’arain ou de fer, se li fistule est droite, si la quier; et se li fistule est torte, si la cerche d’une subtil tente de plonc, car li plons se ploie mues entor la tortuositeit; et se li fistule a mains pertus et tu ne la pues mie bien cerchier par tentes, si la clisterize par l’un des pertus, car la moistors si cort d’un pertus a autre, et la mundifie; puis la quier saigement a ton pooir, que tu conoisses s’il i a os ou nerf, et est chevee em parfont, et demande bien au malaide de la dolor qu’il sent au presser de ta main, et le leu ou il la sent; et quant tu savras vraiement le leu ou elle est, et s’elle est loing de jointure, ou de nerf, ou d’artere ou de voine, ou en aucuns des leus que je t’ai dit, si la cope selonc ceu que je t’ai dit, et oste fuer la fautreure et les chars corrumpues que sont dedens; et puis la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee, et se li fistule est bien parfonde de droit endroit, si covient que tu copes em parfont, tant com tu pues, puis i met tentes moillies en medicine ague, et les boute jusc’au chief de la fistule, tant que li medicine corrode la superfluiteit qui est demoree au fons; et puis i met oignemens enjanrans sainne char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez par ceu, si le cauterize si com nos avons dit, et se li os est corrompus de la fistule, si le cope.	And all abscesses of this nature are serious for health, and there is nothing but labor and ignorance; and if there is any abscess that does not come from the source I have said, and you have confidence in its treatment, and you can recognize it, take a tent of iron or brass, if the abscess is straight, then probe it; and if the abscess is curved, use a fine linen tent for probing, because the linen bends around the curve. And if the abscess has openings and you cannot thoroughly probe it with tents, inject medicine through one of the openings, for moisture persists between the openings and cleanses them; then probe carefully as much as you can, so that you may know if there is bone or nerve, and whether it is completely closed, and ask the patient to feel the pain when pressed by your hand, and locate where he feels it; and when you truly know its location, and if it is far from a joint, or nerve, or artery, or vein, or any of the places I have said, then treat it according to what I have said, and remove the false tissue and decayed flesh inside; and then continue the treatment until it is healed. If the abscess is deeply seated in its proper place, you must thoroughly copulate it as much as possible, then insert moistened tents into medicated water, and let them extend to the head of the abscess, so that the medicine may corrode the remaining excess at the bottom; and then apply healing ointments until it is fully healed; and if it is not fully healed by this means, cauterize it as we have said, and if the bone is corrupted by the abscess, treat it accordingly.
Se voinne ou ners ne te greve ou membres principelz, si com nos avons dit; et se li os est descovers, et il i a corruption et noiror, si lou reis tant que li corruption soit toute ostee, puis le cure de choses enjanrans char tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il n’est sanez, et rent bowe si com devant, saiches que tu n’es mie alez jusc’a font: si descuevre et quier tant que tu soies au fons, et oste toute la corruption, puis restore le leu; et s’il est ensi sanez, c’est bien.	If the vein or nerve is not injured or a principal limb, as we have said; and if the bone is exposed, and there is corruption and blackness, then let the king remain until all the corruption is removed, then cure the flesh around it until it is healed; and if it is not healed, and you return to bowing, know that you have not gone far enough: so uncover and rest until you are at the bottom, and remove all the corruption, then restore the place; and if it is thus healed, it is well.
Se ceu non, saiches que la corruption est trop en parfont, que tu n’i pues avenir; si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier a nature; et s’il i a i petit os corrumput, et tu le pues traire as tenailles, si l’estrai a I estrument covenauble a ceu, et s’il i a maint os, si les trai trestoz, ne n’en laissier nes un; et se li moistor te fait contraire, et il n’i a error ne paour, si cope et moistor et char, et delivre les os.	If this is not the case, know that the corruption is too deep to be remedied; then there is no other means but to let nature take its course; and if there is a small corrupted bone that you can extract with tongs, do so with an appropriate instrument; and if there are many bones, extract them all, leaving none behind; and if moisture prevents this and there is no error or fear, cut the flesh, moisture, and muscle, and free the bones.
Et se tu ne les pues oster a une houre, si met sus la plaie chose enjanrant porriture, et laisse tant que li leus soit porris entor les os, et adonc si avront plus legierement les os; et se c’est uns grans os, si com de jambe ou de cuisse, si reis tant soulement la corruption tant que li noiror soit toute ostee, puis restoure la plaie; et s’il en i a grant partie dou corrumput, et vient jusc’a mole de l’os; si le covient soier et coper tout jusc’a la corruption, et puis le cure tant qu’il soit soudez; et je te dirai d’une fistule qui avint I home en sa jambe, si que tu i preignes exemple et aide en ton ovraige.	And if you cannot remove them within an hour, apply something fomenting to the wound and let it remain until the flesh is rotten around the bones, then the bones will be less painful; and if it is a large bone, such as in the leg or thigh, reset only the corruption until all the blackness is removed, then close the wound; and if there is much of the corrupted part, coming to the marrow of the bone; you must excise and cauterize all up to the corruption, and then cure it until it is healed; and I will tell you about a fistula that occurred in a man's leg, so that you may take example and aid in your work.
Il fut I jovencelz entor XXX ans, qui ot une dolor en sa jambe d’une cause que vint dedens le cors, tant que les matieres vinrent a la jambe, et fut enflee d’un gros aposteme, et n’ot point de cause defuer por ovrir; mais li mire par lor folie ovrerent tant sus que li apostemes ovri, et en corroient mout de matieres, et devint fistule, et i vint mout de pertus que tuit gitoient bowe et moistor dou cors; et maint mire i mirent cure entor II ans, et n’i ot nul saige en l’art de mains, tant que je i fui apelez, et vi sa jambe et les medicines dont on le curoit, et ceu que corroit par les pertus a grant cors; et devenoit rouges li cors dou jouvenceil, et avoit color citrine.	There was a young man around XXX years of age, who had pain in his leg from a cause that came within the body, until the matter reached the leg and it swelled with a large abscess. There was no apparent reason to open it; but they pierced it out of their folly, causing much discharge, and it became a fistula. A great deal of pus continually flowed from the body; and for two years many healers tried to cure it, but there was no wise man in the art of hands until I was called. I saw his leg and the medicines used to treat him, and what flowed through the openings caused much corruption. The body of the young man became red, with a yellowish color.
Je boutai une tente en l’un de ces pertus, et puis cerchai toz les pertus, et trovai que li uns venoit encontre l’autre de toutes les parties de la jambe.	I pitched a tent in one of these openings, and then searched all the openings, and found that one went against the other from all parts of the leg.
Je me hastai donques, et copai en l’un des pertus tant que je descovri une partie de l’os, et le trovai corrumput et perciet, et venoit li corruption jusc’a l’os dedens; je soiai ceu qui m’aparissoit de l’os corrumput, et cuidai qu’il n’i eust autre corruption, fuer que celi que je ostai; et comensai a restourer la plaie de medicines sodans par lonc tens, et ne pot souder; et puis rencomensai, et descovri l’os si com devant, et trovai la corruption continuee en l’os, et la soiai, et puis l’ostai, et me penai de souder le leu; mais je ne pou tant que je copai entor une palme de l’os, et le traï fuer a tout son mole, puis le restourai de medicines; et il fut sanez et soudez hastanment, et ne covint plus rencomencier l’ovraige fors por la foibleté dou malaide, qui ne pooit soffrir, et por la paour de mort que je avoie de lui.	I hastened then, and cut into one of the openings enough to discover a part of the bone, and found it corrupted and perforated, with corruption extending to the inner bone; I saw what appeared from the corrupted bone, and thought there was no other corruption beyond what I removed; but I continued to treat the wound with medicines for a long time, and it could not heal; then I began again, and exposed the bone as before, and found the corruption continuous in the bone, and treated it, and removed it, and labored to mend the place; but I could not do so until I cut into about a palm's breadth of the bone, which was entirely hollowed out, then I treated it; and it healed quickly and was securely mended, and there was no need to resume the work except for the weakness of the patient, who could not endure, and for my fear of death that I had for him.
Car por l’evacuation sanglotoit sovent, mais il fut sanez entierement, et nasquit en leu de l’os une char dure, et fut de bone disposition et n’ot point de nuisement ne de contraire dou tout en tout, ne a l’aleir ne a venir.	For the bleeding often occurred, but it was completely healed, and in the place of the bone grew a hard tissue, and it was well formed and had no harm or adverse effect at all, neither externally nor internally.
Et se li os est brisiez en aucun leu dou cors, si le covient soier en ceste maniere: pren I liien, et l’estrain au chief de l’os qui apert, et comande aucun k’il l’estende en haut; et met I autre lien de lainne plus gros dou premier liien, et le lie sus la char qui est desor l’os, et estent le chief, si que tu traies la char corrumpue au desoz, et descuevre la char sus le leu ou tu vues soier, que li soie ne blece la char; et met I tison ou une tauble desoz l’os por mues coper la char corrumpue; et covient tant soier com on puet veoir et sentir la corruption, et soier ancor autre fois.	And if the bone is broken in any part of the body, it should be treated in this manner: take a thread, and draw it taut at the end of the bone that is exposed, and command someone to stretch it upwards; then put another larger linen thread over the hard tissue next to the bone, and tie it securely so that you pull the corrupt flesh away from the bone, and expose the area where you wish to operate without harming the flesh; place a hot coal or a board under the bone to help heal the corrupt flesh; and continue to treat until you can see and feel the corruption, and do so again if necessary.
Et se li os est corrumpus, et n’apert mie, et li corruptions est en mileu ou en une partie, si descuevre la char toute; puis met I tison desoz, et puis soie des l’une partie a l’autre la corruption, et soit li soieure dou lonc de la corruption I poc, si com nos avons dit; et se li corruptions est en la jointure, si cope la jointure corrumpue, et soie l’os ou elle contient de l’autre part; et se li corruptions est en la continuation des II jointes, si n’i a autre angien que dou coper; et se li corruptions est ou poignil de la main, ou ou poignil dou piet, si est mout fort celle chose, mais toutevoie il covient que tu enquieres celle corrosion, coment elle t’apert; et la mundifie en toutes les manieres que tu pues, mais que li voine ou li nerf ne te faicent contraire; et saiches que li incisoire et les soies por coper ces os sont maintes, selonc l’assise des os et l’aparance d’ous, et lor grossece et lor subtiliteit, et lor grandor et lor petitece, et lor duresce; et por ceu covient il apareillier a chescune semblance d’ovraige son estrument; et saiches que l’uevre te moustrera l’estrument dont tu avras mestier, selonc la conissance de cest art, et le tesmoignaige des manieres des maladies; si porpense l’estrument dont tu as mestier selonc ceu qu’il le covient.	And if the bone is corrupted and does not open, and the corruption is in the middle or part thereof, uncover the flesh completely; then place a coal beneath, and thereafter let the soot run from one side to the other of the corruption, and let the soot be as long as the corruption, as we have said; and if the corruption is at the joint, cut the corrupted joint, and sew the bone on the other side; and if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, there is no old custom but to copper them; and if the corruption is by a knife of the hand or by a knife of the foot, this thing is very strong, but nevertheless it must be that you inquire about that corruption, how it appears; and cleanse it in all ways that you can, but let neither vein nor nerve hinder you; and know that the incisor and sinews for coppering these bones are many, according to the arrangement of the bones and the appearance of the bone, and their size and subtlety, and their grandeur and smallness, and their hardness; and for this it must be prepared an instrument suitable to each workpiece; and know that the work will show you the instrument you need, according to the knowledge of this art, and the testimony of the ways of diseases; so think about the instrument you need according to what is fitting.
dou feu	of fire
Li chiés porrissent ou par cause dedens, ou par cause defuer; et quant tu avras medicinee celle corrosion par la cure des medicines, et il ne profitent mie, si covient coper celui membre jusques au leu ou li corrosion vient, si que li malaides eschaipe par ceu de la mort, ou par la malice, qui est plus grans, de la defaute dou membre; et li signes si est que li membres devient noir, si qu’il semble qu’il soit ars dou feu, et porrist aprés la noiror, pues va celle corrosions de membre em membre, et prent par tout le cors; si te haste dou coper, et se c’est par la percussion d’aucunes venimouses bestes, si com scorpion de mer et wivre et semblans, se li corrosion est au chief dou doi, si le cope, et ne li doner mie espaice de venir jusc’a la main.	The shoulder dislocates either from within or from without; and when you have medicated the corrosion by treating the wound with medicines, and it does not heal, then you must operate on that member until you reach the place where the corrosion comes from, so that the patient escapes death, or greater harm from the lack of the limb; and the signs are that the member becomes black, seeming to be burned by fire, and after the blackness, the corruption spreads from one member to another, taking hold throughout the body; so hasten the operation, and if it is due to the sting of certain venomous beasts, such as sea scorpion and snake and similar, and the corrosion is at the head of the arm, then treat, and do not give it time to spread to the hand.
Et s’elle vient jusc’a la main, si la cope a la jointe, si que la corrosion ne viegne jusc’a bras; et s’elle vient au bras, si le cope au coute; et s’elle passe le coute, c’est li mors, et n’i vaut amenistremens fuers que li quantitez de sa vertut; et tot ensi fai quant li corrosion vient ou piet: s’elle vient en la premiere jointe, si la cope aprés l’autre jointe; et s’elle vient ou piet, si cope tout le piet; et s’elle monte en la jambe, si cope a la jointure dou genoil; et s’elle vient desus le genoil, si n’i a autre engien que dou lassier le malaide a mort; et li maniere dou coper ou dou soier le membre si est que tu le lie desus et desoz, et estende uns menistres l’un des liiens aval, et uns autres ministres l’autre liien amont, et tu dessevre la char qui est entre les II liiens a I spatumile large, tant que li os soit descovers; puis le cope ou soie, et met de chescune part I drapeil de lin, si que li soie ne touche le leu sain, et viegne au malaide autre lesion et aposteme chaus.	And if it comes as far as the hand, clamp at the joint, so that the corrosion does not reach the arm; and if it comes to the arm, clamp with the knife; and if it passes the knife, it is death, and there is no remedy except for the quantity of its virtue; and thus do when the corrosion comes or pierces: if it comes to the first joint, clamp after the other joint; and if it pierces or wounds, clamp all the wound; and if it ascends into the leg, clamp at the joint near the knee; and if it comes above the knee, there is no other means than to let the patient die; and the way of clamping or sewing the limb is that you tie over and under, extend some ministers below, and some others above, and you separate the flesh which is between the two ties as wide as one spatumile, until the bone is uncovered; then clamp or sew, and place a linen cloth on each side, so that the sinew does not touch the healthy part, and cause another lesion and abscess to the patient.
Et se decorremens de sanc vient quant tu oevres, si cauterize le leu hastanment, ou tu met sus aucunes poudres restraignans; puis revien a ta medicine tant qu’elle soit acomplie, puis lie le membre navreit d’un liien covenauble, et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et je te conterai k’il avint a I home en som piet: il li avint une noiror qui sembloit arsure de feu, et celle corrosion vint premier en son doi dou piet, tant qu’elle porprist tout le piet; et quant li hons vit la corrosion, si se hasta de coper le piet, et fut sanez; et lonc tens aprés li revint li corrosion ou doi de la main, et il vint a moi, et je li mis sus choses repercussives aprés la mundification dou cors, et ne pot cesser li corrosions; et il vot que je li copasse la main, et je ne vou, que je avoie esperance de repercuter la matiere; et doutai ausi que se je tailloie sa main, qu’il ne morist, car li vertus de l’ome estoit foible; et il se despera toz, et revint en sa terre, et se hasta de coper sa main, et fut sanez; et je n’ai ceu conteit fuers que por ceu c’on faice autreteil, s’on en a mestier.	And if bleeding occurs when you work, cauterize the limb quickly, or apply some restraining powders; then return to your medicine until it is completed, and bind the injured limb with an appropriate bandage, and treat it until it is healed; and I will tell you what happened to a man in our village: he had a black spot that seemed like a burn from fire, and this corrosion first appeared on his big toe of his foot, spreading to cover the entire toe; when the man saw the corrosion, he hurried to cut off his foot, and he was healed. Shortly after, the corrosion or lesion appeared again on his hand, and he came to me, and I placed reflective things after cleansing his body, but the corrosion did not cease; he requested that I amputate his hand, and I did not do so because I had hope of reflecting the matter; I also doubted whether if I cut off his hand, he would die, since the man's virtue was weak. He became desperate and returned to his land, hurriedly cutting off his hand himself, and was healed; I only relate this story for others to use if needed.
Aucune fois vient aposteme en leu charnut, et demore si longement qu’il fait grant assemblee de bowe; et puis ront et perce, et en saut li bowe, et demoure li leus vuis, ausi com uns vasselz; et li cuir qui est desus est ausi subtilz com I drapelz deliiez, et ne corront mie jusc’a l’os, ne jusc’au nerf, et telz maladie si est apelee «sain», et n’est mie apelee «fistule»; mais s’elle est si alongie qu’elle viegne jusc’a l’os em parfont, si est apelee «fistule»; et li cuire si est que tu cope celui cuir tout entor, et meismement quant il est subtilz, ausi com uns drapelz; et ne s’aert mie por sa corruption.	Sometimes an abscess forms in the flesh, and stays so long that it creates a large accumulation of pus; then it ruptures and drains, and the pus jumps out, leaving the fat like vessels; the skin above is as delicate as untangled thread, and does not run all the way to the bone or to the nerve, and such illness is called "sain," and is not called "fistula"; but if it extends so long that it reaches the bone by perforation, it is called "fistula"; and the skin is such that you peel away the entire layer of skin, especially when it is delicate, like thread; and does not burst due to its corruption.
Et se tu as fiance que li cuirs s’aerde, et li corruption n’est mie en parfont, et li cuir est espés de char, si le cure de clistere ensi: regarde se li seins est grans, et li bowe qui en ist est de puant odor, adonques le clisterize de medicine egiptiaine qui est ensi faite: prenez aisil, et oile, et litargire, igalment, et metez cuire en I vassel au feu, tant que li medicine soit rouge, et deviegne ausi espesse com miel; et puis pren de ceu selonc ta necessiteit, et le font en aigue et en miel, et en clisterize lou sein, et estraint le pertus; et laisse la medicine ens par II houres, puis l’estrai en espreignant; fai ce mout de fois, tant que li seins soit mondefiiez, et soit ostee li puor; et aucune fois est clisterizeis d’aigue de cendres, quant ceste medicine n’est presens, et est que tu preignes cendres de fust de vigne, et giete aigue desus, puis la coule, et en clisterize, tant que tu saiches que li seins est bien mondez; et se li malaides ne le puet soffrir, ne la medicine egiptiaine ne l’aigue de cendres, si le clisterize d’aigue et de miel ou il ait un poc de litargire broiet; ou tu la clistirize de miel et de vin melleit, que li mielz ait proprieteit de mundifiier et de laver, et li vins fait aerdre le sain; et quant tu as ce fait, et tu as fiance que li seins est bien mundifiiez, si le clisterize de ceu que fait naistre char en li, et est que tu preignes emplaustre diafinit, et le font avec oile roset et en vin; ou tu le clisterize d’aucunes medicines et d’oignemens, dont j’ai dit les proprietez ou traitier des oignemens; et se li pertus dou sein est petis, et li cainne dou clistere n’i puet entrer, si l’eslarge d’un fer un poc, et met ens une tente de l’oignement egiptiein, ou oignement basilicon, tant k’il soit eslargiez; et se li plaie est trop large, si la cout et i laisse tant soulement I leu ou li clistere puisse entrer, et se li pertus que giete bowe est au desus, si le cope ou plus bas leu que i est.	And if you suspect that the skin will ulcerate and the corruption is not deep, and the skin is thick with flesh, cure it by enema as follows: observe whether the swelling is large, and the pus within has a foul odor; then prepare an Egyptian medicinal enema in this manner: take aloe, oil, and litharge, equally, and cook them in a vessel over fire until the medicine turns red and becomes as thick as honey; then use as much of it as needed, mix with water and honey, and apply the enema to the swelling, pressing on the puncture. Let the medicine remain for two hours, then drain it off carefully; do this repeatedly until the swelling is resolved and the pus removed; if such medicine is not available, you can use ash water instead: take vine wood ashes, pour water over them, settle, and apply as an enema. Do this until you are certain that the swelling has been well cleansed; then use an enema to create flesh in it, for which you should prepare a diaphoretic paste with rose oil and wine; or use various medicines and ointments, of whose properties I have already spoken when treating ointments; if the opening in the breast is small and cannot be reached by the enema tube, enlarge it slightly with iron, then place a tent of Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment over it until it is enlarged enough; if the wound is too large, cover only the area where the enema can enter, and if the opening through which pus drains is above, you should peel back more skin below.
Car quant li bowe est en parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char; et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si appareille en tel maniere que li bowe corre au plus bas leu que i est, car quant li bowe est parfont, si n’i laisse enjanrer char et se tu ne pues coper lou sein desoz si com tu vues, si apareille en teil maniere: que li bowe corre legierement aval, et n’i lassier rien de la bowe; et pren medicines consolidatives por mettre sor le sain, et estent sus I drapeil de lin que cuevre tout le sain; puis cope as forces endroit le pertus dou sein I poc plus large dou premier, pues estent oignement souef sus I autre drapel selonc la quantiteit dou pertus, et le met sus le pertus dou sain por aligier la bowe, et n’oster mie le grant drapeil fuers que aprés maint jor une fois; et celui qui est sor le pertus dou sein, oste sovent por oster la bowe, et saiches ceu que corra de la bowe, se c’est venin ou poc ou assez, ou digeste, ou indigeste; et pren warde se li patiens sent dolor ou nom, et s’il i a aposteme ou non, et quant ta medicine s’est en teil maniere estendue et tu vois la nature que saut sus le pertus dou sain, si saiches que li seins s’aert ja, et aproche li santez; et puis le deslie le matin, ou le tier jor, et quant tu delies la plaie, si chainge I autre drapeil, et renovele l’oignement.	For when the bow is perfect, do not let it drain flesh; and if you cannot stop the bleeding under it as you see fit, arrange it in such a way that the bow runs to the lowest place where it is. For when the bow is perfect, do not let it drain flesh and if you cannot stop the bleeding under it as you see fit, arrange it in such a manner: that the bow runs gently downward, leaving nothing of the bow; and take consolidative medicines to put over the sound, and keep them on an linen drape that covers all the sound; then apply strength toward the hole in the breast slightly larger than the first, for let ointment souef be applied under the other drape according to the size of the hole, and place it over the hole in the flesh to lessen the bow, and do not remove the large drape outside until after many days once; and that which is underneath the hole in the breast, often remove to drain the bow, and know what comes from the bow, whether it be venom or little or enough, or digested, or undigested; and take care if the patient feels pain or numbness, and whether there is an abscess or not, and when your medicine has spread in such a manner and you see the nature that sautes on the hole in the flesh, know that the breasts are already averted, and approach health; and then release it in the morning, or on the third day, and when you release the wound, change the other drape, and renew the ointment.
Et se li seins giete bowe indigeste aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie.	And if the breast expels undigested food after many days, know that the breast is not healed.
Et se venins subtilz cort aprés lonc tens, si ne te desperer mie de la santeit, car li santez aproche.	And if subtle poisons cut after long time, do not despair of health, for health approaches.
Car il i a homes cui tarde enjanremens de char en ses plaies, et de ces que font le contraire; et se bowe indigeste saut dou sein aprés maint jor, saiches que li seins ne s’aert mie; et se li seins tarde d’aerdre, et est porloigniez, si ajoste medicines sechans moistes en substance et seches en vertut, si com oignement diafinit, car il i a grant partie de vitriole, et c’est li derriene medicine; pren oignement dyafinit, et le font avec oile roset, et l’arose de viel vin igal en substance; puis le confit et en use; et ceu meisme fait mielz cuit engroissiez, quant oignemens dyafinit n’est presens, ou tu pren mirre et aloen et encens, et le broie, et le poudre sus le miel quant il est sor le feu; et puis en glue I drapel, et l’estent sor le sein, et aucune fois i aministre on aristologe longe, et racines de lis celeste, qui est ausi com farine de veces et centoire; et en use de simples ou de compostes: broie les, et en fai poudre, et met sus le miel que j’ai dit, et en use; et se li cure est alongie, et n’est curez par ceste cure, adonc saiches que la corruptions est em parfont, et fait empression en l’os, ou as membres durs, ou as liemens; si le cure de la cure de fistule, si com nos avons dit ci devant.	And if there are people whose wounds heal slowly despite proper care, and those who do the opposite; and if undigested food starts to come from the breast after many days, know that the breast is not healed; and if the breast heals slowly and is far away, apply drying medicines with both substance and virtue, such as a diaphoretic ointment, for there is a great part of vitriol in it, and this is the last medicine; use diaphoretic ointment, prepared with rose oil, and mix it with equal parts old wine by volume; then apply it after allowing it to infuse; if diaphoretic ointments are not present, you may take myrrh, aloes, and frankincense, grind them together in honey when they are on fire, and wrap them in cloth and place them over the breast, administering them frequently by a physician as needed, along with celestial lily roots, which are like wheat flour and centory; use simple or compound remedies: grind them, make into powder, and mix with the honey I mentioned, then apply; if the cure is prolonged and not cured by this method, know that the corruption has fully affected the bone, or hard members, or ligaments; thus, treat the fistula as we have said earlier.
de l’aposteme de l’ungle	from the abscess of the nail
Panarice est un aposteme que naist desoz l’ungle dou pouchiet de la main, ou dou piet, ou par aventure naist en autres dois; et quant il est envielliez, et on n’i prent garde, si i vient I aposteme chaus, et corront et giete bowe tant qu’elle corront la racine de l’ungle, et par aventure la corront toute; et vient li corrosions jusc’a l’os, tant qu’il i vient dolor puant, et est li chiés dou doi larges, et est li color fuxe.	Pannicula is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the finger, or of the foot, or by chance in other toes; and when it grows old and no attention is paid to it, it comes to a head, swells, and discharges pus until it reaches the root of the nail, and sometimes carries it away entirely; and brings about corrosion down to the bone, causing such intense pain that the joint of the finger becomes wide and the color fades.
Quant tu le cures si com nos avons dit en la division, et li cure ne profite mie, si covient que tu copes a i. fer toute la superfluiteit qui est demoree de l’ungle, puis cauterize la plaie aprés.	When you treat it as we have said in the division, and the treatment does not help, then you must cut away all the remaining nail, and then cauterize the wound afterward.
Li cauteres est mout grans aide se li os est sains, et li ungle est sainne; et se li ungle apresse la char ens, et l’encomence a poindre, et la blece, si covient que tu mettes lou rait desoz l’ungle que point la char, et la boute en haut, et cope celi char subtilment et legierement, et met sus le remenant de la char medicines ardans et corrosives por oster tout; puis le cure d’oignemens tant qu’il soit sanez.	The cauteries are much great help if the bone is sound and the nail is sound; and if the nail presses on the flesh and begins to prick it, and the blisters, then you must put a piece of lead under the nail so that it does not touch the flesh, and lifts up, and cuts this subtle flesh gently and lightly, and places over the remaining flesh burning and corrosive medicines to remove all; then the wound heals with ointments until it is healed.
Et se li corrosion est en l’os, si le cope, et trai fuer, car tant com li os corrumpus i est, si ne puet saner; et se tu vois le doi corrumpre, si le cope en I des nous si com il est devant dit, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’il est ferus, et boutez, et il sent grant dolor, si covient que tu le sainnes premier; puis cope l’ungle dou spatumile agut en taillant de travers desus, et warde que li taille ne viegne jusc’a la char qui est desoz l’ungle, car li malaides sentiroit trop grant dolor; et s’il avient, si met chose sus qui apaise.	And if the corrosion is in the bone, cut and pull firmly, for as long as the bone is corrupted, it cannot heal; and if you see the bone decayed, cut it out as described before, then cure it until it is healed; and if it is pierced and swollen, and it feels great pain, then you must first heal it; then cut the nail with a sharp spatule by cutting across, and watch that the cuts do not come to the flesh beneath the nail, for the patient would feel too much pain; and if this happens, place something on it that soothes.
la dolor dou sourdoit de la main	the pain comes from the deafness of the hand
Li dois ajostez qui naist en mains d’aucuns homes par aventure est toz charnus, et par aventure i a teil ou il a osses, et aucune fois i a ungle, et aucun d’aus naissent en la racine de la jointure, ou li naissance est en aucuns nous des dois.	the dislocation that arises in some men by accident is either all flesh or has bones, and sometimes an angle, and none of them arise at the root of the joint, or the birth is in any of our bones.
Cil qui naist en aucune nout dou doi ne se muet, et cil qui naist a la jointure dou doi, par aventure se muet; la taille de celui qui est charnus si est legiere, en teil maniere: taille le en sa racine d’un large spatumile.	That which arises in any bone of the shoulder does not move, and that which arises at the shoulder joint may move by accident; the size of that which is fleshly is light, almost like this: cut it at its root with a broad blade.
Cil qui naist en la racine de la jointure si est grief a curer: si te tien dou coper.	That which arises at the root of the joint is grievous to treat: if you hold it with copper.
En celui qui naist ou doit au derrien nout, si covient que tu copes premier la char reondement jusc’a l’os, puis cope l’os a une soie convenable a ceu, puis le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	In that which is born or must be done last, it is necessary that you scrape the flesh roundly until reaching the bone, then cut the bone with an appropriate tool, and then clean it until it is healed.
Li soudemens que vient as dois ensamble vient par naissance, ou par soudement de plaie, ou par arsure de feu, ou par semblans choses.	The symptoms that come together in these injuries arise either by birth, or suddenly from a wound, or by burning with fire, or by similar things.
Si couvient que tu copes celle soudeure, si que li doit repairent selonc lor formes naturelz; puis met entre dous tentes ou drapelz moilliez en oile roset, qu’il ne se soudent; ou tu met entre dous pieces de plonc subtilz, tant que li leus soit soudez, si com il covient.	It is necessary that you scrape this scab, so that it heals according to its natural form; then place between two moist cloths or woolen drapes in rose oil, preventing them from sticking together; or you can place between two thin pieces of cloth, until the wounds are properly sewn.
Se soudemens vient a aucun de ses dois avec la paume, si cope celle sodure si com il covient.	If the scab comes with either of these two with the palm, scrape this scab as is fitting.
des vils	of the wicked
Vis sont voinnes grosses envoloupees pleines de superfluitez melancoliouses, que vienent em plusors membres dou cors; et plus avient en jambes de ces qui vont a piet et qui travaillent et portent, que a autres.	When his veins are swollen enveloped with excessive melancholic humours, coming from many parts of the body; and more occurs in legs of those who walk and work and carry burdens than in others.
Il covient donques que tu li aministres aucune fois espurgement de cole, et puis le saine de la basilique.	Therefore, you must administer to him once purgation of bile, and then cure him with the basilica.
Li cure de fer si est selonc II manieres: l’une est c’on les cope, et traie on fuer le sanc noir; et li autre maniere si est que tu lieves la voinne, et la trai toute fuer.	The iron cure is according to two methods: one is where they cauterize and cut or burn the black blood; and the other method is that you incise the vein and let all the blood flow out completely.
Li taille si est selonc ceste maniere: arose li premier la jambe d’aigue chaude mout fort, tant que li gros sans soit subtiliiez, puis estrain la jambe dou malaide des desus la cuixe jusc’a la partie desoz le genoil; puis cope la voinne en I leu, ou en II ou en III, d’une taille large, puis eslieve et trair fuer le sanc noir a ta main, des l’un chief jusc’a l’autre, tant que tant de sans en isse com li vertus dou malaide puet soffrir; et puis la lie, et li comande qu’il se teigne de viandes enjanrant cole noire; et recomence l’evacuation et la sainie quant les voinnes sont plainnes, et nuist au malaide.	The incision is performed in this manner: first, heat the leg with hot water greatly until the large veins become thin. Then, stretch the patient's leg from below the knee to just above the knee; next, make a cut in the vein at one place or two or three, using a wide incision. Hold and let all the black blood flow out by hand from one end to the other, as much as the virtues of the patient can bear. Then close it up, and instruct the patient to dye their skin with meat juice containing black bile; and repeat the evacuation and cure when the veins are full, and benefit the patient.
Li alevemens de li est selonc ceste maniere: reis la jambe dou malaide, s’il i a mout de poil, puis le met ou bain, et li arose la jambe d’aigue chaude tant qu’elle deviegne rouge, et enflent les voinnes; et se tu n’as point de baing, si le chaufe au feu, et puis le cope endroit la voinne dou lonc au chief dou genoil, ou en la partie desoz a la cheville; puis aoevre le cuir a l’oncine, et escorche la voinne de chescune part, tant qu’ele apere quant on la sent; et on la voit rouge et noire, et quant elle entre ou cuir si semble ausi com une corde blainche; puis boute le rait desoz, tant qu’ele soit alevee dou cuir, et puis la pent a l’oncine legier, puis le cope en I autre leu ensus III dois; puis escorche le cuir sus la voinne tant qu’ele apere, puis la lieve au rais, si com tu as fait, et la pent a un autre uncine, si com tu as fait premiers; puis cope une autre taille, ou plusors se tu en as mestier, puis la lieve, et la cope au doi dou piet, puis la trai et lieve jusc’a la seconde taille; puis l’estrai de taille en taille, tant qu’elle isse toute fuer, puis la cope; et se tu ne la pues traire et lever, si i boute une aguille a tout I fil fort double, et la lie et la trai, et i boute desoz I rait, et torne ta main d’une part et d’autre, tant qu’il en isse; et garde qu’elle ne cope, car s’elle cope, si ne la puet on traire ne lever, et en vient nuisement au malaide; et quant tu l’as toute traite, si met sor le leu de la plaie laine moillie en vin et en oile roset; et le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	The extractments are done in this manner: hold the limb of the patient, if there is much hair, then put it into a bath, and lift the limb with warm water until it turns red and the veins swell; and if you have no bath, heat it over fire, and apply it along the vein from the bottom of the knee to the part below the ankle; then cut the skin inch by inch, and cauterize each side of the vein until it appears when one feels it; and it will appear red and black, and when it enters or touches the skin it seems like a white cord; then insert a rag under it until it rises from the skin, and then pull it with one finger, then apply another in a higher place over three fingers; then cauterize the skin above the vein until it appears, then lift it off the rag as you did before, and pull it to a second finger, so as you did first; then cut another size or several if you need them, then lift it, and cut at the sole of the foot, then draw and lift until the second size; then extract from size to size until it is all free, then cauterize; and if you cannot pull and lift it, insert a needle with a strong double thread under it, and tie and draw it, and put one rag over it, and turn your hand on both sides until it comes out; and beware that it does not stick, for if it sticks, you cannot pull or lift it, and it is harmful to the patient; and when you have done all this, put moistened wool soaked in wine and rose oil under the place of the wound, and cure until it is healed.
Et se li vis est contraite et torte et envoloupee ensamble, et ele n’est mie droite, si com nos avons dit, si covient que tu la fendes tortement, mais ne la coper mie; et la trai si com nos avons devant dit.	And if the vein is contracted and twisted and wrapped together, and it is not straight as we have said, then you must cut it crookedly, but do not cut it completely; and draw it out as we have previously said.
Li forme dou fer dont on cope la vis si est corbes, et ne trenche mie, qu’il ne cope la voinne; et est de grosse corbeure, car s’il estoit subtilz, si coperoit la voine, mais soit gros si com nos avons dit, et ci est li forme:	The form of iron with which one cuts the vein is curved, and does not cut completely, so as not to cut the vein; and it is of substantial curvature, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein, but it should be thick as we have said, and this is its form:
de la voinne civile	of the common vein
Ceste voinne est enjanree en jambes, en chaudes parties ou il ne naist herbes ne arbre, et en terre ou il n’a point de moistor; et par aventure naist autre part qu’en jambes, et ceu avient de la porriture que vient desoz le cuir, si com il vient dedens le cors serpens et vers, enjanrez entre cuir et char.	This vein is embedded in the legs, in warm parts where no herbs nor trees grow, and in earth where there is no moisture; and by chance it may arise elsewhere than in the legs, and this happens from rot that comes from beneath the skin, as serpents and worms arise within the body, entwined between skin and flesh.
Et se li signes de l’encomencement de ceste voinne si est qu’il vient en la jambe une tres grans enflammation, puis se chainge li leus, et comence li voinne fors issir, ausi com une racine d’une plante.	And if the signs of the beginning of this vein are such that a very great inflammation comes in the leg, then the toes change color, and the veins begin to protrude, as if they were the root of a plant.
Quant li chiés apert, si covient que tu envoloupes entor une piece de plonc des une З et demi jusc’a II З., et la noe, et laisse le plonc pendant a la jambe, et totes les fois qu’il en ist point au defuer, si l’envoloupe entor le plonc, et la nowe; et s’elle est trop longe, si en cope une partie, et envoloupe le remenant, et ne la coper mie en sa racine, tant qu’elle soit toute issue; car se tu la copes, si rentre en la char, et fait venir aposteme et porriture ou leu, et male maladie; por la queil chose il covient qu’elle soit traite poc et poc jusc’a chief, et n’en remaigne rien ou cors; et est aucune fois ceste voinne quant elle est traite de V paumes de lonc, ou de X, et uns hons vint ja a moi, a cui elle issit de X paumes de long, et quant tu la copes, si boute I rais ou pertus, et la perce jusc’a fons, si que tout en isse; et soit vuidie li matiere qui est dedens, et amenistre au leu medicines enjanrans porriture aucun jor, puis le cure si com les apostemes.	When the shoulder is opened, it must be wrapped with a piece of flannel about one and a half to two inches wide, and the bandage, and let the flannel remain on the leg. Every time there is no pressure from above, wrap around the flannel and the bandage; if it is too long, cut off a part and wrap the remainder, but do not cut it at its root until it is fully out; for if you cut it, it will enter the flesh, causing an abscess, putrefaction, or other illness. For this reason, it should be treated little by little until it is completely out, leaving nothing or a core behind. Sometimes this vein, when treated from five inches to ten and even more than twenty inches long, comes to me, from which it protrudes ten inches long. When you cut it, push one or two fingers through it and pierce it thoroughly so that all of it comes out; then drain the matter inside, and apply topical medicines to prevent putrefaction for a few days, and then treat it as with abscesses.
Et aucune fois a ceste voinne mains rains, et meismement quant elle apert en la jointure dou piet, ou ou piet, et i vient mout de pertus, et dont il saut rains; cure le donques si com nos avons dit devant.	And sometimes there are small wounds, and especially when they appear in the joint of the foot or hand, and there is much damage, and from which small pieces fly out; treat them as we have said before.
des vers qui naissent entre cuir et char	vers that arise between skin and flesh
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «maladie de buef», por ceu qu’elle avient maintes fois as bués, et est un petis vers qui naist entre cuir et char, et va par tout le cors montant et dessendant, et le sent om bien a l’aler de membre en membre, tant qu’il desront le cuir ou il vait, et saut fuer; et est enjanrez de porriture d’aucunes humors, si com vienent vers et serpens et lumbris et ascarides ou ventre; et doute on de son malice, car quant il va par le cors, et il monte au chief, et il vient a l’oil, par aventure rentre, et destruit l’oil; et ceu avient maintes fois.	This disease is called in our land "cattle disease," because it often befalls cattle, and it is a small worm that arises between skin and flesh, and goes up and down throughout the body, feeling well as it travels from limb to limb, until it eats through the skin where it goes and comes out; and it is nourished by putrefaction of certain humors, such as come from serpents and worms and ascarids or intestines; and doubt arises about its malignity, for when it goes throughout the body, and it climbs to the head, and it comes to the eye, by chance enters, and destroys the eye; and this happens often.
Quant tu le vues curer et traire, si ne puet on fuers que quant il vait: si covient donques que tu lies le leu desus et desoz d’un fort liien bien estroitement, puis cope sus et le trai fuer, et se li vers est em parfont en la char, et tu ne le trueves, si le cauterize de feu sus, tant qu’il muire; et li plus grans nuisemens que il fait, si est qu’il corront l’oil, si com nos avons dit; et se tu le vois venir ou chief pres de l’oil, si estraint desoz lui le sorcil forment, puis cope sus, et le trai fuer; et covient user le malaide de mundifiement de cors de medicines solutives por les males humors porries, et se warse de viandes enjanrans porriture.	When you see it being treated and drained, one cannot force it when it goes: therefore, you must tie the area above and below with a tight bandage, then cut it out and drain it. If the blood is thoroughly expelled from the flesh, and you do not find any, cauterize it with fire until it dies; and the greater harm it does is that it can damage the eye, as we have said; and if you see it coming or close to the eye, tightly bind beneath it, then cut it out. The patient must be cleansed of bodily humors using soluble medicines for putrid bad humors, and beware of meats causing putrefaction.
de la dolor qui vient de ventositeit	of the pain that comes from wind
Ceste maladie est apelee en nostre terre «vakirir», et est une dolor que vient en aucuns membres, et pues se mue de membre en membre; et je vis ceu que je vos di.	This disease is called in our land "vakirir", and it is a pain that comes into some members, and then moves from member to member; and I have seen those whom I say this of.
Je fui apelez a une femme malaide, et me descovrit som bras, et vis une petite enfleure en la voinne dou brais; et I poc aprés, li vis monter ausi com un ver a l’espaule, plus tost que nulle chose, ausi com vif argent quant il cort de leu a autre; li dolor se departit de celui leu, et se ficha en l’espaule, et puis un poc aprés corrut par tout le cors, tant qu’ele vint en l’autre brais; puis me contait qu’elle tornioit adés entor le cors, si com je la vis.	I was summoned to a sick woman, and she showed me her arm, and I saw a small swelling in the vein of the arm; and just after that, I saw it rise as if a worm on the shoulder, faster than anything, like live silver when it is cut from one piece to another; the pain left that place and lodged in the shoulder, and then shortly after spread throughout the body until it came to the other arm; she told me that it returned repeatedly within her body, just as I saw.
Je me mervillai mout coment elle se movoit ensi de membre em membre, car je n’avoie onques veut ceste maladie selonc ceste maniere.	I was amazed how it moved from member to member in such a manner, for I had never seen this disease spread in this way.
Toutevoie, je avoie veut maint que bien avoient veut movoir dolor de leu a autre, mais je ne l’avoie mie veut, si com je le vis en la femme; et je me pensai que c’estoit por ceu que li femme avoit sec cors, et les voinnes descovertes, et por ceu apparoit celle ventositez constrainte; et n’aperent mie selonc ceste raison a ces qui sont delicious, et qui ont moistes cors et voinnes reponues.	Firstly, I willed well that they would wish to move pain from one place to another, but I did not will it as much as I saw in the woman; and I thought that this was because the woman had a hard core, and veins uncovered, and because these winds constrained were apparent; and they do not appear according to this reason to those who have delicate cores and closed-up veins.
Et quant tu vues curer ceste maladie, et li malaides sent celle dolor, s’elle t’apert si com nos avons dit, si la lie desus et desoz hastanment, et puis cope sus tant que cele ventositez constrainte au leu isse fuer; et cauterize le leu; et se tu ne la vois a tes eulz, si le cure de ceu qui deboute les ventositez, si com pilules fetides, et pilules de serapin, et semblans autres.	And when you see this disease treated, and the patient feels this pain, if it reveals itself as we have said, clean the surface and underneath rapidly, and then stop once these constrained winds have left their place; and cauterize the area; and if you do not see it with your eyes, treat it with what expels winds, such as bitter pills, spider pills, and other similar ones.
des saiettes	of arrows
Les saiettes sont diverses, selonc lor semblances et selonc les leus dou cors ou elles chient.	Arrows come in various types, according to their shapes and the parts of the body where they lodge.
Li diversitez de lor si est qu’il i a de celles qui ont grans pointes, et petites, et chevees, et soudees; et de celles qui ont II angles, et de celz qui ont lengues, et de celles ou il a pieces; et celle qui chiet en aucun membre si chiet selonc II manieres: ou en membre principeil cheveit, si com cerveil, cuer, foie, pormon, rains, intestine, vessie, et semblans membres.	The diversity of their forms is that some have large points, and small ones, and barbed, and soldered; and some have two angles, and those with tongues, and some with pieces. And the one that falls into any limb does so in various ways: or it pierces a principal limb, such as the brain, heart, liver, lung, kidneys, intestines, bladder, and similar limbs.
Quant elle chiet donques en aucun leu de ces membres, et li signe de mort, que je te dirai ci aprés, t’aperent: si covient que tu te warses de l’estraction de ceste saiette, car li mors vient aprés en plusors dispositions; et quant cist mal signe ne t’aperent mie, et li saiette n’est mie em parfont, si la trai, et cure la plaie.	When it falls into any part of these limbs, and the signs of death, which I will tell you later, appear: then you must beware of extracting this arrow, for death comes after in many conditions; and when none of these bad signs appear, and the arrow is not completely removed, extract it and treat the wound.
Et li signe dou cerveil quant li saiette i chiet et perce l’os, et saut li syfac fuer qui est sus le cerveil, est quant scotomie et sode et esvertin et roujor ens eulz, et enflammation et roujor de lengue, et spasme et permixtion d’entendement, et vomissemens de cole; et per aventure ist sans fuer des narines, ou des oreilles; et par aventure pert la parole et la voix; et saut de la plaie moistor blanche semblant a poulz, et en saut ausi com bruee de char; et se cist signe t’aperent, si te tien de la cure, et trai la saiette s’elle n’est ens.	And the sign of the brain when the arrow strikes and pierces the bone, and the sinus fluid which is above the brain bursts, is when there is scotomia and sodness and vertigo and redness in the eyes, and inflammation and redness of the tongue, and spasm and confusion of understanding, and vomiting of bile; and perhaps it comes from the nostrils or the ears; and perhaps it affects speech and voice; and the wound oozes moist white fluid resembling a pulse, and it oozes also as if boiled flesh; and if this sign appears, keep to the treatment, and extract the arrow if it is present.
Li signe de la siette quant elle chiet ou cuer, sont qu’elle est pres de la mamele senestre, et sent ausi com s’elle estoit fichie en chose dure, ne mie vuide; et par aventure li siette se muet ausi com li poulz, et en cort noir sanc, et vient froidor et suor froide, et sincope: saiches adonc sens doute ke li mors dessent.	The sign of the arrow when it strikes or the heart is that it is near the left nipple, and feels as if it were embedded in something hard, not empty; and perhaps the arrow moves like a pulse, and draws black blood, and brings coldness and cold sweat, and fainting: then know without doubt that death ensues.
Et li signe de la saiette que nevre lou pormon est que sans plains d’escume saut de la plaie, et li gorge enfle, et li malaides mue color, et sospire haut et quiert le froit ar.	And the sign of an arrow that Nerve Lomour did not remove is that without any bubbling of foam it jumps from the wound, and the throat swells, and the patient changes color, and sighs loudly and retains the cold air.
Et se li saiette chiet en la coverture dou pis, si est delez les petites costes; et giete grant alainne et grant dolor et sospire; et li muevent tuit li membre des espaules.	And if the arrow falls into the covering of the foot, it affects the small ribs; it causes great pain and sighing; and all the limbs from the shoulders move.
Et se li saiette chiet ou stomac, par aventure si saut de la plaie aucune chose de la viande indigeste.	And if the arrow falls onto the stomach, by chance it jumps from the wound with some undigested meat.
Et se li saiette chiet ou ventre, et en saut point de fien par l’intestine rout, si n’a point d’esperance en la cure, ne en l’estraction de la saiette.	And if the arrow falls onto the abdomen, and in its jump, no hay from the intestine route, so there is no hope in the treatment, nor in the extraction of the arrow.
Et se li saiette chiet en la vessie, et li urine en saut et vient defuer, et li malaides sent fort dolor: saiches que li plaie est mortelz.	And if the arrow falls into the bladder, and the urine spurts out and flows, and the patient feels great pain: know that the wound is fatal.
Li autre membre, si com li faice et li colz et li gorge et li espaule et li adjutoire et li espinee dou dos et li forcele et li cuixe et les jambes, et li membre semblant, sont sauf selonc plusors dispositions.	The other limb, such as the arm and the neck and the throat and the shoulder and the scapula and the spine of the back and the femur and the legs, and limbs similar to these, are safe according to many disposals.
Quant li saiette est en lou nerf ou l’artere, et elle n’est venimouse, si com je vos dirai qu’il m’avint, por ceu que vos faciez autretel.	When the arrow is in the nerve or the artery, and it is not venomous, as I will tell you what happened to me, because you would do otherwise.
Il avint a I home c’une saiette li chut ou larmier en la racine dou neis: je la tentai, et la traï d’autre part desoz la graisse de l’oreille, et fut sanez sens nusement.	It happened to a man that an arrow fell or pierced at the root of the nose: I tried it, and extracted it from the other side beneath the ear fat, and he was cured without any difficulty.
Et traï a un jeu une saiette que li chut en la graisse de l’oil desoz la papiere desoz, et li saiette estoit reponue, et n’en poi ataindre que la pointe devers lou fust, et estoit li saiette grans d’un arc turcois, a tout I fer legier sens oreilles; li jeus fut sanez, et ne li vint nulz mavais accidens.	And draw out an arrow that fell into the grease of the eye under the paper, and the arrow was lodged, and could not be reached with the tip toward the wood, and the arrow was as large as a Turkish bow, light as iron without ears; the patient recovered, and no bad accidents came to him.
Et traï une saiette de la gorge a un crestien, et estoit li saiette arabique a oreilles: je soiai les barbions, et subtiliai tant que je la traï, et fut sanez li crestiens.	And drew out an arrow from the throat of a Christian, and the arrow was Arabic with ears: I pierced the barbs, and drew it out carefully, and the Christian recovered.
Et traï une saiette a I home, que li estoit cheue ou ventre, et pensai qu’il moroit; et puis qu’il ot passez XXX jors, si ne mua point sa disposition; je taillai sus la saiette, et l’engignai, et la traï fuer, et n’ot point de mavais accident.	And drew out an arrow from the man, which had pierced his side or stomach, and I thought he was dying; and after thirty days had passed, his condition did not change at all. I cut into the arrow, treated it, and drew it out, and he had no bad accidents.
Et si vis I home cui une saiette chut ou dos, et fut li plaie soudee sus; et demora li saiette dedens li, et ne chainja point ses dispositions naturez, ne ne trova nuisement en aucune de ses oevres naturelz.	And if you wish for a man who has an arrow that fell or hit him, and the wound was sewn up; and the arrow remained inside, and did not change its natural positions, nor caused harm in any of its natural functions.
Et vis I autre homme, cui il chut une saiette en sa faice, et fut soudee li plaie; et demora ensi sens soffrir grant dolor; et mout d’autres semblans.	And if you wish for another man, who had an arrow in his face, and the wound was sewn up; and remained thus suffering great pain; and many other similar cases.
Et traï une saiette a I home des princes le roi, que li estoit cheue enmi lou neiz, et estoit un poc declinans a la destre partie; et estoit li saiette toute reponue Je fui apelez a la cure aprés ceu qu’elle fut cheue III jors.	And treat an arrow that fell upon a man of the king's princes, which it struck among the nails, and was slightly inclined to the right side; and the arrow was entirely pierced. I was called for the treatment after it fell three days.
Si trovai la plaie mult estroite.	I found the wound very narrow.
Je la quis a tout une subtil tente, et ne la sentis mie; et il sentoit pointure et dolor desoz sa destre oreille.	I took all the subtlety of it, and did not feel it at all; and he felt pricking and pain beneath his right ear.
Je pensai que c’estoit de la pointe de la saiette Je mis sus lou leu emplaustre atratifet digestif, por ceu que li leus n’enflast; et m’aparut li leus de la saiette.	I thought it was from the point of the arrow. I placed on his eye the poultice of atrative and digestive herbs, because the eyes were swollen; and it appeared that the arrow's head was still in his eye.
Je i mis l’emplaustre mains jors, et resouda li plaie derechief, et demora ensi li malaides lonc tens, tant qu’il sentit la saiette I jor dedens son neis; et il le me dist.	I applied the poultice for several days, and redressed the wound again. The patient remained in this state for a long time, until he felt the arrow's head one day in his nose; and he told me.
Je mis sus la plaie medicine ague corrosive par mains jors, tant qu’elle fut overte, et la tentai, et sentis le chief de la saiette qui s’aerdoit au leu; puis ajostai en l’overture de la plaie par celle medicine ague, tant que li chiés de la saiette m’aparut visablement; et trespassa bien li termines entor IIII mois, et puis eslarja si li plaie que je i boutai les tenailles, et le meus d’une part et d’autre, et ne pot issir; adonques ne cessai de subtiliier et d’engignier de manieres d’estrumens, tant que je la pris I jor as tenailles bien faites, selonc ceu que sa forme venra en la fin de cest chapistre, tant que je la traï, et restourai la plaie.	I applied corrosive medicine to the wound with my hands for several days until it was open. I tested it and felt the head of the arrow corroding at the site; then I placed the corrosive medicine in the opening of the wound, until the head of the arrow became visible; and it passed well through the tissues for more than four months, after which I cleared the wound so that I could use pliers to extract it from both sides, but it would not come out. Then I continued to refine and devise methods with tools until I successfully extracted it on one day using properly made pliers, as its form will be shown in the end of this chapter; and I restored the wound.
Et li mire jugent que li cartillaige dou nez ne puet restorer: je la restourai adonques, et fut soudee li plaie, et fut sanez li malaides entierement.	And the surgeon judges that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored: I will restore it, and the wound was sewn, and the patient was completely cured.
Or t’ai dit la qualiteit de l’estraction d’aucunes saiettes, si que tu mettes ta cure sus ceu que je ne dis mie, car li livres ne puet mie tout porprendre; mais li saiges maistres compere sus bien poc grant chose, et sus ceu que li est present et defaillant, trueve nueve oevre, et nuef estrument, au dessendement des choses estrainges qui avienent en cest art.	Or have I told you about the quality of the extraction of some arrows, so that you place your cure on what I do not say, for books cannot take in everything; but master surgeons compare on very little things, and on what is present and lacking, find nine operations, and nine instruments, for the removal of foreign objects that occur in this art.
Je dis que les saiettes n’issent des membres ou elles sont fichies fuer que selonc II manieres: ou par lou leu ou elles entrent, ou par d’autre part; et celle que saut fuer par lai ou elle entre, c’est saiette entrans en leus charnus, et saut fuer aucune fois maintenant.	I say that arrows are in members where they are fixed in two ways: either by the place where they enter, or by another part; and that which enters through the place where it enters is an arrow entering into the flesh, and is never found again.
Et s’elle ne saut maintenant, si la laisse tant que li chars soit porrie entor, et soit alegie li issue; et ausi s’elle est fichie en l’os, et elle ne puet issir, si la laisse ensi aucuns jors, et la muef chescun jor; et adonques elle saut, et s’elle ne saut, si perce entor a tout I foret subtil, tant que li leus entor soit eslargiez, et puis la trai.	And if it does not burst now, let it be left until the flesh rots through, and the issue becomes clear; and also if it is embedded in the bone and cannot come out, let it be left for several days, and change it each day; then it will burst, and if it does not burst, pierce through entirely with a sharp instrument, so that the flesh inside is widened, and then draw it out.
Et se li saiette est fichie en l’os dou chief, et vait jusc’a l’un des ventres dou cerveil, et aucuns des accidens que j’ai dit apert au malaide: si ne la traire mie, mais la laisse tant qu’elle soit igalz aprés aucuns jors, car se li saiette vient jusc’a syfac, c’est li mors.	And if the arrow is embedded in the bone of the head and goes as far as one of the brain's ventricles, or any of the other accidents I have said to the patient: do not treat it at all, but let it be until it becomes equal after a few days, for if the arrow reaches the septum pellucidum, it is fatal.
Et se li saiette n’est fichie fuer qu’en l’os soulement, et ne vient jusc’a syfac, et demoure li malaides aucuns jors sens mavais accident, si l’engigne dou traire.	And if the arrow is not pierced deeply only into the bone, and does not come close to the sinew, and the patient remains without any bad accidents for several days, then the means of drawing it out should be used.
Et s’elle est mout fichie ensi et ne puet issir fuer, si i aministre tareres entor, si com je t’ai dit; puis cure le leu tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it is not pierced deeply enough and cannot be pulled out forcefully, then I administer thorns between, as I have told you; then treat the wound until it is healed.
Et se li saiette est reponue en leu dou cors si c’on ne la puisse veoir, si la quier a tout la tente; et se tu la sens, si la trai a aucun estrument covenauble; et se tu ne pues por l’estrecement de la plaie, et por la parfondesce de la saiette, et il n’i a os ne nerf ne voine, si la fens tant que li plaie soit grans; et trai la saiette se tu pues, et s’il ait en la saiette oreilles a coi elle tient, si oste la char qui est ens fichie de II pars au mues que tu pues, et puis brise ou ploie les oreilles de la saiette, tant que tu la puisses traire; et subtilie bien que tu ne brisier la saiette, que tu la trairoies plus griement.	And if the arrow is embedded in the flesh of the body and cannot be seen, then seek it thoroughly with your hand; and if you feel it, draw it out with any suitable instrument; and if you cannot because of the narrowness of the wound and the depth of the arrow, and there is neither bone nor nerve nor vein, then enlarge the wound until it is large enough; and draw the arrow if you can, and if it has ears that it holds to, remove the flesh that is embedded from both sides toward the part you can reach, and then break or bend the ears of the arrow as much as you can so you can draw it out; and with great care, do not break the arrow, as you would draw it more easily.
Et se tu ne pues a une fois, si la lai jusque li leus entor soit porris, puis la trai, car li estraction iert alegie.	And if you cannot do it at once, let it remain until the flesh between the bones is rotten, then remove it, for the extraction would be painful.
Et se li decorremens de sanc te fait contraire, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit de la cure en son chapistre; et te warde de l’incision dou nerf et de la voinne, et met engien coment tu pues mues traire la saiette sens peril, ou tost ou tart, ou fermement ou belement; et met le malaide selonc la forme qu’il estoit quant li saiette li chut ens, car c’est li plus grans aide que i soit, et se tu ne pues, si lou met selonc ceu que li signe lou te mostrent.	And if the drainage of blood makes it contrary, administer what we have said about the treatment in its chapter; and beware of incising the nerve or the vein, and find a way to extract the arrow as you can, whether soon or late, firmly or gently; and place the patient according to the form he was in when the arrow fell upon him, for this is the greatest aid that it be, and if you cannot, then place him according to what the signs show you.
Li saiette que vient fuer d’autre part, ou il apert aucune chose de li, ou li cuir est enflez endroit si c’on le voit ou sent aparamment: taille donques sus, tant que les tenailles i puissent prendre, et puis l’estrai: si saut fuer maintenant.	The arrow that comes from another part, or where it pierces anything, or where the skin is swollen so one can see or feel it: cut there, as much as the forceps can grasp, and then extract it: if it be now.
Et s’elle est retenue en l’os, si tornoie ta main rondement, tant qu’elle entre en l’os, et eslarge l’os, puis la trai.	And if it is held in the bone, turn your hand roundly until it enters the bone, and enlarge the bone, then pull it.
Et s’elle ne puet issir, si la laisse encor, et puis rencomence l’estraction tant qu’elle isse fuer; et se li fust de la saiette i est, se le boute a tout le fust; et se li fust chiet, et tu vues aministrer boutement, si i aministre I estrument cheveit, si que li pointe de la saiette entre en la cheveure de l’estrument; et puis boute fuer, et se li saiette est chevee, se i boute I estrument a pointe entrant ens, por alegier l’estraction.	And if it cannot come out, leave it for now, and then restart the extraction until it comes out; and if the shaft of the arrow is still in, push the entire shaft; and if the shaft falls out, when you need to administer a thrust, use the tool with a point, so that the point of the arrow enters the hole of the tool; and then push forcefully, and if the arrow is stuck, push the tool with the point entering it, to facilitate the extraction.
Et se li saiette est entouchie, si covient que tu copes toute la char entor ou li venins est, se tu pues, puis cure la plaie si com il couvient.	And if the arrow is touched, it is necessary that you cut out all the flesh around where the poison is, if you can, then treat the wound as required.
Et se li saiette chiet ou peis ou au ventre ou a la vessie ou au costeit, et elle est prochiene, et tu pues coper sus, se i cope; et te garde de coper la voinne et lou nerf, et puis l’estrai, et puis cout la plaie, se mestier est; et la cure tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if the arrow falls or pierces in the abdomen or bladder or side, and it is nearby, you may attempt to remove it; but be careful not to open the vein or nerve, then extract it, and afterwards suture the wound if needed; and treat the wound until it heals.
Li forme des tenailles dont on trait les saiettes sont semblans au bec d’oiseil, et vez ci la forme:	The shape of the tweezers used for removing arrows is similar to the beak of a bird, and here is the shape:
Et en sont mout de manieres: grans, moienes, et petites, selonc la quantitei de la saiette.	And they come in many sizes: large, medium, and small, according to the size of the arrow.
Li forme dou boutant cheveit est ausi com li penne d’un oisel, por bouter a la pointe de la saiette, si com ci est li forme:	The shape of the needle used for piercing is also similar to the feather of a bird, to push at the tip of the arrow, as shown in the form:
li forme des tenailles por bouter et por sachier si est ci:	the form of the tongs for pressing and for knowing this is as follows:
des voinnes dou cors communes	of veins of the body common
Des voinnes dont on se saine sont XXXI, de coi il a ou chef XVI, c’est a savoir: II batans qui sont aprés les oreilles, qui sont apelees les dous «herbech»; et les II arteres qui sont en II temples apparans; et II voines que sont en II larmiers des II eulz, que sont apelees «aspires»; et li voine que est emmi le front; et li voinne que est au chief dou neis; et les II guindeges qui sont ou col; et les II voinnes que sont en levres desus de la bouche, et ce sont les voines que sont apelees «augeherich»; et II voinnes que sont desoz la lengue.	Of the veins from which one is cleansed there are thirty-one, of which sixteen are principal, namely: two jugulars which are behind the ears and called the "herbech" veins; and the two arteries which are in the temples and apparent; and the veins that are in the corners of the eyes, called "aspirate" veins; and the vein that is in the forehead; and the vein that is on the nose; and the two subclavian veins which are under the collarbone; and the two veins that are in the upper lips above the mouth, and these are the veins called "augeherich" veins; and the veins that are beneath the tongue.
Les voinnes dont on saine communement sont V en chescun bras: l’une est li cephalique, et est dou senestre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou chief»; et li moiene est apelee «faste», et est composte de la cephalique et de la basilique, et l’apelent li laie gens «voinne dou cuer»; et li basilique si est ou destre costeit, et l’apelent li laie gent «voinne dou ventre», et est sus le foscile, et est celle dont on saine, qui apert manifestement sus le pouchet.	The veins from which we commonly draw blood are V in each arm: one is the cephalic, and it lies on the left side, and they call it "vein of the head"; and the median is called "faste", and it is composed of the cephalic and basilic, and they call it "vein of the heart"; and the basilic lies on the right side, and they call it "vein of the belly", and it is above the fossele, and it is this one from which we draw blood, which clearly appears above the pouch.
Et li salvatelle est li voine qui est entre l’auriculaire et l’anulaire, et si a II rains; et en la jambe et ou piet sont III voinnes: l’une si est desoz la corbeure dou pochet dou senestre costeit, et li seconde sophene qui est a la cheville dou destre costeit; et li voine qui est apelee «nesse», que est en la cheville de l’autre costei; et en l’autre jambe sont III voinnes desoz celles.	And the salvatelle is the vein that lies between the auricular and annular, and it has two roots; in the leg and foot there are three veins: one is below the arch of the left pocket, and the second sophene which is on the right side at the ankle; and the vein called "nese" which is on the other side of the ankle; and in the other leg there are three veins below those.
Li sainie des voinnes que sont aprés les oreilles si aide as catharres anciens, et a emigraine; et li qualiteis dou sainier, si com je te dis, et est que tu reises lou chief dou malaide, et frote lou leu ou les voinnes sont d’un drap aspre; puis estrigne li malaides son col a une vis, tant que les II voinnes aperent derrier les oreilles en II leus dependens dou chief: quier les donques a ton doi, et ou tu sens lou poulz desoz ton doi, si seigne d’enche; puis pren la lancette, et la boute par desoz la voine jusc’a l’os, puis lieve ta main a tout la voinne amont, et cope et lou cuir et la voinne bien II dois dou traver, et fai issir dou sanc tant que tu vues; puis l’estrain et lie, tant qu’ele soit sanee; et j’ai ja dit l’incision et le cautere ou premier livre.	The healing of veins that are behind the ears helps with old catarrhs and headaches; and the qualities of the healer, as I tell you, and it is that you reset the patient's head, and rub the area where the veins are with a rough cloth; then bind the patient's neck to a screw so that the two veins appear behind the ears in two loops dependent on the head: hold them with your thumb, and where you feel the pulse under your thumb, prick; then take the lancet, and let it pass beneath the vein up to the bone, then lift your hand all along the vein upward, cut and remove the skin and the vein thoroughly twice through, and let the blood flow until you see; then drain it and bind it so that it heals; and I have already said the incision and cautery in the first book.
Li sainie des II arteres que sont en II temples, si vaut a emigrainne anciene, et sode, et obtalmie acostumee, et au cors des larmes agues as eulz; et li qualitez dou sainier si est si com je dis: et est que li malaides estraigne son col, tant que les II voinnes aperent apertement; et sent lou polz desoz ton doi, et puis seigne d’enche; puis lieve lou keur sus la voinne en haut a ton doi indice, et boute la lancette desoz, et lieve la voine en haut, et la cope, si com tu as fait en II autres voinnes, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit; puis deslie lou malaide, et met ton doi sus la voine une houre, puis met sus coton; et puis la lie forment, et la laisse tant qu’elle soit sanee; et nos en avons jai parleit et de lor copement et de lor estraction, ou comencement dou livre.	The health of the two arteries that are in the two temples, is equivalent to ancient migraine, stiff, and customary blindness, and in the body of watery tears on their eyes; and the qualities of this health are as I say: and it is that the patient draws his neck, so that the two veins clearly appear; and feels the pulse beneath your thumb, and then sighs deeply; then lift the heart over the vein upwards to your index finger, and place the lancet underneath, and lift the vein upwards, and the cloth, as you have done with the other veins, and draw off the blood according to your necessity; then release the patient, and put your thumb on the vein for an hour, then put on cotton; and then form it well, and leave it until it is healed; and we have spoken about their tying and extraction, or the beginning of this book.
Li sainie de la voine dou front si vaut autant com li sainie de la cephalique as maladies de la faice ancienes, et a emigraine, et a roujor; et li qualitez si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant, tant que li voine apere; puis pren l’estrument qui est apelez «fosseur», dont ci est li forme:	The sinew of the vein on the forehead is worth as much as the cephalic sinew for diseases of the face, and for headache, and for redness; and its quality is that the patient's neck twists until the vein becomes visible; then take the instrument called "fosseur," whose form is described here:
Et met la pointe sus la voinne, et fier sus de ta main, ou d’autre chose, et laisse dou sanc issir selonc la quantiteit que tu vues; puis delie au malaide le col, et lie la voine tant qu’elle soit saneel et aucune fois l’uevre on d’un flaime large.	And place the point on the vein, and pierce through with your hand or something else, and let the blood flow out according to the quantity you see; then release the patient's neck, and bind the vein until it is sound and never work with a wide flame.
Toutevoie, il ne covient mie que li flaimes soit trop agus; et le saine de travers, car li os est pres, et par aventure brise li flaimes quant il est subtilz.	In all ways, it is not fitting that the flames be too hot; and let the sinew lie across, for the bone is close, and by chance the flames might break when they are fine.
Li sainie des II voines que sont en II larmiers si aide as eulz, et a la tigne, et a la roujor, et a l’oriuel en l’oil, et as maladies de la faice; et li qualitez de lor sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col en tordant d’aucun liien, si com devant; puis le saine, et soit li sainie dou traver, un poc dou lonc dou flaime un poc large, car il n’i a point de char.	The health of the two veins that are in the eyelids helps with the eyes, and for hiccups, and for redness, and for the white part in the eye, and for diseases of the face; and the quality of their health is such that the patient draws his color by twisting from any joint, as before; then the savior, and let the saving be through the traverse, a bit long like a flame a bit wide, because there is no point of flesh.
Et se li flaimes est subtilz, par aventure si brise; puis fai corre dou sanc, tant com tu en as mestier, et puis lie sus couton, et le lie bien.	And if the flames are subtle, by chance they break; then make the blood run as much as you need, and then tie with cotton, and tie well.
Li sainie de la voine dou neis si vaut a ague, et a sode forsenee, et a maladies de faice, si com emigraine et roujor que vient en la faice, et meimement quant elle est anciene; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estrigne son col, puis estrain son neis a ta main senestre, et pren lou flaime subtil lonc, et le fiche emmi la levre en l’espaice qui est entre les II narines, car li voinne n’apert mie bien enqui, et li sans comencera maintenant a corre; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, et fai corre dou sanc selonc ta necessiteit, puis la lie une nuit, car elle est mout tost restoree; et c’est li forme dou flaime:	The health of the vein near the nose is good for water and hard scrofulous disease, and for diseases of the face, such as migraine and redness that comes to the face, especially when it is old; and the quality of its health is such that the patient draws his color by twisting from any joint, then twists his nose with your left hand, and take a subtle long flame, and stick it between the lip in the space which is between the two nostrils, for the vein does not open well herein, and the wound will start to run now; do not go too much beyond perfection, and make the blood run as you need, then tie it for a night, because it is most easily restored; and this is the form of the flame:
Li sainie des II guindeges si aide a l’estrecement de l’alainne, et a l’encomencement de meselerie, et a mout de maladies, et a empetigine, et a corrodens, et a herpes, et estiomenes; et li qualitez de la sainie si est que li malaides estraigne son col desoz l’une et l’autre, si com nos avons dit; et soit li maistres estans sus lou chief dou malaide, et li malaides siece sus I siege, puis saine la voine dou lonc un poc largement, puis trai dou sanc tempreement, ou tant com mestier est; puis refai autreteil en l’autre voinne, puis deslie lou liien, et estraint andous les voines moienement, que li malaides n’estrangle; et le laisse jusc’au matin, que li plaie soit sanee.	The sinew of the two girdles helps in the narrowing of the alainne, and in the beginning of mingling, and much to diseases, and to petechiae, and to corrosion, and to herpes, and estiomenes; and the quality of the sinew is that the patient draws his col out from under both, as we have said; and let the master be on the head of the patient, and the patient lie down on the seat, then cleanse the vein from long a little bit widely, then draw temperately the blood or as much as needed; then do another thing in the other vein, then untie the ligature, and tightly press all the veins moderately, that the patient does not strangle; and leave until morning, so that the wound is healed.
de la sainie des leivres	of the health of the liver
Li sainie des voinnes des levres desus si aident a cole en la bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et fendures de levres, et dou neis et entor.	The health of the veins of the lips helps in swelling in the mouth, and to corruption of gums, and cracks in the lips, and at birth and afterwards.
Et li qualitez de la sainie si est de faire seoir lou malaide devant toi, et estraint son col si com j’ai dit; puis torne la levre, et regarde as II voinnes, dont l’une est a la destre levre et li autre a la senestre, et les conoist on par ceu qu’elles sont noires, et par ceu que entor elles a voines menues noires: cope donques l’une et l’autre, et se tu ne les conois, et tu en es en doutance, si cope la plus grosse de chescune part, et tout ausi fai des II voinnes que sont desus et desoz, car c’est une meisme maniere.	And the qualities of the health cause the patient to sit before you, and hold his neck as I have said; then turn the lip, and look at the two veins, one on the right lip and the other on the left. One can be known by their black color, and by the small black veins around them: cut both of these, and if you do not know them and are in doubt, cut the largest from each side, and do the same for the two veins above and below, for they are of the same manner.
de la sainie desoz la lengue	of the health beneath the tongue
Li sainie des voinnes que sont desoz la lengue si aide aprés la sainie de la cephalique, et c’est a l’estrecement de la gorge, et as maladies de l’uve, et as maladies de la bouche; et li qualitez dou sainier si est que li malaides siece entre tes mains devant lou soleil, et li lieve la lengue, et regarde desoz en chescun costeit une voinne noire: saine donques l’une et l’autre, et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car desoz sont les arteres.	The health of the veins that are beneath the tongue aids after the health of the cephalic vein, and this is in the constriction of the throat, and for diseases of the uvea, and for mouth diseases; and the quality of the sinner is such that the patient's condition improves before your eyes in the sun, and it lightens the tongue, and you look beneath on each side a black vein: therefore both are healthy, and do not go too much into perfection, for beneath are the arteries.
Les voinnes dou coute dont on saine communement sont sainies selonc II manieres: ou em poignant a tout I flaime mirtin large, ou olivaire subtil si com coutez trenchans, et est apelez «anesil»; et sont large et subtil selonc la largesce et l’estrecement des voinnes.	The veins of the costumarily treated vein are healed in two ways: either by pricking with a large mirtin flame or with a subtle olive oil as you hear sharp, which is called "anesil"; and they are large and subtle according to the size and constriction of the veins.
Li forme dou flaime mirtin si est mout renommee, et est large si com tu vois:	The form of the martyr's flame is very renowned, and it is wide as you see:
Et ait mestier por ovrir les voinnes chevees plaines de gros sanc apparent, et que contienent gros sanc et trouble; et c’est li forme dou flaime olivaire:	And it has need to open veins filled with thick blood visible on the surface, and which contain much thick blood; and this is the form of the olive flame:
et est plus subtilz apointé, et est por sainier les voinnes subtilz, ou il a subtil sanc citrin.	And it is more pointed subtle, and is for opening subtle veins, where there is thin yellow blood.
Li sainie de la basilique, qui est une de ces voinnes, si aide as maladies que sont desoz la gorge, et ou col, et ou peis, et ou ventre; et covient au sainor qu’il saine saigement, et qu’il se warse de l’artere qui est desoz.	The basilica's treatment, which is one of these veins, helps diseases that are below the throat, and in the neck, and in the side, and in the belly; and it is suitable for the sinner to bleed and to avoid the artery beneath.
Et s’il cope l’arterre, et decorremens de sanc vient, si le covient estainchier, si com j’ai dit; et ne doit mie estre poignans li flaime, mais taillans si com anesil.	And if the artery is cut and bleeding occurs, it must be staunched as I have said; and the fire should not be pricked but cut like flax.
Et se li basilique n’apert manifestement, si covient que tu l’estrainges, et chainge une autre; ou tu quieres aucun rain de li, ou tu saine en leu de li la voinne emmi le bras: elle apert manifestement; et la cope au flaime anesil, si com nos avons dit.	And if the basilique vein does not open clearly, it must be extracted and replaced with another; or you take any rib of it, or you incise in lieu of it the vein inserted in the arm: it opens clearly; and the cut is made with flax, as we have said.
Et se tu vues conoistre le leu de la sainie, si covient ainsois que tu estraignes lou bras, que tu touches le leu tant que tu conoisses le poulz; puis signe le leu d’enche, et puis lie lou bras, et cope la voine dou flaime anesil; et warde que tu ne ferir en l’artere quant tu vois le leu enfleit, car c’est de l’artere: eschui la donques.	And if you wish to know the place of the incision, it must be thus that you extract the arm, and touch the place until you feel the pulse; then mark the place with a needle, and then tie the arm, and cut the vein with flax. Be sure that you do not wound the artery when you see the place swollen, for this is the artery: avoid it then.
Et se tu vois saillir en haut ausi com l’urine d’un enfant, et li sans est rouges et subtilz, saiches que c’est sans de l’artere: haste toi donques, et met ton doi sus longement, puis oste ton doi se li sans estainche, que maintes fois avient; se lie lou bras, et laisse ensi, et ne lou mueve li malaides; et soit sus paour, et ne lou mueve tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if you see it bulge up high as urine in a child, and the skin is red and fine, know that it is blood from an artery: hasten then, and place your finger longwise, then withdraw your finger when the bleeding stops, for this often happens; bind up the arm, and leave it thus, and do not move the patient until it is healed.
Et se li sans n’est estainchiez, et il te vaint, et li medicine ne t’est presens, si cope l’artere s’elle apert, car li chief de li retraient; et estainche li sans.	And if the skin is not yet stopped and it pains you, and medical help is not present, cut the artery if it appears, for the head of the retractor will stop it.止血。
Et pren une escorce de fistice, et la fent, et pren l’une des moitiez et lie sus bien jusc’a l’autre jor; se li sans estainche, c’est bien; se ce non, si le cure, si com nos avons dit, des poudres qui estainchent sanc; et li estainchemens n’est mie griés em plusors dispositions por le petit leu de la plaie, et la possance dou liien dou bras.	And take a bark from the fisticle tree, split it open, and use one half well bound until the other day; if the skin stops bleeding, that is good. If not, treat the wound as we have said, using powders to stop blood. The dressings are not greatly affected by many preparations for the small size of the wound and the strength of the arm.
Li sainie de la voinne em mileu si aide qu’elle trait sanc dou chief desus, et dou cors desoz, por ceu qu’elle est composte de la basilique et de la cephalique, si com nos avons dit; et covient au sainor qu’il se warse por lou nerf qui est desoz, et s’il point trop em parfont, et il trueve lou nerf, et il enfle et li santez soit griés, et par aventure ne puet saner; et cist nerf apert mult de fois, et s’il n’apert en aucuns homes por sa subtiliteit, si covient que tu lou saines de l’estrument anesil; et eschui lou nerf a ton pooir.	The vein in the middle helps treat blood from the head above, and from the body beneath, for it is composed of the basilica and cephalique, as we have said; and it is necessary for the healthy one to guard against the nerve underneath, and if it points too much towards perfection, and he finds the nerve, and it swells, and the health be spoiled, and by chance cannot heal; and this nerve often appears, and if it does not appear in any man through its subtlety, it is necessary that you anesthetize the vein with the instrument; and avoid the nerve as much as possible.
Et se il a voinne entre les II ners, si la fent dou lonc.	And if there is a vein between the two nerves, cut along its length.
Li sainie de la cephalique si aide, qu’ele atrait sanc dou chief, et aide as eulz; et covient sainier em poignant au flaime olivaire ou au flaime mirtin, car c’est li plus sauve de toutes les voinnes, car il n’a desoz li ne nerf ne artere.	The cephalique vein helps, as it treats blood from the head and aids the eyes; and it is necessary to anesthetize it by pricking with olive oil flame or myrtle oil, for this is the safest of all veins, because it does not have any nerve or artery beneath.
Toutevoie, covient querir lou plus legier leu, et ne grieve rien s’on faut la premiere fois, et on rencomence; et par aventure enfle li leus a aucuns homes, cant on faut la premiere fois, mais il ne grieve rien.	In every way, it is necessary to seek the lightest touch, and not grievously wound if it must be done for the first time, and one restarts; and by chance, the limbs swell in some people when it must be done for the first time, but it does not grievously wound.
La qualitez de la sainie si est selonc ta pensee.	The quality of the skin is according to your thinking.
Li premiere chose que tu dois savoir de sainier, si est que sainie n’est amenistree fuer que por garder santeit, et por eschuir les maladies a venir; et soit li sainie faite en l’une des III voinnes que sont ou coute: c’est a savoir, cephalique, faste, et basilique; et se doit on sainier en l’encomencement de prientens a geun, et en autompne et en yver aprés mengier, quant li signe de repletion aperent; et se doit on sainier le premier jor ou le tier, aprés II houres ou III dou jor.	The first thing you must know about surgery is that surgery should only be performed to maintain health and to avoid future illnesses; and surgery should be conducted in one of the three veins: namely, cephalic, facial, and basilic; and surgery should be done at the beginning of prayers on knees, and in autumn and winter after eating, when signs of fullness appear; and it should be performed on the first or third day after two or three days.
Li sainie qui est aministree as maladies n’a point d’oure determinee, mais que quant besoing est de jor ou de nut, en toutes houres et en toz tens; et ne covient mie sainier les enfans jusc’a XIIII ans, ne femme portant fuer que des lou quart mois jusc’a septime.	The medicine given for diseases has no fixed hour determined, but when need is of day or night, at all hours and in every time; and it is not fitting to medicate children up to fourteen years, nor women bearing strength only from the fourth month up to seven.
Ne ne se doient mie sainier li viel qui ont passez LX ans.	Old people who have passed sixty years should not be medicated.
Et quant aucuns se vuet sainier, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient k’il mondefie les intestines d’un clistere legier, s’il a mout de fiens retenut, si que les voines n’atraient des intestines les superfluitez porries nuisans as membres principelz; ne ne se saine mie cil qui est trop saolez de viandes, ne qui est yvres, tant k’il en soit fuer, ne ydropiques; et se warse on de sainier aprés colique passion, et vomissement, et decorrement de ventre, et multipliement d’abiter a femme, et de traval, de veiller et de juner, et ceu que tot la vertu, ou par chose de l’arme ou dou cors; puis subtilie les humors, se li sans est gros, par viandes et par bevraiges et par medicines, se tu en as lou poir; puis entre ou bain, s’aucune chose ne lou deffent, por subtiliier lou sanc, et te saine de la voinne dou pis entor la tierce, si com nos avons dit; et te garde celui jor de travail, et de poinne, et de luxure, et de semblans choses; et soies liez et joians, et soit li sainieres plus haut que cil cui on saine, et li frote lou bras II fois ou III, puis estraigne lou liien desus moienement, car quant il est trop estrois ou poc, si ne puet corre li sans; et puis le frote le leu as mains, tant que les voines enflent, et les sente on; puis moille li sainieres le flaime d’un poc d’oile viel, puis mette son doit de sa main senestre sus celle voinne desoz lou leu un poc ou il vuet sainier, que li voinne ne fue et faille au ferir.	And when any wish to be medicated, in whatever manner it may be, it is fitting that they purge the intestines with a light enema, if there is not much fecal matter retained, so that the veins do not attract from the intestines the putrefied superfluities harmful to the principal limbs; nor should one medicate those who are too salted by meat, nor those who are drunk, whether they be strong or weak, nor those who are dropsical; and if one wishes to medicate after a colic attack, vomiting, and evacuation of the stomach, and multiplication of abode in women, and travail, and watching, and fasting, and those whose entire virtue is diminished by force of weapon or body; then for subtlety of humors, if the sans is gross, from meat and drink and medicine, if you have such power; then between or after bath, if anything does not prohibit, to subtilize the blood, and medicate through the vein in the foot between the third and fourth, as we have said; and on that day avoid work, and labor, and lust, and similar things; and be tied and joyous, and let the one who medicates be higher than the one being medicated, and rub the arm two or three times, then extract the leech moderately, for when it is too tight or loose, it cannot adhere properly; and then rub the limb with your hands until the veins swell, and you can feel them; then anoint the fingers of the left hand with a little old oil, then place his thumb under the vein just above the limb where he wishes to medicate, so that the vein does not break from the pressure.
Car il i a voinnes que fuient ausi com cordes au sainier, et si a de telz que sont plainnes de ventositeit, si que quant on met sus le flaime, si retrait a flaime, et ne puet ovrir li voinne, et ensi est on de ceus; et s’il aoevre la voinne, si est li plaie trop estroite, por ceu si covient que li sainieres soit avisez en ces choses.	For there are veins that flow as strings to the surgeon, and some that are full of windiness, such that when one puts fire on them, they retreat from the flame, and cannot open the vein, and thus one is of those; and if he opens the vein, the wound is too narrow, for which reason the surgeons must be cautious in these matters.
Et se li voine oevre la premiere fois, c’est boin; se ceu non, si rencomence ancor un poc desoz celui leu ou sus hastanment, se li leus n’est enflez.	And if the vein opens the first time, that is good; but if not, one must attempt it again a little below that place or quickly above, if the limb is not swollen.
Et se li leus est enflez, et li malaides s’espoante, se li laisse I jor ou II, et ne liier mie le bras: par aventure i venra apostemes chaus; ne n’entre ou bain, puis rencomence la sainie s’elle li plait; et se li pertuis est petis, ou li sans cort subtilment et tu doutes qu’il n’isse mie tant de sanc com tu vues, si fier en celui pertuis meisme a tout le flaime droitement; et l’uevre un poc hastanment, ainsois que li leus soit enflez; car ceu avient maintes fois, quant li plaie est petite.	And if the limb is swollen, and the patient feels pain, let it rest for one or two days and do not bind the arm: perhaps abscesses will form; do not enter a bath, but continue with the surgery if it pleases you. And if the opening is small, or the vein is thin and subtle, and you doubt that there is not as much blood as you see, then apply the flame directly to that opening; work quickly, as the limb becomes swollen; for this often happens when the wound is small.
Se tu vois le leu enfleit, si ne rencomencier mie la sainie, et met sus un poc de lie d’oile, car elle alige lou cors dou sanc, et est muedre en cest leu li lie que li oile; et ensi aministre la lie de oile en chescune sainie que tu saines les voines, por estanchier lou cours dou sanc; et ceu meisme fait triaicle et bowe d’eus, quant on le met sus le leu; si subtilie li sans et s’espart quant il est trop gros.	If you see the limb swollen, do not resume the healing, and place a bit of lard on it, for it lightens the body from blood, and makes the lard that is there in the swelling thin; thus administer lard in each healing where you heal the veins, to stop the flow of blood; and the same is done with honey and wax when placed on the limb; so subtlely does the blood separate when it is too thick.
Et s’il i vient uns apostemes gros, qui avient maintes fois, meismement quant il n’est sainiez fuer que a celi fois ou li overture de la voinne est petite, si te haste, et met sus le leu esponge moillie en aigue et en seil un poc chaut, et l’estraint une houre; et covient que tu faices ceu aprés l’issue dou sanc de la voinne, et s’il demoure au leu aprés aucuns jors aucune noiror ou verdor, si ne li nuist mie; et se tu vues, met sus aucune chose de aloes ou de mirre remise en jus de calament, monstastre, ou semblant.	And if there comes an abscess large, which happens often, even when it is not healed more than that time or the opening of the vein is small, hasten, and place on the limb a wet sponge in water and salt a bit warm, and hold for an hour; and you must do this after the bleeding from the vein has stopped. And if after some days there remains any black or green on the limb, it does not hurt it; and if you see, place on it any substance of aloes or myrrh set in calamus juice, must, or similar.
Et maintes fois avient aposteme et aparance a la sainie de la basilique: met donques ta main sus, et se tu trueves le leu mol a la compression de la main, si est celle aparance male.	And often an abscess and appearance arise in the skin of the basilica: therefore place your hand there, and if you find the area soft under the pressure of the hand, that is the bad appearance.
Eschui donques que tu ne mettes sus aucune chose de ceu que nos avons dit, car par aventure en cort sans de l’artere; mais li fai I emplaustre sec por endurcir le leu, puis le cure d’autre cure, tant qu’il soit sanez.	Therefore, do not apply anything of what we have said, for by chance it could cut into an artery; but make it a dry poultice to harden the area, and then treat with other remedies until it is healed.
Et trai a chescun dou sanc selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu, et de la color dou sanc.	And draw from each of the humors according to the quantity of its virtue, and the color of the blood.
Car se li sans est noir, si en laisse issir tant qu’il soit rouges; et se tu lou vois gros, si lou laisse tant qu’il soit subtiliiez; et s’il est trop chaus, si le laisse refroidier.	For if the blood is black, let it flow until it becomes red; and if you see it thick, let it flow until it becomes thin; and if it is too hot, let it cool.
Et covient a celui qui est plains et fors, et ait mestier d’estraction de sanc, c’on li faice plus large plaie, et soit li flaimes larges; et a celui qui est foibles, fai le contraire, et le covient sainier poc et sovent, et le doit on sainier en taillant de travers, ne mie en poignant; et ceste maniere de sainie est sauve de decorrement de sanc et de copement de nerf, et vaut mues que li sainie dou lonc ne dou large.	And it is fitting for him who is full and strong, and has need of blood extraction, to make a larger wound, and let the flammes be wide; and for him who is weak, do the opposite, and he should be healed little but often, and one should heal in cutting across, not by pricking; and this manner of healing saves from running of blood and nerve compression, and is better than long or wide wounds.
Et a celui cui li cors faut a la sainie, covient doner pain moilliet en jus de pomes grenates; s’il est eschaufez, si trai dou sanc III fois ou IIII Et s’il est de froide complexion, si menjuce devant la sainie pain moilliet en sirop muzé, ou en sirop de miel aromatique avec espices, si com poivre, canelle, gingibre, et chiches, et sirop bien odorant.	And for him whose body needs nourishment after the healing, it is fitting to give soft bread with pomegranate juice; if he is heated, draw blood three or four times. And if he has a cold complexion, eat soft bread before healing in mûre syrup, or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and chickpeas, and well-scented syrup.
Et s’il paume a la sainie, aprés l’issue de mout de sanc, si covient qu’il hume brouet de char, et sirop odorant subtil, et use des autres choses que nos avons dit en la division ou chapistre de sincope, por l’evacuation de voinne.	And if it swells at the joint, after the discharge of much blood, it is fitting that he inhales broth of flesh and fragrant subtle syrup, and use the other things we have said in the division or chapter of syncope for the evacuation of vein.
Et s’il vuet esventer som bras, et sainier autre fois, si covient, quant il est afoiblis par grant sainie, k’il se saine poc et poc, selonc la quantiteit de sa vertu continueement.	And if it swells in the arm and was swollen before, it is fitting, when he is weakened by great swelling, that he be swelled a little and a little, according to the quantity of its virtue continuously.
Et qui vuet esventer som bras aprés la premiere sainie, et il a cors fort, si se saine VII houres aprés la premiere sainie, ou aprés la nuevime houre.	And whoever swells in the arm after the first swelling, and has strong cor, should be swollen seven hours after the first swelling, or after the ninth hour.
Et qui se vuet sainier d’autre part, si se doit sainier lou secont jor ou le tier.	And whoever is swollen in another part, should be swelled the second day or the third.
Car il a mout de sanc dedens le cors qui est ja eschaufez, et fait venir fievre; si en covient traire grant quantiteit, et eslargir le pertus tant qu’il chiece em pameson; puis que tu rewardes toutes les conditions de sainie, et met ta main sus som poulz quant il saine, que li mors ne viegne en leu de pameson, et ceu avient maintes fois, quant li sainieres est negligens; et ne covient mie quant tu vues desliier lou bras, et faire issir sanc la seconde fois, et li pertus est clos, que tu presses forment sus; ne s’il est corbes, qu’il estende lou bras hastanment, car ce seroit malz; mais le laisse tant qu’il saine la seconde fois; ou tu i point a la pointe dou flaime, tant que li sans qui est congelez a pertus de la voinne isse fuer, et met sus I poc de seil remis en aigue, et presse sus legierement.	Because there is much blood within the body which is already heated, and this causes fever; therefore it is necessary to drain a great quantity, and enlarge the puncture until it becomes inflamed around the wound; after you have restored all conditions of health, and place your hand on your pulse when it heals, so that death does not come from under the heart, and this happens many times, when the surgeons are negligent; and it is not fitting when you see release the arm, and make blood flow a second time, and the puncture is closed, that you press firmly upon it; nor if it is crooked, that you stretch the arm hastily, for that would be ill; but let it be until it heals the second time; or you may prick at the tip of the flame, until the one who has been frozen to the point of the vein breaks free, and place a little salt in water, and press lightly upon it.
Et se li voine est enflee, si la laisse et ne l’estreindre mie, tant que li aposteme soit apaisiez.	And if the vein is swollen, let it be and do not compress it until the abscess is pacified.
Et se necessitez est dou traire dou sanc la seconde fois, si le saine en celui leu meisme, ou en un autre voinne, ou en l’autre bras.	And if the need arises to treat the blood a second time, let it be done in that same vein, or in another vein, or in the other arm.
Li voinne emmi le bras est sainie en leu de la voine dou chief por ceu qu’elle est composte.	The vein in the arm is treated in place of the vein in the hand because it is composed.
Et li maniere de la sainie si est que li malaides boute sa main en aigue chaude, tant que li foscile soit rouges; puis soit liiéz moienement, si que li voinne apere bien, puis le saine maintenant dou travers, ne mie dou large ne dou lonc; et soit li pertus larges, et soit sainiez bien pres de la jointe de la main, et se sans n’en puet issir, si remet la main en aigue chaude, et laisse corre lou sanc en l’aigue, tant que tu en aies assez; et se c’est en esteit, si ne rebouter mie la main en aigue chaude, car on l’i met plus en yver que en esteit; et li sainie de ceste voine est plus sauve de toutes autres voinnes, qu’il n’i a ne artere ne nerf.	And the method of treatment is that the patient puts his hand in warm water until the fingers turn red; then tie it moderately so that the vein appears well. Now suture it from the side, not from the length or the width; and make the punctures wide, and suture them close to the joint of the hand. If no blood can come out, put the hand back in warm water and let the blood flow into the water until you have enough; if it is in winter, do not repeatedly put the hand in warm water, for it should be used more in summer than in winter. The suturing of this vein is safer than any other veins, whether artery or nerve.
Li sainie de la salvatele de la main destre si vaut a toutes les maladies dou foie, et c’est li maniere: estrain la main, et boute en aigue chaude, tant que li voinne soit enflee, si c’on la voie; et se la saine de travers, et se tu la copes dou tout en tout, si ne grieve rien; et n’aler mie trop em parfont, car li nerf sont desoz toz desnuez de char, et puis remet la main en aigue chaude, se li sans est congelez en la plaie, et n’en puet issir.	The health of the right hand's salvation is good for all liver diseases, and this is the manner: stretch the hand, and pour in warm water until the veins are swollen; if it is crooked, and you cover it completely, do not harm anything; and do not go too long, for the nerves are beneath all skin, and then put the hand in warm water again, if the hand is frozen in the wound, and cannot come out.
Et quant tu avras trait dou sanc tant com mestier t’est, si met sus la voinne oile et seil por souder hastanment, et ensi fai de chescun rain.	And when you have let out enough blood as needed, put a piece of oil-soaked cloth to seal it quickly, and do this for each vein.
Li sainie de li en la main senestre si vaut a la maladie de la mice, et fai tout ausi com je t’ai dit devers destre.	The health of the hand in the left hand is good for the disease of the lungs, and do everything as I have told you for the right hand.
Li sainie de la sophene si vaut a toutes les maladies que sont desoz le cors, si com maladies de la marris, et retenement de flors, et maladie des rains, et des cuixes et des jambes ancienes, et semblans maladies.	The sickness of the spleen is useful for all diseases that are below the body, such as diseases of the liver, retention of flowers, and disease of the reins, and of the thighs and old legs, and similar diseases.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides boute som piet en aigue chaude, et frote sus la voinne tant qu’elle pere, et lie desus la jointure dou piet; et li voinne si est a la cheville, et par desus lou piet en vont mout de rains; saine la donques ou plus large rain, ou a la cheville, que mues vaut.	And the qualities of its virtue are that the diseases cause pain in hot water, and one should rub on the vein until it hurts, and tie above the joint of the foot; and the vein is at the ankle, and above the foot go much of the reins; therefore make it healthy where there is a larger vein or at the ankle, which moves well.
Et se tu la saines sus lou piet, si te warde des ners qui sont desoz, et la saine de traver ausi com en copant; et soit li flaimes anesil.	And if you make it healthy on the foot, beware of the nerves beneath, and make it healthy by cutting through them as when sawing; let the flambes be ash.
Et se li sans n’en puet issir, si remet lou piet en l’aigue, et laisse bien vuidier la voine.	And if the stone cannot pass out, place the foot in the water, and let it well drain the vein.
Et se li sainieres faut la premiere fois, si rencomence la seconde au desus un poc, car li leus est salz; ne ne douter de nerf, si com nos avons dit, et ensi fai de la sophene de l’autre piet igalment.	And if the stone is needed for the first time, start again the second time above a little, because the loins are salted; nor doubt the nerve, as we have said, and so do with the sponge of the other foot equally.
Li leus de la voinne sciatique est a la cheville de fuer, et sa sainie vaut a la dolor de la hainche, quant c’est por sanc chaut.	The loins of the sciatic vein are at the ankle, and its stone is worth for the pain in the hip when it is due to hot blood.
Et li qualitez de sa sainie si est que li malaides entre ou bain, et estraigne desus la cheville IIII dois en tordant, car autrement n’apert li voinne; et s’elle apert, si le saine en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et en traversant; et vaut mues que tu la copes, car li leus est saus, et elle est mout reponue a mains homes.	And the quality of its stone is such that the patient enters the bath, and expels four doles above the ankle by twisting, for otherwise the vein does not open; and if it opens, you can stone it in all ways that you can, and by crossing; and it is best to twist it, because the loins are soft, and it responds well to manual manipulation.
Et se tu ne la trueves, si saine aucun rain de li qui apert ou dos dou piet, et vers lou petit doi, et te warde des ners; et fai tant corre dou sanc que tu vues, et puis deslie lou lien, et met sus coton et l’estraint; ele est maintenant sanee.	And if you do not find it, trace any vein from the shin or back of the foot, and towards the little toe, and beware of the nerves; and let the bleeding continue as much as you see, then release the bandage, and place a cloth and bind it; it is now healed.
des sainies de ventouse	of the suction cups
Ventouses sont fait de cornes, ou d’arain, ou de voirre; et ventosation si est faite selonc II manieres: ou par ferir et atraire sanc, ou sens ferir.	Suction cups are made of horns, or leather, or glass; and suction is performed in two ways: either by pricking and drawing blood, or without pricking.
Et ceste ventosation qui est sens ferir si est selonc II manieres: ou elle est a tout feu, ou sens feu; et ventosation qui est faite par ferir et par estraction de sanc si est faite en XIIII leus dou cors, de coi li uns est tout en som le chief; et li autres est emmi le col; et II autres en II costeis dou col; et li ventouse desoz lou menton; et li ventouse des II espaules; et li ventouse sus les crupies; et les ventouses emmi les II bras; et les ventouses des II jambes; et les ventouses des II chevilles; et li ventosation ne trait point de sanc, fuer que des menues voinnes que sont esparses en la char, et por ceu n’en afoiblist om mie, si com on fait de sainie de voinne; et ne covient mie qu’elle soit aministree, ne a tout feu ne sens feu, en aucune maladie qui vient de repletion, tant que toz li cors soit vuidiez.	And this suction that is performed without pricking is done in two ways: either with fire or without fire; and the suction that is performed by pricking and drawing blood is done at fourteen places on the body, of which one is all around the head; another is inserted into the neck; two are on both sides of the neck; one is under the chin; one is on both shoulders; one is above the armpits; one is on each arm; one is on each leg; one is on each ankle; and fire suction does not treat blood, but only the small veins that are scattered in the flesh, and for this reason it does not weaken at all, as we do with a vein from a cut; and it should not be administered either with fire or without fire in any disease caused by excess, until the whole body is emptied.
Et se par necessiteit de maladies covient ventoser, ou por acostumances, si l’amenistrons chescune houre en l’encomencement dou mois, ou en la fin, et emmi et en chescun tens; car il i a de telz qui, quant il ont mestier de ventoser, si ont pesant chief; et si a telz qui truevent repletion et roujor en lor faice, et en lor chief, et au col, et tenebrour as eulz; et telz qui truevent une goute de sanc en lor bouche, et ont enflee la lengue, et raichent sanc; et si i a de telz qui songent, et voient par nut sanc et navrez et mors et semblans choses.	And if for necessity of sickness it is fitting to bleed, or for custom, we shall conduct it every hour at the beginning of the month, or at the end, and between times; for there are such as, when they have need to bleed, have heavy heads; and there are such as find fullness and redness in their face, and on their head, and neck, and darkness before their eyes; and such as find a drop of blood in their mouth, and have swollen tongues, and draw blood.
Et quant nos voions ces signes, et meismement quant c’est emmi lou mois, nos lou commandons a ventoser aprés III houres dou jor.	And when we see these signs, and especially between hours of the day, we command to bleed after three hours.
Li sainie de la muze si aide a la grieteit dou chief … que vient as eulz, et ne covient mie que ce soit aprés l’evacuation de tout lou cors; et ceste ventosation si est en leu de la sainie de la cephalique, et ne covient mie que cil qui est de froide complexion en use, ou qui ait chatharre, car ce lor fait mout grant nuisement; et por ceu ne covient mie que li veillart en usent, ne qui ont ou chief froides maladies.	The health of the brain and helps in the hardness of the head... that comes to them, and it is not fitting that this be after the evacuation of all the body; and this bleeding is instead of the health of the cephalic, and it is not fitting that those who are of a cold complexion use it, or who have chyluria, for it does much harm to them; because of this, it is not fitting that those who keep watch use it, nor those who have cold diseases in their head.
Et cil qui s’en saine sovent, si devient oblious, et por ce covient mettre la ventouse un poc plus aval par la doutance d’obliance.	And he who is often cured of this, becomes forgetful; therefore, a bit more suction should be applied due to the doubt of forgetfulness.
Li ventosation emmi le col est en leu de la sainie dou chief et de la basilique, et por ceu vaut elle a l’estrecement dou pis, et a fendure de la chenal dou pormon, et a toust, et a repletion; et la covient poc bouter, car s’elle tient trop fermement, si enjanre obliance ou stomac et ou cuer.	The ventilation at the neck is in the place of the healed shoulder and basilicus muscle, and for this reason, it is good for narrowing the vein, and cutting the channel of the brachial artery, and everywhere, and for filling; and one should apply it only slightly, because if it holds too tightly, it can cause forgetfulness or stomach and heart issues.
Li ventosations as II costelz dou col si vaut as dolors dou chief, et obtalmie et emigrainne, et a l’estranglement, et a la dolor as racines des dens, et est en leu de la sainie de la basilique; et covient que tu comandes au sainor qu’il espresse sa main au mettre, qu’il ne cope l’artere, et ne veigne decorremens de sanc.	The ventilation at the second ribs of the neck is good for headaches, eye diseases, and migraines, and for stricture, and pain in the roots of the teeth, and it is in the place of the healed basilicus muscle; therefore, you should instruct the patient to hold his hand when applying, so as not to compress the artery and avoid hemorrhages.
Li ventosations desoz lou menton si vaut a maladie de bouche, et a corruption de gencives, et semblans maladies qui sont en la bouche; et est en leu des sainies des II levres.	The ventilation above the chin is good for mouth diseases, and gum decay, and similar ailments in the mouth; and it is found in healthy tissues of the two lips.
Li ventosations des espaules vaut a maladie que vient de chalor et de remplissement.	The ventilation of the shoulders is good for diseases that come from heat and congestion.
Li ventosations des coutes si vaut autant com des III voinnes dou bras, car elle atrait sanc de ces grosses voinnes; et comande au sainor qu’il ne fiere mie trop em parfont, car li leus est nus de char, et sait desoz ners et arteres.	The ventilation of the armpits is as effective as three veins in the arm, for it draws blood from these large veins; and instruct the healthy person not to pierce it too close to the center, for the area is naked of flesh and one can feel the nerves and arteries beneath.
Li ventouse qui est sus la croupe si vaut as emoroydes dou fondement, et as maladies desoz, et covient que li ventouse soit grans, et soit d’arain, qu’elle a mestier de bien traire; et par aventure, s’elle estoit subtilz, si briseroit; et i fai grans plaies.	The cupping applied on the buttocks is good for hemorrhoids at their root, and ailments below. It should use large cups of iron, which must be well-sealed; otherwise, if they were too delicate, they might break, causing great wounds.
Les ventouses des jambes si sainent apertement, car elles atraient sanc de tout le cors, et valent as dolors ancienes des rains, et de la marris, et de la vessie, et ramoinnent les flors; et sont en leu des II sophenes, et des II chevilles, et toutevoie elles afoiblissent lou cors aprés lonc us, et font venir paumison em plusors dispositions.	The cups of the legs heal openly, for they draw blood from the whole body, and are effective for old pains in the sides, and in the hips, and generally weaken the body after long use, and bring on paralysis in many conditions.
Li maniere de mettre la ventouse si est que tu la mettes premier vuide, et succe tempreement, et la met hastanment, et remue igalment, et ne cesser de ceu faire, tant que tu voies lou leu rouge et enfleit, et apere li roujor dou sanc; puis fier, et remet les ventouses, et pren warde en la disposition des cors, car il i a telz qui ont tanre char, et clers porez: si covient ferir une fois soulement, et covient faire larges plaies, et un poc parfondes; et suce legierement.	The manner of placing the cup is to first empty it, and then press it gently, and put it quickly, and move evenly, and continue doing this until you see the area turn red and swell, and appear with a glow of blood; then remove it, and place the cups again, and take care in the disposition of the body, for some have thick flesh and clear pores: so it is necessary to prick only once, and it is necessary to make large wounds, and slightly deep ones; and suck gently.
Et se li sans est gros, si couvient ferir II fois: la premiere fois por subtiliier la voie dou sanc gros.	And if the vein is large, it must be pricked twice: the first time to dilate the passage of the large blood.
Et se li sans est tres espés, si covient ferir la tierce fois; et quant nos volons traire dou sanc poc et poc, si nos soffist soulement une fois.	And if the vein is very full, it must be pricked three times; and when we want to draw a little blood at a time, we prick only once.
Et se nos volons mout de sanc, si rencomensons sovent; et se li sans est espés, si fier em parfont, et li termines si est que li keurs soit perciez soudement, et couvient a celui qui a gros cuir et dur, et qui ont estrois porelz, que tu oignes les leus des ventouses d’oile aperitif et dissolutif: se c’est en esteit, d’oile violet, ou d’oile d’amandres douces, ou d’oile de semence de cucurbite; et se c’est en yveir, d’oile de cresson, ou de lis, ou de camomille, ou autre semblant.	And if we want much blood, we begin often; and if the vein is full, prick it deeply, and the endings should be that the vessels are suddenly pierced, and for those with thick skin and hard veins, and who have narrow pores, you should anoint the eyes of the suction cups with a pungent and dissolving oil: if it is in heat, use olive oil or sweet almond oil, or pumpkin seed oil; and if it is in winter, use mustard oil, or lavender oil, or chamomile oil, or another similar one.
Et se li superfluitez est grosse et froide, si pren oile amaratin, ou de balsamite, ou oile d’anet, et les semblans.	And if the excess is large and cold, take bitter almond oil, or balsam, or anise oil, and similar.
Et se cil cui on saine a tendre char et larges porelz, se n’i covient mettre point d’oile, mais le covient laver aprés la ventosation d’aigue rose, ou d’aigue froide, ou d’aigue de morelle, ou d’aigue de cucurbite, ou d’aigue de porcelainne, ou autre semblant.	And if the one who is being cured has flesh and large pores, it is not necessary to put any oil on it, but it should be washed after ventilation with rose water, or cold water, or pear water, or cucumber water, or porcelain water, or other similar.
Et cil qui a mout de moistor, si se leve d’aisil, ou d’aigue de mirte, et de sumac, et de semblans choses.	And he who has much moisture, let him rise from almond, or pear water, or sumac water, and similar things.
Et cil qui ont grosses superfluitez se levent de vin viel, ou d’aigue de seuc, ou de decoction d’anet ou de camomile, ou d’autres semblans; et ne se covient mie sainier de ventouse devant le bain ne em bain, mais aprés lou bain une houre ou II; et ne dorme mie aprés la ventosacion, et covient k’il se warse, quant il se doit ventoser et quant il est ventosez.	And those who have large excesses rise from old wine, or pomegranate water, or decoction of anise or chamomile, or other similar things; and it is not advisable to be cured by suction before the bath or after bathing for one to two hours; and do not sleep after ventilation, and they should be wrapped when they are to be suctioned and when they are suctioned.
Et warde se cil qui se saine est coleriques, et se li sans est trop agus et enflamez; si covient qu’il preigne choses froides, si com pomes grenates et endives et laitues a l’aisil, et semblans choses; et menjuce pucins, et char de chastron, et viandes moistes.	And watch over him who is healing if he is choleric, and if the blood is too acrid and inflamed; it is fitting that he take cold things, such as pomegranates and endives and lettuces in vinegar, and similar things; and eat grubs, and meat from capons, and moist foods.
Et cil qui a froide complexion, si preigne syrop de miel, et vin odorant moien, qui est entre viel et noveil, et menjuce poc, et menjuce pucins et petis oiselz et pijons; et lou jor qu’il se ventousera, si doit plus boivre que mengier; et covient doner a aucuns homes aucune fois triaicle ou muscate devant la ventosacion, ou aprés, por conforter les membres principalz; et soit subtiliiez li sans, mais il ne covient mie que cil qui sont chaut le boivent.	And he who has a cold complexion, should take syrup of honey and moderate fragrant wine between the old and new, and eat little, and eat grubs and small birds and pigeons; and on the day he will cupped, he should drink more than eat; and it is fitting to give some men triacle or musk before or after cupping to comfort the principal members; and let the blood be subtle, but it is not fitting that those who are hot drink it.
Les ventouses que sont mises sens ferir sont celles que sont mises sus lou foie, et sus la mice, et podagre, et sus lou ventre et la boude et les rains et la hainche, car cil membre ne soffrent mie ferir sus oulz, et ne le fait on fuer que por atraire sanc de membre em membre, si com nos mettons sus les mameles quant li neis sainne; por oster la viscositeit qui est au membre, si com nos metons ventouses sus le ventre et sus la boude por amenuisier le membre; et oste la dolor, quant il i a opilation ou piere, si oste par sa vertu atractive par aventure l’opilation, ou desaert la piere de son leu; et ensi fait ele quant on le met sus lou foie et sus la mice quant il i a ventositeit retenue, et ces ventouses sont aministrees vuides por sucier tant soulement; et aucune fois sont aministrees ensamble feu, et aucunes fois plainnes d’aigue tede, si com em maladies dou pleuresin, et en tel maniere c’on emplisse la ventouse d’aigue chaude soule, ou d’aigue ou il ait cuit herbes covenaubles a ceu.	The suction cups that are placed without piercing are those placed on the liver, and on the thigh, and podagra (arthritis of the foot), and on the belly and mouth and veins and hip, for these parts do not tolerate being pierced with needles, and one uses heat only to draw blood from member to member, as we place them on nipples when a child is born; to remove the viscosity that is in the member, as we place suction cups on the belly and on the mouth to diminish the swelling of the member; and removes pain, when there is abscess or stone, it sometimes removes the abscess, or displaces the stone from its place; and thus does it when placed on the liver and on the thigh when there is retained windiness, and these suction cups are administered empty to suck only; and sometimes they are applied with fire, and sometimes full of tepid water, as in diseases of pleursin (a form of inflammatory condition), and in such a manner one fills the suction cup with warm water or with water containing herbs suitable for this.
Li forme de la ventouse aministré a feu si est ci:	The form of the suction cup applied with fire is as follows:
Et ait II dois de large et demi palme de parfont, et ait ou costeit entor lou mileu I petit pertus, ausi com por bouter une aguille, et soit d’arain, souef devant si qu’ele ne blece lou malaide au mettre sus lou membre; et ait em mileu une verge de travers d’arain ou de fer, por mettre une chandoile emprise, et en soient et grans et petites selonc les maladies et l’eaige de ces qui les prenent; car les ventouses des enfans sont autres que des vielz, et des maigres que des gras.	And let it be two inches wide and half a palm's length from the furnace, with a small hole in the middle, as for inserting a needle, and made of tin, with a spout at the front so that it does not burn the patient when placed on the limb; and let there be a cross rod in the middle of tin or iron to place a wick, and their sizes should vary according to the diseases and the strength of those who use them; for the suction cups of children are different from those of adults, and of thin people from those of fat people.
Et doit on ensi mettre ceste ventouse sus lou membre: empren la chandoile de cire ou I linement, et le met emmi la ventouse au traver de la verge qui est emmi la ventouse, si que li clartez soit au fons de la ventouse qu’elle ne brule le malaide; et puis la met sus lou membre, et tes dois soit sus lou pertus que nos avons dit, si que quant on vuet, si en va li vapor, et oste on la ventouse; et emprent on le linement si com devant, et le rencomence sovent, se tu as mestier.	And one must place the suction cup on the limb in this manner: take the wax or linten wick and insert it through the hole in the middle of the suction cup, so that the flame is at the bottom of the cup to prevent burning the patient; then put it on the limb, with your two fingers on either side of the hole as we have said, so that when you look, the vapor goes out, and remove the suction cup; and replace the wick as before, and repeat often if you need to.
En la ventouse donques qui est aministree em maladie de pleuresin, a tout aigue, n’a point de verge ne de pertus, et n’est amenistree fuer que quant ele est plaine d’aigue, et est mise sus lou membre tant soulement; et c’est li forme:	In the ventouse that is administered for a disease of pleuresy, it has no straw nor perforations, and is not applied forcefully unless it is filled with fluid, and is placed on the limb only; and this is its form:
Sansues ne sont amenistrees fuer que en membres ou on ne puet mettre ventouses por lour petitece, si com levres et gencives, et semblans leus; et en leus desnuez de char, si com doi ou neis, et autres semblans; et li qualitez de l’user si est que quant tu trueves sansues que sont en aigues douces nettes sens porreture, si les pren; et les met une nut en aigue douce, tant qu’elles soient famillouses, et n’aient rien en ventres; et puis soit sainiez de voinne et de ventouse, puis frote le membre tant k’il soit rouges, et met sus les sansues; et quant elles seront plainnes, et cherront, se c’est leu ou on puisse mettre ventouse, se li met, car ce vaut mout aprés.	Without straws they are not applied forcefully on members where straws cannot be placed due to their small size, such as lips and gums, and similar areas; and on bare skin like that of the ear or nose, and other similar places; and the quality of the straw is that when you find withouts that are in clear, sweet water without corruption, take them; and place one nut in clear water until they are softened and have nothing inside; then draw blood by venesection and ventouse, afterwards rub the limb until it becomes red, and place the withouts on it; and when they are full and fall off, if it is a place where a ventouse can be placed, put one there, for this is very effective.
Se ceu non, si leve le leu d’aisil, et puis d’aigue, mout bien, et puis l’espreint; et se li leus saine trop aprés lou cors des sansues, si moille I drapel de lin en aigue froide, et met sus, tant que li sans soit estenchiés; et se li sans est multipliez, si met sus vitriole broié, ou gales, et semblans choses, tant qu’il soit estenchiez; ou tu met sor le leu moitiez de feves pelees, et les laisse tant qu’elles s’aerdent au leu, si estanchera maintenant; et se tu en as de plus mestier, si pren autres sansues.	If not, lift the shoulder blade, and then wash it well with water, very thoroughly, and then dry. And if the wound heals too soon after the body's fluids, make a linen pad wet with cold water and place it on top; until the flesh is infected; and if there are many wounds, place broken glass or garlic, and similar things, until they are infected; or you may put on the shoulder half of peeled beans, and leave them until they burn on the shoulder, and will now stop bleeding. And if you have more need, take other fluids.
Et se les sansues ne se vuellent prendre, si frote le leu de sanc fres, ou tu i fiche une aguille tant que li sans en isse, et puis les met sus, et tantost com elles sentent lou sanc, si s’aerdent; et quant tu vues qu’elles chieent, si poudre sus un poc d’aloen et de seil broiet, ou de cendre, si cherront maintenant.	And if the wounds do not will to heal, rub the shoulder with fresh blood, or prick it with a needle until the wound bleeds, and then place something on it; as soon as they smell the blood, they will burn. When you see them weep, sprinkle a little aloes and ground salt or ashes on them, and they will now dry up.
Ci comence li livre des brisures	This begins the book of fractures
Cist chapistres est maintes fois necessaires en l’art de medicine, et est restorement de brisure et de desaluement.	These chapters are often necessary in the art of medicine, and are for the restoration of fractures and dislocations.
Saichiez, chier fil, que li fol mire se gietent de cest chapistre, qu’il ne virent onques nul des anciens livres, ne lettre n’en lurent; et por ceste cause est estraingie li science en nostre terre, car je n’en trovai onques nul boin; et n’en sai nient, fuer que par la science des anciens livres, ou j’ai tant estudiiet que je en ai traite la science, et par experiment, et par l’acostumance de ma vie; et je vos ai jai descrit en cest chapistre ceu qui est contenut, et l’ai abregié en la fin, et ai mostreit clerement les formes des estrumens que sont amenistrez, si com j’ai fait en ces II chapistres ci devant.	Know, dear friend, that the knowledge in this chapter is not found in any of the ancient books or writings; and because of this, the science has been lost in our land. For I have never found anything good in them, and I know nothing of it except through the science of the ancient books, which I studied so much that I treated it, and by experiment, and from the habit of my life. And I have described here what is contained, abbreviated at the end, and shown clearly the forms of the instruments that are used, as I did in the two chapters before these.
Il covient donques que nos disons ou prologue de cest livre les sommes de la parole et les chapistres ou li saiges met son entendement, et demore sus la verteit, si que cil qui sont esproveit saichent et aprenent cest art noble, et l’aprenent a autrui.	It must therefore be said in our prologue to this book the summaries of the word and the chapters where the wise put their understanding, and remain on the truth, so that those who are experienced may know and learn this noble art, and teach it to others.
Je dis que quant brisure ou dislocation ou torsions ou quasseure vient a aucun, si covient que tu te hastes de sainier lou malaide d’une part et d’autre, s’aucune chose ne lou te tot, si com foiblece de cors, ou enfes, ou viellars; ou se li tens n’est tres chaus, ou trop frois; et menjuce cholz frois, c’est a savoir froides joutes, et char d’oiseil et de chevril, et ne boive point de vin, ne menjuce nules grasses chars, et ne s’emplisse mie trop de viandes qui remplissent les voinnes de sanc, tant que tu n’aies doute d’aposteme chaut, ne d’espandement de matiere au membre; si reviegne li malaides a som premerain governement k’il a useit.	I say that when a fracture or dislocation or twists or cuts happen to anyone, it must be that you hasten to sain the patient on both sides, if any condition prevents you from doing so, such as bodily weakness, illness, or age; or if his skin is too loose or too cold; and give him cold meats, that is, cold joints, and rabbit and chevron meat, and do not drink wine, nor eat any fatty meats, and do not become overly full of foods that fill the veins with blood, until you have no doubt of a hot abscess or spreading of matter in the limb; so the patient recovers under the primary governance he has used.
Et quant li os brisiés comence a restourer, si covient que on norrisse le malaide de viandes que font gros norrissement, ou il ait viscositeit, si com froment cuit en aigue, et ris, et testes, et piez, et pance de vaiche, et oefz, et poissons fres, et gros vin, et semblans chose.	And when the broken bone begins to heal, it must be nourished with meats that promote rapid healing or have viscosity, such as cooked wheat in water, rice, lentils, beef tripe, eggs, fresh fish, and good wine, and similar things.
Car a teil norrissement se reprent mues et plus tost li brisure.	And in proper nourishment, the healing process accelerates and the fractures mend faster.
Et saichiez que li os brisiez des vielz et des decrepites ne se pueent mie bien reprendre ne souder selonc lor nature por la sechor des membres, ne cil ausi qui sont trop tendre, si com os de petis enfans; mais n’a cure, ramoinne sus l’os brisiet I gros tenrons qui s’aert et joint le membre ensamble, tant qu’il enforce si com il fut devant; et ne li tot point de son oevre, et por ceu le covient norrir de grosses viandes, si com nos avons dit.	And know that the bones of old and decrepit people do not heal or set well according to their nature due to the dryness of the limbs, nor those that are too tender, such as the bones of small children; but take no cure, reset the broken bone and wrap it tightly so that it unites the limb together, until it strengthens as it was before; yet do not bind it too tight in its work. For this, you must nourish with large meats, as we have said.
Et saiches que les briseures sont diverses em maintes manieres.	And know that the fractures are different in many ways.
Car li brisure dou chief est autre que li brisure dou pis, ou de la jambe, et je vos dirai en cest chapistre toutes manieres de brisure.	For the fracture of the head is different from the fracture of the foot or the leg, and I will tell you all kinds of fractures in this chapter.
Car il i a brisure que vait a arvol, et autre en aguisant, si com li taille d’une penne por escrire.	For there are fractures that go lengthwise, and others that fracture across, just like the cut of a pen for writing.
Et si a brisure avec plaie, et brisure a tout une petite fendure.	And if there is a fracture with a wound, and a fracture with a small crack.
Et a chescune maniere ait son engien, et son estrument propre en la restauration, selonc ceu que li remembrance vient en son leu; et est conue li brisure de l’os par ceu que li leus est tors, et apert bien par defuer, et sone au presseir de la main; et quant il n’i a tortuositeit ne son au tochier, et li malaides ne sent mie grant dolor, se n’i a point de brisure; mais il puet bien avoir tortuositeit, ou fendure, ou petite brisure.	And for each kind there is its own method and proper tool in restoration, according to what memory brings to its place; and fractures of the bone are known by the deformity of the limb, and are clearly perceived by palpation and tapping. And when there is no deformity, nor a sensation on touch, and the patient does not feel great pain, then there may be no fracture; but it can well have a deformity, or crack, or small fracture.
Si ne covient mie que tu lou mueves a la main, mais met sus medicines que vienent ci aprés, et puis l’estraint maintenant subtilment.	If it is not fitting to move it by hand, but place medicines as mentioned hereafter, and then hold it delicately now.
Et saiches que li brisure que vait en arvol, et sont les II parties desjointes, il les covient maintenant mettre a point igalment, ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne; et se apostemes chaulz i vient, si lou laisse aucun jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez; puis le met igal au mues que tu pues legierement et saigement, et saiches que li restauration de li est plus legiere que li restaurations de celi ou il ait pieces; puis l’estraint, si com il covient ci aprés.	And know that the fracture which goes across, and are the two parts disjointed, you must now put them at equal points, as apertures close up to live; and if yellowish apertures come, let it remain a day or two until the apertures are pacified; then set them equally at the joints where you can gently and securely place them, and know that the restoration of this is less laborious than the restoration of that which has pieces; then hold them as it is fitting hereafter.
Et se en l’os a piéces brisies, si l’estent de II pars, se c’est mains ou piet, ou a ta main se c’est uns petis membres, ou a II cordes, ou a une corde et a ta main; et met le membre selonc sa figure natureil, si que quant les parties dou membre brisiet sont desevrees, si ramoinne par toz engiens les additions en lor leus au mues que tu pues, et garde que par ton ovraige ne viegne au malaide lesion ne doulor; et ajoste bien les II chiés des os selonc les millors formes.	And if in the bone there are broken pieces, set them in two parts, whether it is a hand or foot, or by your own hand if it is a small limb, or by two strings, or one string and your own hand; and place the limb according to its natural figure, so that when the parts of the broken member are separated, you must reset all additions within their places at the joints where you can, and see that through your work no injury or pain comes to the patient; and adjust well the two heads of the bones according to the best forms.
Et le sent bien a la main s’il te semble k’il ne soit mie bien: si la dresce bellement, et ne l’estraindre mie trop, ne presser si com font cil qui i font venir par lor ovraige aposteme chaut et contraction au membre, si com nos avons veut maintes fois.	And feel well with your hand if you think it is not quite right: dress it beautifully, and do not hold it too tightly or press it as those who bring on a hot abscess and contraction to the limb through their work do many times.
Et quant li membres est a point, si chastie bien lou malaide qu’il ne lou mueve, ne en veillant ne en dormant, ne en tornant, ne en autre maniere; et warde bien que li membres soit si asseurez qu’il ne sente nule dolor.	And when the limb is at point, chastise well the patient that he does not move it, neither while awake nor asleep, nor in turning, nor any other way; and see to it that the limb be so secured that he feel no pain.
Car quant il sent nulle dolor, si n’est mie a point, et le covient mettre en teil disposition qu’il ne sent nule dolor; et te garde k’il soit mis droitement, que tortuositez n’i veigne quant il iert restorez; et li qualitez dou membre brisiet est selonc ceu que je te dis.	For when he feels no pain, it is not yet at point, and it needs to be put in proper disposition so that he feels no pain; and see to it that it be set straight, lest tortuosities arise when it is restored; and the qualities of the broken limb are according to what I tell you.
Saiches que li membre brisiet sont divers em petitece et en grandor et en forme.	Know that broken limbs are varied in smallness and in largeness and in form.
Car il i a petis membres, si com brais et dois et semblans: si covient envoloupeir drapelz de lin molz et subtilz; et cil qui sont gros, si com cuixe et jambe: si covient envoloupeir d’un liien large et dur, car li larges liiens embraice tout le grant membre, et l’estraint de toutes pars igalment, si qu’il n’i a nule taiche; puis lie entor estoupes legieres, III tours ou IIII selonc lou membre, et estraint ta main un poc a tout le liien, puis vai au desus de la brisure et l’estraint moins, que la brisure puis esloigne un poc la brisure; et mollifie lou liien poc et poc, tant que tu preignes grant partie dou leu sain, puis repren I autre liien, et torne entor derechief sus lou leu brisiet; puis revai a la partie desoz de la brisure, et l’estraint moienement, ne mie trop fort ne trop molement, si com nos avons dit en la premiere lieure desus; puis met entre les liiens estoupes de lin ou drapelz, tant qu’il soit toz igalz, puis lie tout par desus I bendeil, et puis met tes esteles bien faites sus, s’il n’i a aposteme ou enfleure.	For small limbs, such as arms and thighs: it is necessary to wrap them with soft and fine cloths; and those that are large, such as the thigh and leg: they should be wrapped with wide and firm bandages, because broad bandages encompass the entire limb and constrain it evenly, so there is no gap; then tie in light stops three or four times according to the limb, and slightly tighten your hand around the whole bandage, then go above the break and constrain less, so that the break can be moved a little away from the break; and gradually soften the bandage until you perceive a large part of the healthy tissue, then take the other bandage, and wrap again above the broken area; then return to the part below the break, and constrain moderately, neither too tightly nor too loosely, as we have said in the first hour above; then place light stops of linen or cloth, so they are all equal, then tie everything over the main binding, and put your well-made pads on top if there is no abscess or swelling.
Et s’il i a enfleure ou aposteme, si met sus chose apaisant aposteme chaut, et qui oste l’enfleure, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors; puis estrain sus tes esteles, et soient de moitiet d’une large cainne rese saigement, ou de fust dont on fait les clives, ou de rains de palme, et soient selonc ceste figure:	And if there is swelling or an abscess, place something that soothes the abscess and reduces swelling on top, and leave it for several days; then apply hot compresses, which should be half as wide as a thick rope, or from wood used for spindles, or from palm fibers, and be according to this shape:
mais il covient que li estele que om met sus la brisure soit un poc plus grosse et plus large que les autres; et soit ausi longe com il covient au membre de petitece ou de grandor; puis estraint sus les esteles ausi com tu as fait a la premiere lieure, puis lie desus un fil avenanment, si com en la premiere lieure sus la briseure; plus estroit est ensus, adés moins; et covient que li fil soient moien, ne trop gros ne trop menus, et soient de lin mol; car se li fil sont gros, si com j’ai veut des oevres des folz qui font lor lieures des cordes de linement tort, et c’est grant error, car li lieure ne puet estre igal s’il est trop subtilz, et ne covient mie qu’il ait entre chescune estele moins dou doi d’espaice.	But it must be that the compress placed on the fracture is somewhat larger and wider than the others; and should be as long as necessary for the size or length of the limb. Then apply the compresses in the same manner as you did at the first application, then tie a suitable thread above them, just as you tied above the fracture at the first time. The threads are closer together below, thus less so above; and it must be that the thread is medium, neither too thick nor too thin, and made of soft flax. For if the threads are too thick, like those from leaves that make their rounds with twisted linen strings, this is a great error, because the thread cannot be equal if it is too fine, and it does not suit that there be less than two fingers' width between each compress.
Et se li malaides est navrez par les chiés des esteles aprés l’estrignement en leus sains, si met desoz elles estoupes de lin, ou lainne charpie, si qu’il ne se blece.	And if the patient is injured by the heads of arrows after being tied tightly in their sound limbs, place over them linen plugs or bandages of woollen cloth so that they do not swell.
Quant li plaie est avec la briseure, et li keurs est rompus, je en dirai la cure ci aprés.	And when the wound is with the cauterizer, and the bones are broken, I will describe the treatment after this.
Et saiches qu’il ne covient mie estraindre d’esteles toz les membres brisiez le premier jor.	And know that it is not advisable to tie up with arrows all the broken limbs on the first day.
Car quant li membres est grans, se n’i covient mie mettre esteles fuer que aprés V jors ou VII, ou plus selonc ta seurteit d’aposteme chaut sorvenant; et vez ci la maniere des emplaustres anciiens por restorer brisure, dislocation, et torsion: et est que tu pren de la farine que se tient as parois dou molin, et la confis avec abun d’uef, et met ceste confection, ne trop clere ne trop espesse, et en use, et c’est li commune maniere de l’emplaustre restorant la brisure a plusors dispositions, et meismement as femmes et as petis enfans, car il n’est mie ne trop chas ne trop frois.	For when the limbs are large, it is not advisable to tie them up tightly with arrows on the first day; rather, do so after five days or seven, or more according to your discretion based on the heat of the abscess that has come about. And here is the method of ancient plasters for restoring fractures, dislocations, and twists: take flour that clings to the walls of the mill, mix it with abundant egg, and apply this mixture not too thin nor too thick. This is a common method for using restorative plasters to treat fractures in various conditions, especially for women and small children, as it is neither too harsh nor too cold.
Autre maniere d’emplastre restorans la brisure et la dislocation et la torsion: pren З abareis et ladani et enule et asefetide et gomme arabique et mugat, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana V З.; alechil VIIII З.; et en fai poudre, et les melle avec aubun d’uef; se li complexion de l’ome est chaude, si use de cest emplaustre, car il est de bone composition, et restoure les os brisiés hastanment, et vaut a plusors homes.	Another method for a plaster to restore fractures and dislocations and twists: take 3 parts of myrrh and 1 part of ladanum and incense and gum arabic and mugat, mix 7 parts; 4 parts of myrrh and aloes, mix 5 parts; 9 parts of ambergris; grind these into a powder, then melt with the yolk of an egg; if the person's complexion is warm, use this plaster, for it is of good composition and quickly restores broken bones, worth many men.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a torsion: pren mugat et vismalve, ana X З.; mirre et aloes, ana VIIII З.; acaice VI З.; bolic armenic X З., et broie bien, et confit avec aigue ou abun d’uef, et l’aministre.	Another method for a plaster that treats twists: take mugat and vismalve, mix 7 parts; myrrh and aloes, mix 9 parts; acacia, mix 6 parts; armenian balsam, mix 10 parts, and grind well, then prepare with water or the yolk of an egg, and administer.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a jointes et as os desevrez de lor leus, et apaise la dolor sorvenant, et le taille usent de l’os, et la briseure: pren lainne novele, et la moille en aisil et en oile cuit, et met sus lou leu.	Another plaster for joints and the bones out of their sockets, and soothes the pain coming on, and the cutting of the bone, and the breaking: take new wool, and the fat from fleece and cooked oil, and put it on the wound.
Cist emplastres ne restoure mie, mais il est boins por apaisier d’aposteme chaut, et oste proprement les dolors.	This plaster does not heal, but it is good for soothing hot abscesses, and properly removing pains.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre qui restoure les os brisiez: pren foilles de figuier seches, et foilles de pavol terrestre, et broie ensamble, et fai emplaustre.	Another plaster to heal broken bones: take dried fig leaves, and ground ivy leaves, and grind them together, and make a plaster.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre a la restoration de la brisure de l’os et por amenusier lou remenant de l’aposteme.	Another plaster for the healing of bone fractures and to reduce the swelling of abscesses.
Pren racine de vismalve, camomille, flors de violettes, farine de veces, de chescune une partie; et broie, et confis avec vin, et se li membres est eschaufez, se le confis avec aigue de coriandre moiste, ou d’aigue, et en use.	Take root of visvalve, chamomile, flowers of violets, flour of vetches; of each one part; and grind them, and make a paste with wine; and if the limbs are heated, mix the paste with moist coriander water or just water, and use it.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre plus fors que li premier, quant aposteme dur vient a la restauration dou membre.	Another method of plaster more powerful than the first, when an abscess hardens during the restoration of the limb.
Pren racines de vismalve, et semence de lin, balauste, mellilote, et sansuce, et flors de violetes et de camomille, de toutes ana une partie; et broie, et confit avec aigue de salz, ou aigue douce, ou avec vin, selonc la chalor du membre, et son repos.	Take roots of visvalve, and seed of flax, balaster, melilot, and savin, and flowers of violets and chamomile; of each one part; and grind them, and make a paste with salt water, or sweet water, or with wine, according to the heat of the limb and its rest.
Ypocras dist en son livre c’on ne mette sus lou membre brisiet por restorer fuer que cerote fait de cire et d’oile, et nulle autre chose plus, et dist qu’il soit entre dous ne trop molz ne trop durs.	And Hippocrates in his book states that one should not apply anything to a broken limb for restoring strength that is made of wax and oil, and nothing else more, and he says it should be neither too soft nor too hard.
Et il semble galien c’on doit mettre sus lou membre brisiet, por restoreir, choses seches un poc chaudes, si com mirre et aloes et encens et semblans choses, si com nos avons dit.	And Galen seems to say that one should apply to a broken limb things dry and slightly warm, such as myrrh and aloes and incense and similar things, as we have said.
Autre maniere d’emplaustre que vaut a lesion et a dolor: pren mugath et chevolz d’omes decopez, ou pennes d’oiseil, et vismalve, et seil igalment, et les broie, et en fai emplaustre et lou lie.	Another plaster for lesions and pain: take mithridate and horsehair cut into small pieces, or bird feathers, and vinegar, and salt, and grind them all together, and make a plaster from it.
Et puis lou deslie un poc aprés, et pren garde se li malaides ne sent nule dolor, ne ne s’est meus li os de son leu; si ne lou deslie par mains jors Et se dolor vient au leu, ou prurite, sens repos ou enfleure, si te haste, et le deslie, et oste l’emplaustre maintenant; et pren drapeil legier, et esponge de mer moiste, et plonge en aigue, et en leve lou leu, tant que li prurite cesse, et soit apaisie li dolor; puis laisse reposer lou membre une houre, puis met sus lainne seche, moillie en aigue ou en oile roset, et lie sus une nut, tant que tu soies seur d’aposteme chaut; et repose li enflammation dou membre, et soit ostee li dolor, puis rencomence la lieure subtil, et un poc d’emplaustre, et ne l’estraindre mie si fort com devant; et subtilie tant qu’il soit sanez.	And then remove it after some time, and take care that the patient does not feel any pain, nor have the bone moved from its place; if no pain comes, do not remove it by hand. If pain comes to the area, or itching, with discomfort or swelling, hasten, and remove it, and take off the plaster now. Use a light cloth and a moist sea sponge, dip it in water, and wrap the limb until the itching ceases and the pain is relieved; then let the limb rest for an hour, after which put on dry wool soaked in water or rose oil, and bind it with a bandage until you are sure of the warm abscess; and subdue the inflammation of the limb, and remove the pain, then resume the subtle dressing and a little plaster, but do not bind it as tightly as before. Continue this subtlety until it is healed.
Et se tu vois que aposteme chaus et roujor et dolor et enfleure sont jai osteit dou tout, et tu as mestier d’emplaustre et de liien, si le rencomence, si com tu a fait premier igalment.	And if you see that the abscess has become empty and redness and pain and swelling have all been removed, and you need to apply a plaster and bandage, then restart it as you did first equally.
Et s’il ne vient au membre nient de ceu que nos avons dit, si ne le desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou IIII ou V ou VII; et aucune fois le laisse XX jors, selonc ce c’on voit, tant que li briseure s’aert, et aproche li ajostement de la char sus; adonques lou restraint plus que premier, et li engroisse sa viande, si com j’ai dit devant; et se tu vois lou leu sechier plus que mestier n’est, saiches que norrissemens n’i puet venir; arose lou donques d’aigue chaude tede, toutes les fois que tu lou deslies, et ce soit chescun tier jor, et eslaiche un poc la lieure; par cest ovraige donques cort li norrissemens au membre, et esmende hastanment ceu que font li fol mire, que restourent le membre tortement: c’est malvais, et si est ovraiges paourous, et je n’i voi autre chose que dou lassier et de l’ovrer droitement.	And if none of what we have said comes to the member, and it is not dislocated after three days or four or five or seven; at some point leave it twenty days, as one sees, until the fracture dries up, and bring near the adjustment of the flesh; then restrain more than first, and let it grow its flesh, as I said before; and if you see that the place dry out more than is necessary, know that nourishment cannot come; apply hot water cloth each time you dislocate it, and let it rest a bit; by this work thus cut off the nourishment to the member, and mend quickly what the foolish menders do, which leave the member deformed: this is bad, and such are fear-filled works, and I see nothing else but to leave it and work straight.
des diverses manieres de brisure	of various ways of fracture
Maintes manieres de brisures sont, et diverses figures, et les causes sont destintees; car il a brisures que sont faites de percussion d’espee, et li colz oste tout l’os jusc’a syfac qui est desoz l’os, si com fait haiche ou fust; et por ceu est apelee ceste maniere de briseure «haichure».	Many ways of fractures are, and various figures, and the causes are destined; for there are fractures that are made by the percussion of a sword, and the neck cuts all the bone just to the syface which is beneath the bone, as does a hatchet or club; and because of this, this manner of fracture is called "hatchet fracture.
Ou li espee cope l’os par desus sens percier, et est apelee ceste maniere de brisure «absolue»; et est li plaie de ces II brisures grans ou petite.	Or the sword cuts through the bone from above without piercing, and this manner of fracture is called "absolute"; it includes both large or small wounds.
Et s’il i a percussion emboee, ou fendure ou de colz de piere, ou de cheoir sus piere, ou d’autres semblans.	And if there is a compression fracture, or a split, from stones, or falling on stones, or other similar cases.
Et s’il a brisure persant, qui aproiche jusc’a la toile qui est desoz l’os, ou elle est sus l’os, et est ceste plaie ou grans ou petite.	And if there is a fracture perilous, which approaches just to the tissue beneath the bone, or on the bone, and this wound is either large or small.
Et si a plaie qui est reponue en l’os ausi subtil com uns chevous, et est li fendure petite, et por ceu est apelee ceste brisure «capillaire»; et si la plaie qui est faite ou par ferir de piere, ou par cheoir, ou par semblant chose, et fait entrer la piece de l’os aval, et est li leus chevez si com font li chaudelier quant il fierent sus les chaudieres; si entre li piere dedens.	And if there is a wound that is seated in the bone as fine as hairs, and is a small裂伤，因此称为这种骨折为“毛细血管”骨折；而如果伤口是由石头撞击、跌落或类似事物造成的，并使骨片向下进入，使骨头的边缘像铁匠在锅上打击时那样；石块内部会有裂缝。
Et ceu avient plus a sous qui ont ou chief moistes os, si com chief d’enfant; et avient a toutes ces manieres de brisure que pieces menues en sont desevrees si com esteles; et je em parlerai en son leu.	And this happens more to those who have or chief moist bones, such as children's bones; and it happens in all these ways of fracture where small pieces are dislodged like splinters; and I will speak of it in its place.
Et conoissons toutes manieres de briseures par la detraction sus elles, et l’inquisition a tentes, et par la char corrumpue qui est sus.	And let us know all manner of fractures by their symptoms, and by probing, and by the rotten flesh that is upon them.
Li semblance capillaire est conue par ceu que quant on a descovert l’os, et on frote enche sus, si apert li brisure noire.	The appearance of the hair is known by this: when the bone is discovered and rubbed over it, the black fractures become apparent.
En la cure de la brisure, pren garde as accidens dou malaide, et se tu vois nul malvais accident, si com vomissement de cole, et amission d’entendement, et estension, et paumeson, et fievre ague, et les eulz issir fuer et rougir, et autres semblans em plusors dispositions, si ne puet saner sens doute.	In the treatment of the fracture, take care of the patient's condition, and if you see no bad symptoms, such as vomiting of bile, loss of consciousness, swelling, paralysis, feverish chills, and the eyes turning white and red, and other similar things in various dispositions, it cannot heal without doubt.
Et se tu ne vois accident espoantauble, et tu esperes salut, si comence la cure.	And if you do not see any alarming symptoms, and you hope for recovery, then begin the treatment.
Et quant li navrez vient premier a toi, et c’est en yver, si covient oster l’os devant lou quatorzime jor au mues que tu pues.	And when the pain comes first to you, and it is in winter, then you must remove the bone before the fourteenth day after the moon.
Et se c’est en esteit, si te haste d’oster l’os devant lou septime jor, ainsois que li toile desoz l’os soit corrumpue, et vienent li accident que nos avons dit.	And if it is in summer, you must hasten to remove the bone before the seventh day, so that the tissue beneath the bone becomes corrupted, and the accidents as we have said come about.
Et se li brisure de l’os vient jusc’a la toile que cuevre lou cerveil, si covient que tu fendes la partie fendue ensi: et est que tu preignes lou chief dou malaide navreit, et descuevre sus l’os en toutes les manieres que tu pues, et sus la figure de la plaie plus souef que tu pues, et se decorrement de sanc vient au descovrir l’os, ou aposteme chaus, se li aide de ceu qu’il covient, et est que tu emplisses lou leu de drapelz moilliez en oile roset; et fai reposer la plaie tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et soies asseurez de decorrement de sanc; puis comence entor l’os a oster, et c’est fait selonc II manieres d’ovraige: l’une manieres si est que tu copes au taillement estroit devant, et c’est li forme:	And if the fracture of the bone comes just to the tissue that covers the brain, then you must split the fractured part in such a way: and you must take hold of the chief part of the injured bone, and uncover above the bone in all ways that you can, and more especially over the figure of the wound. And if bleeding from the bone occurs upon uncovering the bone, or an abscess forms, then assist with what is needed, and it is that you fill the space under the skin with moistened linen soaked in rose oil; and let the wound rest until the abscesses subside, and you are assured of no further bleeding; then begin beneath the bone to remove it, and this is done according to two methods of work: one method is that you cut precisely at the front, and this is the form:
Et puis i boute I autre taillement plus grant que lou premier.	And then I make another incision larger than the first.
Et li seconde maniere si est que tu aies nombre de taillemens divers, les uns estrois et les autres larges, et soient a pointe, et soient de fer inde; et en oevre legierement, que tu ne bleces le chief.	And the second method is that you have a number of different incisions, some narrow and others wide, and they should be pointed, and made of iron. And work lightly, so as not to burn the head.
Et se li os est fors et durs, si covient que tu lou perces entor, ainsois que tu i aministres taillemens avec tareres, ne mie parfont qu’il ne percent outre l’os dou test, et doit avoir desus la pointe une marge ou I cercle, que ne laisse passer la pointe outre l’os; et t’en covient avoir plusors, si que chescuns viegne en son leu de l’espés de l’os, si que tu aies tareres por toz test; et c’est li forme des III manieres de tareres:	And if the bone is hard and dense, you must pierce it through and through, as when making incisions with trepanning tools, not completely but so that the point does not pass beyond the bone of the skull. It should have a margin or circle above the point, preventing it from passing beyond the bone; and you must have several, so that each comes to its place according to the thickness of the skull, ensuring you have trepanning tools for all skulls. And this is the form of the three kinds of trepanning tools.
Li qualitez por percier entor l’os brisiet est que tu mettes I tarere sus l’os, et torne a tes dois tant que tu saiches que li os est perciez; puis remet lou tarere autre part un poc aprés, et ensi fai tout entor, puis cope as incisoires l’espaice de l’os qui est entre les pertu, et fai ceu plus subtilment que tu pues, et legierement, si com nos avons dit, tant que tu en traies l’os a ta main, ou a aucun des estrumens que tu as si com tenailles, pinceures; et garde que tu ne touchier au cerveil ne au syfac.	The qualities to pierce through the bone break and are that you place the probe on the bone, turn it to your two hands until you know that the bone is pierced; then remove the probe a little bit further in another part, and do this throughout, then scrape with the lancets the space of the bone which is between the perforations, and do this more subtly than you can, and lightly, as we have said, so that you bring the bone to your hand, or to any of the instruments you have such as tongs, forceps; and guard that you do not touch the brain nor the face.
Et quant tu avras l’os perciet, et trait, si couvient que tu reses l’apreteit qui est demoree de l’os a tout I autre estrument semblant a un incisoire, mais il covient qu’il soit plus tenves et plus subtilz que li autre incisoire; et s’il demore rien des petis os, ne nulles escailles, si les oste legierement a I des estrumens; puis cure la plaie de tentes et d’oignemens que nos avons dit.	And when you have pierced and treated the bone, it is necessary that you reset the displacement which has remained from the bone to all other similar instruments, but it must be more tense and more subtle than the other lancets; and if there remains any small bones or no scales, you should remove them gently with the instruments; then cure the wound with dressings and ointments as we have said.
Et li autre maniere d’ovraige si est cil que Galiiens dist, qui est plus saus; et le loa molt fort, et c’est sa parole.	And the other method of work is that which Galien said, which is safer; and it is strong, and it is his word.
Il covient premier que tu descuevres une partie de l’os, lai ou li brisure apert mues, si que quant tu avras descovert celle partie, si metras desoz lou chief de cest incisoire lenticulaire, de coi ci est li forme:	It is necessary first that you uncover a part of the bone, at the spot where the break opens up, so that when you have uncovered that part, you will place under the head of this incisor a lens-shaped piece, as described here.
Et ne trenche mie d’une part, et est li partie ague en II costez, si que li trenchans est devers l’os; puis fier d’un petit maillet sus, si que tu copes legierement l’os tout entor, et te done bien en garde de la toile que est desoz; s’elle est aerse a l’os, si l’oste legierement, car on l’oste bien sens nuisement, et sens paor.	And do not cut from one side, and let the broken part be on two sides, so that the cutting is towards the bone; then strike with a small hammer above, so that you lightly fracture the bone all around, and take care to protect the membrane beneath; if it is close to the bone, gently remove it, for it can be removed too easily and with fear.
Et se li brisure de l’os ne perce jusc’a la toile, et li os est copez tant soulement par desus, et il i a petites pieces, si couvient rere celle asperiteit, et oster les escailles au raseur subtil dont tu dois avoir diverses quantitez, por amenistrer en chescun leu le plus covenauble, selonc l’ovraige et la figure de la brisure.	And if the break in the bone does not pierce as far as the membrane, and the bone is cut only from above, and there are small pieces, then it must be treated after that roughness, and remove the scales with a fine razor of which you should have various quantities, to apply in each place what is most suitable, according to the work and the shape of the break.
Si reis devant de grant raseurs, et aprés de plus subtilz, et ne cesser de ceu faire tant k’il soit bien.	If you use large razors first and then finer ones, and do not stop until it is well done.
En chescune des autres tailleures capillaires et brisure subtil, covient que tu amenistres cause selonc son adrecement; et c’est chose que n’est mie reponue a celui qui a mis son estude en cest art.	In each of the other fine incisions and subtle breaks, you must apply what is most suitable according to its nature; and this is a matter that is not fully covered by one who has devoted his study to this art.
Et se li syfac est descovers, si covient que tu preignes I drapeil de lin, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et le moille en oile roset, et le mete sus la plaie; puis pren I autre drapeil doublé en II ou en III, et le moille en vin et en oile roset, et le met sus le premier drapeil; et fai ceu plus legierement que tu pues, que tu ne grever lou syfac, puis aministre par desus I autre liien, et ne l’estraindre mie fuer que tant k’il teigne la plaie soulement; et le laisse ensi I jor ou II, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, puis le deslie, et i aministre medicines si com racines de lis, et farine de veces, et poudre d’encens, et aristologe, et semblans choses; et de ces choses fai poudre, et met sus la plaie, et i aministre adés medicines mondefians sens mordication; et warde que li plaie soit adés nette, que tu n’i laissier mie l’oignement, ne n’i laissier mie assembler bowe, car quant bowe s’asemble sus la toile dou cerveil, si la corront et porrist, et avient au malaide grans malice; car quant on met sus lou syfac chose mordant, si nercist par desus.	And if the face is uncovered, you must take a linen cloth according to the size of the wound, and in oil from roses, and apply it to the wound. Then take another doubled cloth twice or three times over, with wine and oil from roses, and place it on top of the first cloth. Do this as lightly as possible so that you do not burden the face. Then apply a bandage above the other one without binding it too tightly so as only to touch the wound; leave it like this for a day or two until the abscesses are calmed, then remove it and administer medicines such as lily roots, wheat flour, incense powder, and aromatic herbs, and similar things. Make these into a powder and apply it to the wound, and administer additional non-irritating medicines without causing stinging. And see that the wound remains clean; do not leave the ointment off, nor allow it to gather moisture, for when moisture gathers on the cloth over the brain, it will flow and cause great harm to the patient; for when anything irritating is applied to the face, it does not heal properly from above.
Pren warde donques, se nulz mavais accidens vient au malaide, si com nos avons dit, si est doutable sens doute.	Therefore, take note, if no adverse accident occurs to the patient, as we have said, there is doubt without doubt.
Et se noiror n’i vient fuers que por la medicine c’on a mise sus, que teil vertu ait, si covient que tu preignes une partie de miel, et III parties d’oile roset et en glue I drapel, et lou met sus lou syfac; puis lou cure de manieres de cures qu’il couvient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if night comes and only because of the medicine we have put on, it has such virtue, then you should take a part of honey, three parts of rose oil, and in gum one rag, and apply it to the sore; then treat it as a wound should be treated until it is healed.
Saiches que aucune fois sont brisies les II parties dou neis desus, ou li une par li soulement, car ce sont II os; et cil desoz est cartillaginous, et ne brise mie, si ne fait fuer k’enbower ou tordre, et puis saine.	Know that sometimes the two parts above the neck are broken, or only one of them, for these are two bones; and the one beneath is cartilaginous, and does not break nor cause pain or twist, and then heals.
Et se l’une des II parties est brisie, si covient que tu boutes ton petit doi ou pertus dou neis, et met igal cele brisure dedens a ton doi indice, et au pouchet par defuer, tant que li neis reveigne selonc sa figure natureil; et fai ce legierement, et warde que li malaides ne sente dolor par ton ovraige.	And if one of the two parts is broken, it is necessary that you insert your small finger or thumb from the root, and set the break equal within your index finger, and in the palm by pressing, so that the root regains its natural figure; and do this gently, and ensure that the patient does not feel pain through your work.
Et se li brisure est en la partie desus lou neis, et ne puet venir li dois au leu, si couvient que tu lou mettes igal au chief d’un rait un poc gros.	And if the break is above the nose and your finger cannot reach the place, it is necessary that you set it equal to the base of a thumb slightly larger.
Et se li brisure est de II pars, si refai autretel, et te haste de restorer lou premier jor, se tu pues; se ce non, aprés lou septime ou le disime, quant li apostemes chaus est apaisiez, puis bouthe au chief dou neis tentes de drapelz de lin, se li brisure est en une partie.	And if the break is on both sides, do the same on the other side, and hasten to restore the first day if you can; if not, after the seventh or tenth day, when the abscesses are subsided, then insert tented linen threads into the base of the nose, if the break is in one part.
Ou tu boutes I autre d’autre part, se li brisure i est; et soient les tentes si grosses qu’eles emplissent les pertus dou neis.	Or if you strike the other side, where the injury is; let the swellings be so large that they fill the pores of the birth.
Et dirent aucun restorour c’on doit moillier les tentes em burre, et muer chescun jor.	And any restorer shall moisten the swellings with butter and change each one every day.
Il ne me semble mie que ce soit bien, mais covient qu’elles soient moillies en confection d’aubun d’uef, et de poudre de molin; puis laisse la tente, tant que li os soit fers, et li cartilaiges endurcis.	It does not seem right to me, but the swellings should be moistened with a preparation of egg white and flour of wheat; then leave the swelling until the bones are firm and the cartilage hardened.
Et aucune fois boute on ou neis pennes d’oie en leu de tentes, et si a I souef drapeil entor, et se tient la briseure, et soffle li malaides parmi; or fai lou kel ke tu vues.	And sometimes one uses goose quills in place of swellings, and if there is an opening, cover it with a cloth; and keep the wound clean, and blow on it to dry it out; do as you see fit.
Et se apostemes chaus vient au neis tandis com tu i oevres, si i met cerote ou coton moilliet en oile roset, ou en I poc de dyaquilon.	And if abscesses form on the nose as you work on it, apply a poultice or a moist cloth in rose oil, or with a little diaphoretic.
Et se apostemes chaus n’i vient, si met emplastre par defuer, de farine de sisament, et de poudre d’encens, confites avec aubun d’uef, puis met sus estoupes legieres, et ne liier mie lou neis; et se li brisure dou neis est petite, et il est brisiés em menues pieces, si l’estrai as estrumens covenables a ceu, puis cout la fendure, et la cure de choses enjanrans char, et soudant, si com emplastres et oignemens covenables a ceu; et s’il n’a dedens lou neis nule plaie, si lou cure de tentes, et i met cainnes de plonc, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses do not form on the nose, apply an ointment from above, made of silkworm silk powder and incense powder, cooked with egg yolk. Then place it over light stoppets, and do not tie the nose. And if the break in the nose is small, and it is broken into small pieces, extract it with tools suitable for this, then close the wound and treat matters concerning flesh, sewing, as ointments and applications suitable for this; and if there are no wounds inside the nose, treat with lint, and place cottons until it heals.
de la routure de la mandibule	of the rupture of the jawbone
Quant li mandibule est route desoz, et il n’i a point de plaie defuer, et li brisure est defuer tant soulement, et n’est mie brisiez en dous, fuer que corbelz dedens, si le conoist on legierement.	When the jawbone is ruptured but there is no wound visible, and the fracture is open only, not broken into pieces but rather like corners inside, one can recognize it lightly.
Il covient, se li brisure est en la destre partie, que tu boutes ton doi indice en la bouche dou malaide; et se li brisure est en la mandibule senestre, si boute ton doi indice de la main destre, et boute la brisure dedens legierement, et l’afaite a l’autre main par defuer, et met igal.	It must be, if the fracture is in the right part of the jaw, that you place your index finger in the mouth of the patient; and if the fracture is in the left mandible, you place your right hand's index finger near the fracture gently, and complete it with the other hand through a small opening and keep it even.
Et se li brisure de la mandibule est desevree en II, si covient que tu aministres extension de II pars, tant qu’il soit igalz.	And if the fracture of the jawbone is separated into two parts, it must be that you administer an extension to both parts, making them equal.
Et se commovemens des dens avient, ou routure, si les estrain d’un fil d’or ou d’argent ou de soie, puis met sus la mandibule brisie cerote, et met sus I drapel double; et met sus lou drapel une grant estele bien faite, ou une piece de cuir igal, longe et large selonc la mandibule, et la lie sus au mues que tu pues, et comande a malaide qu’il se repose, et menjuce viandes legieres.	And if movement of the teeth occurs, or rupture, strain them with a thread of gold or silver or silk, then place on the broken jaw a poultice, and place under it a double cloth; and place on this cloth a well-made pad, or a piece of leather equal in size to the jaw, and attach it to the cheek as you can, and instruct the patient to rest, and eat light foods.
Et se tu vois que li figure se chainge, si le deslie au tier jor, et puis remet a point ceu que c’est chaingiet; et met emplaustre sus, de la poudre dou moulin avec abun d’uef ou farine de sisament, aprés ceu que tu as osteit lou cerote; et met sus l’emplaustre lainne legiere, et se li emplaustres s’aert, et li disposition dou malaide ne se chainge, laisse le tant k’il soit sanez; maintes fois est sanez en III semainnes.	And if you see that the figure changes, release it on the third day, and then put back in place what has changed; and apply a poultice with flour from the mill mixed with abundant egg or sinew flour after you have removed the poultice; and place over the poultice a light cloth, and if the poultices dry out and the patient's condition does not change, leave it until he is healed; many times it is healed in three weeks.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si amenistre ceu que nos avons dit maintes fois.	And if abscesses continue to form, administer what we have said many times.
Et s’il i a brisure et plaie ensamble, rewarde se nule piece de l’os en est ostee; si subtilie de l’oster as estrumens covenaubles a ceu.	And if there is a fracture and wound together, note any piece of the bone that has been removed; so subtle to remove with instruments suitable for this.
Et se li plaie est estroite, si l’eslarge a flaime selonc ta necessiteit.	And if the wound is narrow, widen it with flammes according to your necessity.
Et quant tu avras ostees toutes ces pieces, et il n’i demore nule, si cout la plaie, s’ele est large, et met sus I des emplaustres covenaubles a ceu, por enjanrer char, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have removed all these pieces, and there is none remaining, close the wound if it is wide, and apply suitable plasters over it to promote healing until it is healed.
de la forcele	from the strength (or force)
Li forcele brise plusors fois devant, devers l’espaule, et li brisure si est selonc III manieres: ou elle est brisie et desevree en II, et i a pieces, et est li plus legiere a restorer; ou il i a brisure avec plaie.	The shoulder blade breaks multiple times in front, near the shoulder, and the break occurs in three ways: either it is broken and dislocated into two pieces, which is the lighter to reset; or there is a break with a wound.
Et li ovraiges si est quant li brisure est sens plaie, que tu aies II ministres, si que li uns teigne l’ajutoire que sent la forcele brisie; et li autres estende lou col vers la partie; puis met igal la brisure a tes dois, si que li forme soit si com il covient, et n’i ait ne apparance ne chevement.	And the procedure is as follows when the break has no wound: you should have two assistants, one holding the shoulder blade that feels the broken bone; and the other extending the neck toward the affected area. Then align the break with your hands so that the shape is as it should be, and there should be neither appearance nor movement.
Et se tu a mestier de plus estendre, si met desoz l’espaule au malaide une spere reonde de drap, ou de lainne, et soit grosse selonc ta necessiteit; et estent et lieve la forcele, et estraint le spere a ta main, si que tu mettes igal la brisure, si com il covient.	And if you need to extend further, place a round pad of cloth or wool over the shoulder on the patient, making it as large as necessary; then stretch and lift the broken bone, and hold the pad with your hand, so that you can align the break properly.
Et se tu ne pues traire le chief de la forcele au defuer, por ceu qu’elle vient em parfont, si covient que li malaides gise sovin sus son hatereil, et met desoz l’espaule I oreillier moien, et boute li ministres l’espaule aval, tant que li os de la forcele soit levez.	And if you cannot draw the head of the shoulder outwards, because it comes perfectly, then it is necessary that the patient lie often on his back, and place a medium pillow under the shoulder, and direct the attendants to support the shoulder downwards until the bone of the shoulder is lifted.
Et puis adrece la brisure a tes dois, et se tu lou trueves debrisiet, si covient que tu fendes sus; et trai fuer les pieces legierement, et se li os ne puet joindre por aucun sormontement, si le cope a l’un des incisoires que tu as; mais que tu mettes desoz la forcele cest estrument, por warder lou syfac:	And then treat the fracture with your hands, and if you find any fragments, you must split them; and draw the pieces gently, and if the bone cannot join for any prominence, use one of your incisors; but place this instrument over the shoulder to prevent swelling.
et semble une cuiller, et n’est mie chevez, et soit ausi large com il lou covient, selonc la grandor de l’os et la possance de l’uevre; et ait II chiés, si com tu vois, et soit li uns larges, et li autres estrois, si com est li routure de la plaie que tu as fait quant tu as trait les os; et quant tu es asseurez d’aposteme chaut, si cout la plaie, et se li routure est petite, ou tu doutes aposteme chaut, si emple la plaie de drapelz et de tentes, selonc sa quantiteit.	And it seems like a spoon, and is not in place, and should be as wide as it suits, according to the size of the bone and the strength of the work; and has two heads, as you see, and one should be broad, and the other narrow, as is the tear of the wound that you made when you drew the bones; and when you are assured of a hot abscess, close the wound, and if the tear is small, or you doubt a hot abscess, fill the wound with cloths and tents, according to its quantity.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si moille I drapel en oile roset et en aisil et en vin, et met sus.	And if an abscess is fully formed, I wrap it in rose oil and honey and apply it.
Li estrignement de l’os, quant il est sens plaies et sens tailleure, est que tu mettes sus l’os l’enplaustre de la poudre dou molin et d’aubun d’uef, et met estoupes legieres sus, et met une spere desoz l’assele, se tu en as mestier; puis pren une tres grant bende d’une palme de large, puis met I drapeil double sus estoupes, et l’emplaustre; puis pren une estele subtil de III dois de large et de lonc, et l’envoloupe entor celui bendeil, si que li chief dou bendeil soient pendant; et met l’estele sus la briseure, et torne le bendeil sus lou col, et desoz l’asselle sainne, et desoz l’asselle malaide; et la ramoinne de chescune partie, et quant tu vois ke li lieure tient la briseure avenanment, et tu vois clerement que li estele ne se muet desus l’os brisiet, si le rewarde chescun jor, et quant li liiens eslaiche, si lou restraint; et fai gesir lou malaide sus son dos, et li met quant il dort I petit orillier desoz l’assele, por lever l’ajutoire en haut; si aligera li brisure de la forcele par l’aligement de l’espaule, ou tu li lie lou bras au col, et ne lou desliier se malvais accidens n’i vient, jusc’a XX jors; puis rencomence l’emplaustre, se tu vois qu’il en ait mestier, et l’estraint et le laisse ensi, tant qu’il soit restorez; et elle est restoree au plus en XXVIII jors, et en moins a aucuns homes.	The setting of the bone, when it is sensed by wounds and cuts, is that you place on the bone a plaster of flour powder and egg yolk, and cover with light stoppers, and put a sphere underneath the stopper if needed; then take a very large bandage one palm wide, place the folded cloth over the stoppers and the plaster; next, take a thin stick three fingers wide and long, wrap it around the bandage, so that the ends of the bandage hang down; place the stick on the fracture, turn the bandage around the neck, under the stopper, and above the injured part; tighten each part, and when you see that the ligatures hold the fracture properly, and clearly see that the stick does not move over the broken bone, then dress it daily, and when the skin loosens, release the restraint; make the patient lie on their back, and place a small pillow under the stopper to raise the shoulder; this will alleviate the force of the fracture by supporting the shoulder, or tie the arm around the neck, and do not untie it unless bad accidents occur, up to twenty days; then reapply the plaster if needed, and keep it tight until it is restored; it is usually restored within twenty-eight days, but in some cases, it may take less time.
de la brisure de l’espaule	of the breaking of the shoulder
Poc avient que li espaule brise ou large leu ne em mileu, et ne lou seit on fuers que par lou touchement; si l’apareille selonc la figure de la brisure, et la ramoinne selonc sa forme natureil, en toutes les manieres que tu pues; puis met sor le leu poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, et estoupes legieres, et met sus I drapeil double; puis met sus une estele large et subtil, un poc plus large de l’espaule, et se desoz l’estele est chevemens en aucun leu de l’espaule, si emple celle cheveure d’estoupes de lin, si que li estele siece igalment; et puis l’estraint a tout une grant bende fermement, si que li estele ne se mueve de son leu, et regarde le liien chescun jor; et toutes les fois k’il amolist, si l’estraint, et met igal l’estele s’elle est fuer de son leu, et gise li malaides sus son costeit; et li espaule est restouree en XX jors ou en xxv, Et quant cist nombres est acomplis, si le deslie, et soies seur, car ce n’est mie os qui se mette fuer legierement.	When the shoulder is broken or cracked and not entirely shattered, and one cannot tell from the touch; adjust the joint according to the shape of the break, and reset it in its natural form in all ways possible; then apply a powder made with flour and egg, wrap lightly, and place over a double cloth; next, put on a broad, thin strip slightly wider than the shoulder, ensuring no movement in any part of the shoulder. If necessary, secure this strip with linen stoppers so it sets evenly; then tightly bandage around the entire area to keep the strip from moving, checking the stitches each day; whenever it swells, re-bandage and adjust the strip if it is out of place, and let the patient rest on their side; the shoulder will be healed in about 20 or 25 days. When these numbers are completed, release the bindings, for it is not bone that sets quickly.
Et se une piece de l’os tent avant, et point desoz lou keur, si fent sus, et l’oste, et fai ceu que nos avons dit en la brisure de la forcele d’apaisier aposteme chaut.	And if a piece of bone tends forward and points out from the heart, make an incision, remove the bone, and do what we have said in the breaking of the forcele to cool an abscess.
de la brisure dou pis	of the breaking of the foot
Li peis est aucune fois brisiez em mileu, mais ce avient poc; mais il brise sovent au defuer.	The foot is often broken in the middle, but this happens rarely; it breaks frequently at the ankle.
Et quant il est brisiez emmi, si decline au desoz, et sent li malaides grant dolor, et faute d’alainne, et toust, et par aventure vomist sanc, et apert li chevemens en l’os brisiés, et lou sent om bien.	And when it is broken in the middle, it bends outward, and the patient feels great pain, as well as loss of consciousness. Immediately, and by chance, they may vomit blood, and the movement in the broken bones becomes apparent, and everyone can see this well.
Et li restoracion si est que li malaides gise sovin sus son dos, et li met I cussin entre les espaules, puis presse les espaules, et li assemble les costes des II costelz a tes mains, et subtilie dou mettre igal a toutes les manieres que tu pues, tant que li figure de l’os soit si com il covient; puis met sus emplaustres et estoupes desus l’estele subtil de salz, ou d’autre fust legier, et l’envoloupe en I drapeil, et la lie sus l’os brisiet, si qu’elle ne se mueve; et torne le liien reondement au dos, et l’estraint avenanment, et rewarde chescune houre la liure, et s’elle ramolist, si l’estraint; et s’il lou covient desliier, por corrosion ou por prurite que vient au leu, ou dolor ou aposteme, si te haste, et lou deslie, et raie l’emplaustre, et adresce ceu qui i est venus de manieres de cures; puis ramoinne l’emplaustre, et l’estraint tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is that the patient lies often on their back, and they place a cushion between the shoulders, then press the shoulders, and align the ribs of the two sides with your hands, subtly adjusting them in all possible ways until the shape of the bone is as it should be; then apply plasters and ointments over the fine salt substrate or another light material, wrap them in a cloth, and tie them securely to the broken bone so they do not move; turn the bandage round the back, adjust it appropriately, and rewrap the ligature every hour, tightening if it loosens; and if it needs to be untied for corrosion or itching at the site, or pain or abscess, you should hurry and untie it, remove the plaster, and treat what has appeared as in wound care; then rewedge the plaster and secure it until healed.
de la brisure des costes	of the breaking of the ribs
Saiches que li briseure des costes ne vient fuer que en leus gros aprés le dos, et au chief dedens, et ne ploient fuer que por ceu qu’eles sont glairouses; et le sent om bien a l’inquisition as dois.	The breaking of the ribs comes from force only behind the shoulders and at the upper part within, and they do not bend from force because they are lubricated; and one feels this well during examination through the sides.
Et li restoremens si est que tu met igal la brisure, si com il covient.	The restoration is that you set the break equally, as it should be.
Et puis met l’emplaustre, et l’estraint d’une estele, se tu en as mestier.	And then apply the plaster, and bind it with a bandage if you need to.
Et se li brisure des costes est declinans au dedens, si sent li malaides tres grant dolor, et pointure, ausi com de pleuresin, car li os point la toile; et alaine a poinnes, et toust et vomist grant planteit de sanc, et c’est de grief santeit, et li ancien i ont mis grant engien.	And if the break of the ribs is leaning inward, the patient feels intense pain and puncture-like discomfort, similar to weeping, because the bone pierces the membrane; they wrinkle their face, and immediately vomit large amounts of blood, which is a serious health issue. The elderly have used great skill in treating this.
Et si a de ces qui dient qu’il le covient aministrer viandes qui enflent le ventre, por bouter la briseure au defuer.	And if some say that it is fitting to give foods that swell the belly to administer, to put off the ache.
Nos ne faisons mie ceu, que apostemes chaulz n’i viegne, s’il n’i est venus.	We do not make those that abscesses form if they have not come.
Et s’il i est venus, si le saine.	And if they have come, let them heal.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on met ventouses sor le leu, por sucier forment, et c’est semblant a raison; toutevoie, doutance i a que li ventouse n’atraie les superfluitez au leu por la disposition de foiblece.	And if any of you put cups on the shoulder to draw fluid, it seems reasonable; however, there is doubt that the cups will attract the superfluities to the shoulder due to the disposition of weakness.
Et dirent aucun d’ous c’on doit covrir le leu de lainne moillie en oile chaut, et met on tentes entre les costes por metre igal la lieure entor, puis soit curez de la cure de pleurisin, de viande et de medicine.	And if any of you say that we should cover the shoulder with wetted wool in hot oil, and put tents between the ribs to make the treatment uniform, then it should be treated with the pleurisy cure, meat, and medicine.
Et se li malaides sent grant dolor qu’il ne puet soffrir par l’os qui point la toile, et doutance est au malaide, si covient fendre sus lou leu de la coste brisie, et covient mettre desoz I estrument por warder lou syfac; et adonques doit on trenchier l’os, et traire legierement, et puis coudre les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, et le curez d’emplaustres, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the patient feels great pain he cannot endure through the bone where the vein is ruptured, and there is doubt for the patient, it is necessary to incise above the rib of the broken rib, and it is necessary to place something beneath the instrument to protect the lung; then one must cut the bone, and extract lightly, and then suture the two edges of the wound if it is large, and treat with plasters until he is healed.
Et se apostemes chaus vient, si met sus drapelz moilliez en oile roset, et met sus lou leu; et cure tandis le leu de ceu qu’il covient a aposteme, et soit gisans sovins sus lou costeit ou il doit, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses continue, place wet cloths in rose oil and apply them to the rib. Cure by treating the rib as needed for the abscess, and keep lying on the side where it should be, until he is healed.
de la brisure dou col	from the break of the neck
Aucune fois vient briseure as os dou col, et poc avient k’il ploie; et ausi a l’espinee dou dos.	Sometimes there is a break in the bones of the neck, and rarely does it bend; and also in the spine of the back.
Et quant ce avient a aucun, et tu vues savoir s’il sera sanez ou non, si pren warde se tu vois ses mains mollifiies et enflees et mortes, et ne les puet movoir ne estendre, et quant tu les poins d’une aguille, si ne lou sent.	And when this happens to someone, and you want to know if they will be cured or not, look to see if their hands are softened, swollen, and dead, and they cannot move or extend them. And when you prick them with a needle, they do not feel it.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz em plusors dispositions, et s’il les muet et sent bien quant on les estraint et point, saiches que li jointure de l’os est sauve, et que li malaides iert curez, s’on i met cure.	Know that it is fatal in many instances, and if they can move and feel well when you hold and prick them, know that the joints of the bone are saved, and that the patient will recover if proper treatment is applied.
Et se semblans chose vient a l’espinee dou dos, et tu vues savoir s’il iert sanez ou non, si pren warde se li piez sont amollis, et se li accident i sont qui sont em mains, et sus lou dos saut ventositeit et egestion sens volonteit; et quant on l’a sovineit sus son ventre, si saut egestion sens volonteit.	And if similar things come to the spine of the back, and you want to know if they will be cured or not, look to see if the patches are softened, and if the accidents are those in the hands, and on the back with windiness and involuntary evacuation; and when it is sovined over their belly, there is involuntary evacuation.
Et quant il est sovinez sus son dos et il vuet asseller, si ne puet.	And when it is inflamed on its back and he wishes to apply a salve, he cannot.
Saiches qu’il est mortelz: si ne laboreir mie en sa cure.	It is mortal: he should not work at all in its treatment.
Et se cist accident ne li vienent, si est li chose plus legiere.	And if this accident does not happen to him, it is a much lighter matter.
Et li cure si est que tu rewardes s’il i a aposteme chaut, si met sus l’espinee oile roset ou oile de moieuf d’uef, tant qu’il soit apaisiez; puis met sus un des emplaustres confortans et sechans, et le lie d’un liien, et comande au malaide a reposer; et ne dorme mie sus celle partie ou il sent la dolor, tant k’il soit sanez.	And the treatment is that you apply it if there is a hot abscess, placing an olive oil or egg yolk oil on it until it subsides. Then place one of the comforting and drying plasters over it, and bind it with a bandage. Instruct the patient to rest; he should not sleep in that part where he feels the pain until he is healed.
Et se aucuns os se dessevre, si covient coper sus lou keur; et oste l’os, puis assemble les II levres de la plaie, s’elle est grans, a une costure, puis le cure d’oignement enjanrant char, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se li chiés de l’os est brisiez, ki est apelez li «chiés de la kowe», se i boute ton pouchet de ta main senestre, et le met igal a l’autre main a ton pooir, puis met l’emplaustre et l’estele sus, se tu en a mestier; puis l’estraint, et s’il i a os desevreit, si fent sus, et l’oste, et cure la plaie tant qu’elle soit sanee.	And if any bone splits open, it is necessary to cover over the heart; remove the bone, then join the two edges of the wound, if large, with a stitch, and treat with ointment promoting flesh growth until healed; and if the head of the bone is broken, which is called the "head of the cow," you should hold your left hand's pouch and place it equally in your right hand at your power, then apply the plaster and bandage over it if needed; then bind it, and if there is a split bone, make an incision, remove it, and treat the wound until healed.
de la brisure de l’os de la hainche	of the breaking of the bone of the hip
Poc avient que li os de la hainche soit brisiez, et s’il avient, si n’avient fuer c’un poc d’amenuisement au chief; et fent dou lonc, et decline au pardedens, et vient au malaide dolor au leu, et pointure, et enfle ceu que brise.	Often, the bone of the hip is broken, and if it happens, there will be only slight swelling at the head; make a long incision, and angle downwards to the front teeth, and bring about pain, point tenderness, and swelling where it breaks.
Et li restoration si est que tu estendes ta main sus, tant que tu soies sus la briseure; et saiches quelz est li brisure et li figure de li; et se li brisure est au chief soulement, si met igal cele brisure, tant qu’ele soit a figure natureil.	And the restoration is that you extend your hand above, as long as you are over the burner; and know which are the breaks and their figures; and if the break is only in the head, you set it evenly so that it is in natural figure.
Et se li brisure est dou lonc, ou elle decline au dedens, si fai gesir le malaide sus son ventre, tant que li restauration de cele brisure te soit aparillie.	And if the break is long, or it declines inward, you make the patient lie on his stomach so that the restoration of that break may be aligned.
Et quant tu l’avras mise igal, si met sus l’emplaustre, puis met sus une estele de fust ou de keur, et estraint la briseure, si qu’ele ne se mueve; et emple le leu desoz les costes, tant que li lieure soit igalz.	And when you have set it even, apply a plaster, then place a stick or a cork on top, and bind the burner so that it does not move. And fill the space under the ribs, making the binding even.
Et comande au malaide k’il dorme sus son costeit sain, ou sus son dos.	And instruct the patient to sleep on their sound side, or on their back.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si n’i tochier, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez, et met sus ceu que nos avons devant dit; et puis revien a la restauration, et l’estraint si com il covient, s’il n’i a nul mavais accident; et c’est li maniere.	And if abscesses form and come up, do not touch them until the abscesses are pacified, and apply what we have said before; then return to the restoration, and hold them as is fitting, if there is no bad accident; and this is the manner.
de la brisure de l’ajutoire	of the breaking of the shoulder
Li adjutoires est ceu qui est entre lou coute et lou chief de l’espaule, et s’il est brisiez, si le doit on restorer selonc l’une des II manieres: dont l’une est que tu pren I fust plain de moiene groissor, selonc ceste forme:	The adjutoires are those between the scapula and the head of the shoulder. If they are broken, you must restore them according to one of the two methods: one method is that you take a stick filled with moistened grain, according to this form:
Et lie as II chiés II liens, et les pent en haut, et siece li malaide sus I siege; puis li giete som bras brisiet sus le fust, tant qu’il viegne a l’aissele, et ait em mi une corbeure de fust, puis pent sus aucune pesant chose ou li ministres l’estende aval; puis mette li mires la briseure igal a ses mains ensamble, tant que li briseure retorne si com il covient.	And tie the two heads of the ligaments, and press them upwards, and place the patient's broken arm on the stick until it reaches the armpit, with a notch in the stick. Then place some heavy thing or have the attendants extend it downwards; then place the broken part level with the patient's hands together, so that the broken part returns as it should.
Et li autre maniere si est que on sovine le malaide sus son hatereil, et li lie la main a son col, puis comande a II ministres que li uns teigne ceu qui est sus la briseure a ses mains, et li autres teigne desoz a tout I liien, et estende chescuns a sa partie.	And the other way is that one soothes the patient on his haterel, and ties his hand to his neck, then commands two ministers that one pricks him above at his hands, and the other pricks underneath at both wrists, extending each to their part.
Et se tu vues que li estraction soit plus fors, si estraint I liien desoz la briseure, et sus la briseure, et estende chescuns des ministres a sa part.	And if you see that the extraction is stronger, hold the wrist both below and above the pricker, and extend each of the ministers to their part.
Et se li briseure est prochiene au chief de l’espaule, si covient que tu mettes I liien moien desoz l’assele, et I autre vers lou coute, desoz la briseure; et ausi se li briseure est devers lou coute, si i covient mettre I liien legierement, sens labor, tant que li briseure soit igalz sus lou leu, et sus lou coute; puis met igal la brisure, si com il covient, et l’estraint, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the pricker is near the head of the shoulder, you should place the wrist in the middle below the axilla, and the other towards the side, below the pricker; and similarly, if the pricker is towards the side, you should place the wrist lightly, without labor, so that the pricker is level both above the joint and above the side; then place the incision as it should be, and hold it steady, unless abscesses come.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si ne l’estraindre mie jusc’a VII jors, et met sus lainne moillie en aisil et en oile roset, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez; puis l’estraint, et li maniere de l’estraindre si est que tu mettes l’emplaustre sus la briseure, puis assemble le bras sus l’ajutoire, et met ta main sus l’espaule ou sus lou sein; et met le drapeil, et estraint sus l’ajutoire, et sus lou bras, si que li bras soit en leu d’esteles, s’aucune chose ne le te deffent, ou se li os n’est muez.	And if abscesses have formed, do not extract them until the seventh day, and place on a wetted cloth in oil of roses, until the abscesses are pacified; then extract them, and the manner of extracting them is that you apply the plaster to the wound, then assemble the arm over the assistant, and place your hand on the shoulder or on the breast; and put the bandage, and bind over the assistant, and over the arm, so that the arm be in a level position, unless something prevents it, or if the bone is displaced.
Et se tu doutes que li os ne se mueve, si use d’esteles, et met sus la brisure une estele plus large et plus fort des autres, et ait entre chescune estele I doi d’espaice, et soit chescune estele si grans qu’elle passe la briseure III dois de chescune part; puis estrain sus les esteles, ensi com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre sus la briseure, plus fort et moins en aloignant.	And if you doubt that the bone is displaced, use a splint, and place over the wound a splint wider and stronger than the others, with two fingers' breadth between each splint, and let each splint be so large that it passes the wound three fingers' breadth on each side; then bind over the splints as I said at the beginning of this chapter on the wound, more tightly but not by drawing away.
Et se tu vois l’assise des esteles, et l’estrignement, si com nos avons dit, en l’oure que tu restoures le membre brisiet, et tu doutes l’aposteme chaut, si le laisse a liier jusc’a septime jor, si com nos avons dit; puis regarde chescuns III jors lou lien, que prurite ne enfleure n’i viegne au leu, ou li norrissemens ne puist venir au membre por ceu k’il est trop estrois.	And if you see the seat of the stars, and the constriction, as we have said, in the hour that you restore the broken limb, and you doubt the hot abscess, let it remain bound for seven days, as we have said; then look each three days at the wound, to see if itching or swelling arises at the site, or if the growths cannot come to the limb because it is too narrow.
Si l’adrece, si com nos avons dit.	If the treatment, as we have said.
Et se nulz telz accidens n’i vient, si ne lou desliier fuer que aprés III jors ou plus, et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ait ses mains sus son stomac; et met desoz l’ajutoire I cussin plain de laine igalment, et regarde chescune houre dou jor ou de la nut, que li figure dou membre brisiet ne se mueve, ou ne soit amollis li liiens; si l’adrece par la vertu de medicine, et li done la viande que nos avons devant mis, en teil maniere que li viande soit au premier subtilz; et quant il comance a reprendre, si soit grosse.	And if no such accidents occur, and the dislocation does not happen after three days or more, and let the patient sleep on his back, and place his hands on his stomach; and put underneath the shoulder a cushion full of evenly cut wool, and observe each hour of the day or night that the figure of the broken limb does not move, or that the ligaments do not become soft; if the treatment proceeds by the virtue of medicine, and let him have the meat as we have placed before, in such a manner that the meat be at the first subtle stage; and when it begins to take hold, let it be generous.
Et est costume que li ajutoire et li jambe doient estre repris en XL jors dou tout; et adonques lou doit on desliier et aministrer bain et medicines d’oignemens por le leu adrecier.	And it is custom that the shoulder and the leg should be taken back in forty days from all; then one must release them and administer baths and ointment medications to correct the resetting.
Et se li estricture est laide et emboee, si demore a desliier L jors ou II mois.	And if the contraction is ugly and constricted, it must remain to be released for one or two months.
de la brisure du bras	of the fracture of the arm
Li bras est compos de II os, qui sont apelez li dui «foscile», de coi li uns est petis, et est cil qui enseut le pouchet; et li autres est grans, et est cil qui est desoz, devers lou petit doi; par aventure brise li grans foscile soulement, ou li petis, et par aventure andui ensamble.	The arm is composed of two bones, which are called the "fascicle" bones; one is small and follows the pocket, and the other is large and is below, opposite the small finger; by chance, only the large fascicle bone may be broken, or the small one, and by chance both together.
Quant li petis fosciles est brisiez, li restaurations est legiere, et li sanations; et quant li grans est brisiez, si est li sanation male, et plus griés que quant il sont brisiez andui ensamble.	When the small bones are broken, the restoration is light, and the healing; and when the large ones are broken, the healing is poor, and more grievous than when they are broken all together.
Se c’est li petis foscile qui est brisiez soulement, si le covient poc estendre legierement, et mettre igal.	If it is the small bones that are broken only, then it should be extended lightly, and placed evenly.
Et se c’est li grans foscile, si le covient estraindre plus fort; et l’estende sus I cussin, et teigne le pouchet de la main plus haut des autres, et li petis dois plus bas des autres dois, et soit li malaides croisiez sus lui meisme, et I cussin devant lui plus haut, que li malaides ne soffre nule labor; puis estende li ministres som bras a la partie desoz a sa main, ou a I liien, et uns autres ministres a I autre au desus.	And if it is the large bones, they should be held more firmly; and extend them on the cushion, and lift the pocket of the hand higher than the others, and the small bones lower than the others. Let the patient cross their limbs over themselves, with the cushion in front higher than the patient so that the patient does not suffer any labor; then extend the attendants' arms below their hands, or at the elbow, and another attendant above at the other side.
Et puis le mette li mires igal, selonc sa millor forme.	And then set the bones equal, according to their best form.
Et se en la brisure a pieces, si met chescune en son leu, et s’il en i a nule desevree ke poigne lou keur, et tu ne la pues restorer en son leu, si fent sus et l’oste, si com nos avons dit devant.	And if in the fracture it is broken into pieces, set each piece in its place, and if there is any that cannot be grasped by the hand, and you cannot restore it to its place, then cut open and remove it, as we have said before.
Et se avec la briseure a plaie, je en ai parleit au chapistre singuler; si pren la cure.	And if with the bone saw, I have spoken of it in the singular chapter; then proceed with the treatment.
Et se en l’encomencement dou restorement sorvient apostemes chaus, si glue I drapeil de cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire blainche, que ne soit mie ne trop durs ne trop molz; et lie I drapeil par sus subtilment, tant que li apostemes chaus soit apaisiez.	And if during the beginning of the restoration abscesses appear, apply a dressing made of rose oil and white wax, that is neither too hard nor too soft; and tie the dressing tightly enough so that the abscesses are pacified.
Et puis oste lou cerote, et i met l’emplaustre de la poudre dou molin avec abun d’uef, pues met les esteles, et soit li estele de la briseure adés plus fors, et un poc plus large que les autres; et saiches que il doit avoir VI esteles ou bras em plusors dispositions: soit que li briseure soit en l’un des os, soit en II; et estraint plus sus la briseure que autre part, et toz jors moins en aloignant, si com j’ai dit au comencement dou chapistre; et soient li drapelz que sont sus la briseure molz et moistes, et ne soient mie dur ne aspres; et soit li filz, dont il est estrains, de lin, ne trop gros ne trop menus, si com nos avons dit.	And then remove the plaster, and put the ointment of the powder from the mill with abundant egg, pour in the cloths, let one of the cloths of the burner be stronger, and a bit wider than the others; and know that it must have six cloths or arms in several positions: whether the burner is in one of the bones, or two; and restrain more above the burner than elsewhere, and all day less by extending, as I said at the beginning of this chapter; and let those on top of the burner be soft and moist, and not hard nor rough; and let the thread from which it is drawn be of linen, neither too thick nor too thin, as we have said.
Et rewarde lou membre et lou liien aprés aucuns jors.	And reward the limb and the joint after several days.
Et se aucuns mavais accidens vient au membre, si com prurite ki vient au membre, si covient que tu aroses lou membre d’aigue chaude, tant que cil prurites soit apaisiez; et laisse le membre ne mie estroit reposer.	And if any bad accident comes to the limb, as itching that comes to the limb, it is necessary that you moisten the limb with hot water until those itchings are soothed; and let the limb rest not too tightly.
Et puis rencomence l’estrignement, et se li liiens est amolis et li os desevrez, et semblant chose, si l’adresce.	And then reapply the binding, and if the ligaments are softened and the bones displaced, and something seems wrong, set them right.
Et se pren warde se li norrissemens ne puet venir au membre, por ceu qu’il est trop estrois, si covient que tu l’amollisses I poc, et laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant que li norrissemens i corre, et puis l’estraint.	And if one watches that the swelling does not come to the limb, because it is too tight, it is necessary that you soften it a little, and let it so for some days, until the swelling goes down, and then bind it.
Et se nules de ces choses que nos avons dit ne vient au malaide, si ne lou desliier jusc’a XX jors.	And if none of the things we have said come to the patient, do not unbind it for up to 20 days.
ou enqui entor, puis li pent les mains a son col, et soit ses cols igalz, et se warde de movement et de degitement, et dorme sus son dos; et saiches que ceste briseure est restoree en XXX jors ou en XXXV, et par aventure en XX jors, selonc les compositions et les complexions des vertus.	or between the neckbones, then turn his hands to his neck, and let his neck be even, and beware of movement and displacement, and sleep on his back; and know that this fracture is restored in XXX days or in XXXV, and by chance in XX days, according to the compositions and complexions of the virtues.
de la brisure de la main	of the fracture of the hand
Saiches que au dos de la main et as nous des dois avient poc de briseures, et n’i vient mais que ploieure maintes fois.	Know that in the back of the hand and at the knuckles, fractures occur rarely, and there often comes much pain.
Et quant li plante de la main est brisie ou ploie, si covient que li malaides siece croisiet, et siet droitement devant lui igalement; puis met sa main sus la toie estendue, et estende li ministres les os brisiez, et les mete igalz li mires, tant qu’il soient bien joint; et met l’emplastre et les estoupes, se apostemes n’i vient, puis i met une estele selonc la quantiteit dou leu; et soit envoloupee en I drapeil de lin.	And when the sole of the hand is fractured or bent, the patient should place his foot with the sole straight in front of him even; then put his hand on the extended surface, and extend the broken bones, placing them evenly so they are well aligned; apply the plaster and stopes if no abscesses come, then place a bandage according to the size of the area; let it be wrapped in one linen cloth.
Et se li briseure est au pardedens entor lou ventre de la plante, si fai une spere de drapelz, et comande au malaide qu’il l’estrigne a sa plante brisie; et puis l’estrain d’un lonc drapeil, et soit li estele de keur souef ausi grans com li plante de la main, et l’estraint, si com il covient.	And if the fracture is in the heel between the sole and the shin, make a sphere of bandages, and instruct the patient to bind it to his broken heel; then bind with a long strip of cloth, and let the padding be of cork about as large as the palm of the hand, and bind as appropriate.
Et se li brisure est au defuer, si covient que tu mettes une estele sus, et une autre desoz en la plante, si que li mains soit overte et droite, puis le lie tot entor la main, et estanche lou liien entre les dois.	And if the fracture is in the foot, it is necessary to place a pad above and one below on the sole, so that the hand remains open and straight, then bind tightly around the hand, and secure the bandage between the two.
Et se li briseure vient a aucun des nous des dois, se c’est li pouchés, si le met igal, si com il covient; et l’estraint avec la plante, et se tu vues si met une estele droite petite por lever la briseure, et ne se mueve; et se li brisure est as autres dois, si com en l’indice ou l’un des autres, si le met igal, et lou lie avec lou doi sain qui est aprés; ou tu les lie toz en I tenant, que mues vaut, ou tu met sus une estele, si com ou pouchet; et pren warde en la restauration et en la disposition d’aposteme chaut, et secor ceu qui i vient, si com j’ai dit.	And if the fracture comes to any of our fingers, if they are broken, set them equal, as is appropriate; and bind with the palm, and if you see, place a small straight pad to lift the fracture, and it does not move; and if the fracture is on the other fingers, such as in the index or one of the others, set them equal, and bind with the healthy finger that follows; or you can bind all together, keeping them still, or you place a pad above, like a pouch; and take care in the restoration and arrangement of warm abscesses, and aid those who come, as I have said.
de la cuixe brisie	of the broken thigh
Li os de la cuixe est maintes fois brisiez, et bien le voit on quant elle torne devant et derrier; et li restauration si est c’on lie I liien desus la briseure, et I autre desoz.	The bone of the thigh is often broken, and one can see this when it twists frontward and backward; and the restoration is to tie one ligament above the break and another below.
Et li malaides gise sus sa faice, puis estende chescuns ministres son lien a sa part igalment; et c’est quant li brisure est emmi l’os.	And the patient lies on their side, then each minister extends their ligament to their part equally; and this is when the break is placed in the bone.
Et se li brisure est prochiene a la racine de la cuixe, si soit li uns des liiens devers lou poignil, et li autres liiens desoz la briseure.	And if the break is near the root of the thigh, then place one ligament on the side of the knife, and the other ligament below the break.
Et ausi s’elle est prochiene au genoil, et adonques soit li liens delez lou genoil, et soit li extension aval; puis mette li mires l’os igal a ses II mains, tant qu’il soit selonc sa figure natureil, et puis met l’emplaustre, et lou lie, se apostemes chaz n’i vient.	And if it is near the knee, then place the ligaments below the knee, and the extension downward; then set the bone equal with both hands, so that it is according to its natural figure, and then apply the plaster and the ligament, unless an abscess forms.
Et s’il i a aposteme chaut, si le laisse apaisier puis revien a ton ovraige et a ta cure; li lieure est faite en teil maniere.	And if there is a hot abscess, let it subside first, then return to your work and treatment; the incision is made in such a manner.
Il covient que tu envoloupes sus la briseure I bendeil dur doublé en II ou III, et en demoure li superfluitez, puis torne la jambe tant que li talons veigne a la racine de la naige, et boute I fil lonc entre la cuixe et la jambe, delez lou genoil desoz, et veignent li chief dou fil au desus; puis torne sus la jambe et sus la cuixe le bendeil, puis met sus la briseure esteles, et met une estele sus l’os de la jambe; puis emple le leu vuit entre la jambe et la cuixe de drapelz souef por mettre igal l’estrignement, puis comence a liier forment III tors ou IIII sus la briseure; et quant plus vas en sus de la briseure, et moins l’estraint; puis enten as II chiés dou fil que tu as bouteit entre la jambe et la cuixe, et en lie III esteles que sont desus, puis revai au desoz au chief dou fil, tant que tu veignes delez le piet; et l’estraint, si qu’il ne se mueve de son leu, puis le laisse ensi, puis k’il n’i vient ne aposteme ne enfleure n’autre semblant.	It is necessary that you wrap around the sprain with a linen bandage doubled two or three times, and let the surplus remain, then turn the leg until the heels reach the root of the ankle, and insert a long thread between the thigh and the leg, below the knee inside, and let the end of the thread appear above; then turn back to the leg and thigh with the bandage, and place a splint on the sprain, and put one splint on the bone of the leg; then fill the space between the leg and thigh with soft cloth to ensure even pressure, then begin to tie in three or four turns around the sprain; and as you go further from the sprain, tie less tightly; then attend to the two ends of the thread that you inserted between the leg and thigh, and put three splints above them, then return below to the end of the thread, until you see down to the foot; and tighten so that it does not move in its place, then leave it thus, until no abscess or swelling appears elsewhere.
Et s’il i avient, si le deslie, et adresce ceu que i vient, si com nos avons dit maintes fois; et se il i a pieces de l’os que poigne, si le covient ewer, s’om puet; et s’on ne puet, si covient fendre le leu, et traire fuer; et le cure si com nos avons dit, tant k’il soit sanez.	And if it happens, reset it, and align what comes to you as we have said many times; and if there are bone pieces that prick, it must be washed if possible; and if one cannot, it must cut the limb, and draw out pus; and cure it as we have said until it is healed.
Et aucune fois est brisie li cuixe ensi c’on i met esteles, si com en l’ajutoire et ou bras; toutevoie, en la restauration ensi faite ne cloche mie li malaides.	And never is the thigh broken thus we set it, as in the shoulder and arm; nevertheless, in the restoration done, the patient does not suffer pain.
Et saiches que li cuixe est restoree en L jors, ou poc moins ou poc plus, selonc les diversitez des complexions.	And know that the thigh is restored in three days, or somewhat fewer or somewhat more, according to the diversities of the constitutions.
de la ruelle dou genoil	from the groove of the knee
Saiches que en la ruelle dou genoil avient poc brisure, mais elle ploie maintes fois.	Know that in the joint of the knee there is little fracture, but it bends many times.
Et s’elle brise, si n’est mais c’une fendure, ou I pertus, et avient a tout plaie, et sens plaie, et ce sent om bien.	And if it fractures, it is not just a crack or hole, but comes to all wounds and wound-like injuries, and one feels it well.
Et li restauration si est c’on mette igal ceu qui est rons a ses dois, tant qu’il soit assemblez mues c’on puet; puis met l’emplaustre, et i met une estele reonde, se tu en as mestier, et l’estraint si com il covient, puis rewarde toutes les dispositions que nos avons dit ens autres briseures, si com aposteme chaut et autre semblant; si met a chescun accident ceu k’il li covient, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And the restoration is such that one should place equal wax on its two parts, as long as they are assembled and can move; then apply the plaster, and put a round strip, if you need it, and hold it properly. Then re-establish all the dispositions that we have said for other fractures, such as hot abscesses and similar cases; apply what is suitable for each accident until it is healed.
de la brisure de la jambe	of the fracture of the leg
Saiches que en la jambe ait II os, de coi li uns est apelez par droit non «mustelz», et li autres est apelez «foscile»; et avient tout auteil briseure com il vient au bras, et por ceu est li restauracion si com celle dou bras igalment, et li ovraiges est tout i. Et se li dui os sont brisiet ensamble, si torne li jambe de toutes pars.	In the leg there are two bones, of which one is called "mustelz" and the other "foscile"; and fractures occur in all ways as they do in the arm, and for this reason the restoration is equally as that of the arm, and the operations are the same. And if both bones are broken together, the leg turns in every direction.
Et se li os subtilz est brisiez, si torne devant.	And if the finer bone is broken, it turns forward.
Et se li gros os est brisiez, si sent on grant dolor, et le voit on bien; et torne desoz.	And if the larger bone is broken, one feels great pain, and it is clearly visible; and it turns outward.
Adonques amenistre extension, et le met igal, et lie les esteles igalement; mais toutevoie, il covient se li brisure est laide, et il i a plusors pieces, que li extension soit menor et plus legiere; et l’alige selonc ta vertu.	Then apply extension, and set it equal, and tie the straps equally; but in any case, if the fracture is ugly and there are many pieces, the extension should be less and lighter; and lighten it according to your skill.
Et quant tu as tout acomplit ton ovraige, si pren II faixes de fust chevees que porpreignent la jambe d’une part et d’autre, et soient dou lonc de la jambe des le genoil jusque desoz; puis envoloupe en II leus I bendeil desus et desoz, et le lie em mileu ausi, et a ceste lieure ne pora li jambe decliner a destre ne a senestre, et ensi est bien; et aucun i aministrent I bers dou lonc de la jambe, et s’est de fust, et i met on la jambe por warder de movement, et proprement fait on ceu en la brisure ou il a plaie; et remue chescun jor la jambe, por veoir s’il i a aposteme chaut n’autre accident; si le cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	And when you have completed all your work, take two straps of woven wood that fit the leg on one side and the other, and be long from the leg below the knee to above; then wrap in two layers over and under with a bandage, and tie them in the middle thus, and at this place the leg will not decline to right nor to left, and so it is well; and none administer a long bier of wood for the leg, and set the leg to guard against movement, and properly do you make it in the fracture where there is wound; and move each day the leg, to see if there is a hot abscess or any other accident; and cure until it be healed.
de la brisure des os dou piet	of the fracture of the bones of the foot
A la cheville ne vient point de brisure, mais as os dou piet vient aucune fois brisure et as dois poc, et n’i avient fuer que quassure em plusor dispositions.	In the ankle there is no breaking, but in the bone of the foot there is sometimes a breaking and in the toes there is no strength besides weakness from multiple conditions.
Et s’il avient as os dou piet brisure, et tu vois ces os sormonter l’un l’autre, si mette si malaides som piet sus la terre, ausi com s’il voloit aler, et puis met maintenant ton piet sus lou sien, lai ou li os sont levez, puis le presse tant k’il reveignent en lor leus; puis met l’emplaustre et estoupes sus, et met desoz lou ventre dou piet une petite tauble a II chiés plains, puis l’estraint au piet avenanment, puis que tu as envoloupez drapelz entor, et autres choses dont tu as mestier.	And if there is a breaking in the bone of the foot, and you see these bones sticking out one over the other, place the patient's foot on the ground as if it wanted to walk, and then put your foot on top of his, where the bones are raised, and press until they return to their places; then apply the plaster and ointment, and put a small board with two pieces of cloth under the sole of the foot, then bind it appropriately. After you have wrapped it with bandages around and other things you need.
Et quant III jors ou IIII seront passez, si deslie lou liien, car tu troveras les os igalz, soient brisiez, soient desaluez.	And when three days or four have passed, untie the bandage, for you will find the bones equal, whether broken or dislocated.
Et s’il i a aucuns des dois brisiez, si les restoure, si com nos avons dit as dois de la main; puis met au doi brisiet une estele selonc la longesce dou doi, et soit un poc plus large, puis met desoz le piet celle tauble que j’ai dit, et l’estrain avenanment; et s’il en i a II ou III, ou plus, brisiez, si met sus chescun doi une estele selonc sa quantiteit, envoloupee en I drapeil de lin, et estraint la tauble desoz lou piet; et soit estans sus lou chief de la tauble defuer lou ventre dou piet, si qu’il le teigne bien.	And if any of the two are broken, restore them as we have said for the fingers of the hand; then put on each broken finger a splint according to the length of the finger, and let it be somewhat wider. Then place under the foot that block which I have said, and hold it properly in place; and if there are two or three, or more, broken ones, put on each finger one splint according to its quantity, wrapped in a linen cloth, and place the block under the foot. And let it be placed over the head of the block behind the sole of the foot, so that it touches well.
Et covient que tu n’oblier mie les autres choses que j’ai dit as autres briseures, des que nos avons dit; et secor chescun accident si com il covient.	And you must not forget the other things that I have said to the other breakers, as we have said; and assist each accident as it requires.
de la brisure de l’os dou poignil	of the fracture of the bone at the blade
Quant li os de la nature la femme est brisiez, si la fai seoir enlargie, puis l’encline a la partie dou dos, et soit tenue par derrier; puis emplisse li baile la nature de la malaide de couton, et en i mette ausi gros com I sto; puis deboute la femme, et lieve lou dos poc et poc, et adonques saut li coton, tant qu’il vient a l’entree de la nature, et revient li os avec lou sto; et quant elle vuet pissier, si oste lou coton, et quant elle a pissiet, se li remette, et ensi faice VII jors ou entor: si sera restoree li brisure, et se tu vues, pren une vessie de berbis, et lie au pertus une cainne, et boute toute la vessie en la nature; puis soffle en la cainne forment, tant que li vessie soit enflee dedens: la nature si revenra li brisure; puis soit emplie de coton, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit sanez.	When the bone of a woman's nature is fractured, make her sit propped up, then incline her towards the part of the back, and hold her by the rear. Then fill the cavity of the woman's nature with cotton, putting in as much as she can tolerate. Then remove the woman, gradually lifting her back, allowing the cotton to fall until it reaches the entrance of the body, and the bone returns with the flesh. When she wants to urinate, remove the cotton, and when she has urinated, replace it, doing this for seven days or so: thus will the fracture be restored. If you wish, take a bladder from a goat, attach a string to the opening, and fill the entire bladder inside. The nature will return the fracture; then fill it with cotton and leave it that way for some days until it is healed.
Et quant li os dou poignil de l’ome est brisiez, ou de la femme, si le restoure ensi com nos avons dit en l’os de la hainche; et ne sont mie occultees ces briseures prochienes a celui qui i met son estude et son us, et entent mon livre.	And when the bone of the hand is broken in man or woman, restore it as we have said for the bone of the hip; and these nearby breaks are not hidden from him who applies his study and his use, and hears my book.
Car li brisure li signifie em plusors dispositions la droite voie de la restauration: enten le donques.	For the breaks signify in many ways the right way of restoration: understand them accordingly.
En la verge, quant elle est brisie, pren une gorge d’oie et i boute la verge; puis envoloupe drapelz entor, et le laisse III jors ou enqui entor, et il sera sanez hastanment.	In the thigh, when it is broken, take a goose quill and insert the thigh into it; then wrap it with bandages around, and let it lie for three days or more, and it will be quickly healed.
de brisure avec plaie	from break with wound
Il covient a celui qui a brisure avec plaie, meismement s’elle est grans, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire ou semblant, qu’il soit sainiez maintenant, si que les sainies que nos avons dit le tesmoignent.	For he who has a break with a wound, even if the wound is large, such as the bone of the thigh or shoulder or similar, must be healed now, as our treatments indicate.
Et se li plaie saine, si la restainche de vitriole, se tu n’as autre chose, puis rencomence a restorer la briseure en cele meisme houre, ou celui jor, se apostemes chaus n’i vient.	And if the wound is healthy, staunch it with vitriol, if you have nothing else, then resume the healing at that same hour or on that same day, if no abscesses arise.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si laisse la restauration jusc’a nuevime jor, tant que li apostemes soit apaisiez, et n’i touchier ne au tier jor ne au quart, car tu i feroies venir malvais accident.	And if no abscesses arise, let the healing continue until the next day, until the abscesses are appeased, and do not touch it on the third day or the fourth, for you would cause harmful accidents.
Et se li os brisiez est aparans sus lou keur descovert, si covient que tu lou mettes a point legierement a tes mains, a extension petite.	And if the broken bone is apparent on the exposed chest, it is necessary to place it gently with your hands, extending it slightly.
Et se li extensions ne t’est apareillie por mettre igal a tes mains, si le ramoine a cest estrument qui est de fer, qui a VII dois ou VIII de lonc, et li largesce est selonc la quantiteit de la plaie; et por ceu est mestier au mire qu’il empreigne III ou IIII, selonc ceu qu’il en ait mestier en chescune cure de briseure; et soit rons et un poc gros, k’il ne ploie mie a la compression sus lou membre a ton ovraige, et soit agus devant, et gros des le mileu en avant, ensi:	And if the extension is not available to make it equal with your hands, then reset it with an instrument made of iron, which has seven or eight lengths, and its width is according to the size of the wound; and for this, a splint must be prepared that soaks three or four times, according to what it needs for each healing of a fracture; and it should be round and slightly thick, so it does not bend much under compression on the limb during your work, and it should be hard in front, and thick in the middle forward, thus:
Et est apelez «palainche», por coi il covient que li chiés corbes soit mis sus lou chief de l’os apparent; et le boute a une fois, tant k’il reviegne, et soit igalz l’un encontre l’autre.	And it is called "palainche," for which it must be that the curved heads of the shoulder be placed on the head of the apparent bone; and set once, until it returns, and let them be even one against the other.
Et se li brisure est subtilz, et li estrumens ne puet bien prendre l’os, si covient que tu copes lou chief de l’os, tant que li estrumens en ait possance.	And if the fracture is subtle, and the instruments cannot take hold of the bone well, then you must file the head of the bone until the instruments can grasp it.
Et se tu ne pues ramener l’os, si com nos avons dit, si lou cope d’un estrument covenable a ceu, ou incisoire ou soieure, a ton pooir; puis reis ceu qui est demorez en l’os d’aspreteit et de menues escorces.	And if you cannot bring the bone back, as we have said, file the head of an appropriate instrument, such as a scaler or probe, to your ability; then remove what remains in the bone by hardness and small fragments.
Et quant li os est ramenez, et li malaides sent grant dolor aprés, saiches qu’il n’est mie en son leu natureil.	And when the bone is brought back, and the patient feels great pain afterwards, know that it is not in its natural place.
Si fai tant qu’il soit en son leu, puis moille I drapeil en vin stiptique noir, et proprement se c’est en esteit; et ne mettre mie sus la plaie cerote ne autre chose ou il ait oile, qu’il n’i faice venir porriture et corruption; puis aministre esteles quant tu as restoreit l’os, et laisse la plaie descoverte, et cope la coverture tout entor, selonc la quantiteit de la plaie, et te done bien en garde que li plaie ne soit estrainte avec la brisure; et maintes fois ont ce fait li fol mire, et ont fait venir sus le malaide ou mort ou corrodent aucune fois; et soit li estrignemens plus molz et plus souef des autres brisures.	If you place it in its proper position, then moisten the bandage with black wine vinegar, and properly if it is soiled; do not put any ointment or anything else on the wound that might cause infection and decay; then administer leeches when you have set the bone, and leave the wound uncovered, covering around it according to the size of the wound, and take great care that the wound is not compressed by the breakage; many times foolish people have done this and caused the patient to die or become infected at least once; let the compressions be softer and less severe than other types of bandages.
Et se li plaie est male ou grans, et tu doutes que mavais accidens n’i veigne, si com nos avons dit, et tu trueves dolor au leu, si n’i covient mie mettre sus esteles; mais envoloupe entor, en leu d’esteles, drapelz durs, et les lie.	And if the wound is bad or large, and you doubt that a harmful accident may occur, as we have said, and you find pain at the site, then it should not be covered with leeches; but wrap around it instead, in place of leeches, with hard bandages, and tie them.
Et quant tu vois aprés I jor ou II enjanrer bowe a la plaie, si oste ceu que tu as mis sus a tout vin, et i met oignement sanant plaies, si com oignement tetrafarmaçon et semblans.	And when you see after one or two days the wound weep from the wound, remove what you have placed above all the wine, and put healing ointment for wounds, such as tetrafarmacon and similar.
Et covient que tu deslies lou membre II fois le jor, lou matin et au vespre, tant qu’il soit soudez et sanez.	And you must dislocate the limb two times a day, in the morning and at evening, until it is set and healed.
Et covient que li membres soit aparilliez en teil maniere que li bowe corre aval legierement.	And the limb must be adjusted in such a manner that the wound runs downward smoothly.
Et se maint jor trespassent, et il ne puet souder mais rent adés bowe, saiches k’il i a petites pieces d’os, por coi il covient que tu quieres la plaie avec tente, et oste toutes ces pieces desevrees que font venir celle dolor.	And if many days pass and the wound cannot heal any further, know that there are small pieces of bone, for which you must clean the wound with a tent, and remove all these detached pieces that cause pain.
Et se fistule vient au leu, ou autre maniere de corruption, si covient que tu le cures, selonc ceu qu’il dist en son chapistre ci devant.	And if a fistula comes to the head, or any other kind of corruption, it must be treated, according to what he says in his chapter above.
Et quant li os est brisiez, et apert sus lou membre, si com li os de la cuixe ou de l’ajutoire, et autres semblans des grans membres, si ne le traire mie, car maintes fois en vient li mors, mais le laisse tant qu’il porrisse; par aventure cherra par lui aprés XX jors ou XXX, puis cure la plaie, se tu pues; et se tu ne pues, si la laisse.	And when the bone is broken and open in the same limb, as the bones of the thigh or shoulder, or other similar large bones, do not treat it immediately, for many times death comes from it, but let it be until it rots; by chance it may fall out by itself after 20 days or 30, then cure the wound if you can; and if you cannot, leave it.
des brus qui vienent sor la sodure	from bruises that come over the sutures
Nous vienent maintes fois aprés la santeit de la briseure, meismement quant c’est pres de la jointure, et laide chose est a veoir li figure dou membre; et par aventure ne puet faire li membres ses ovraiges naturelz.	Many times after the breakage, especially when it is near the joint, and it is a sad sight to see the figure of the limb; by chance it cannot perform its natural functions.
Pren warde donques se li nous est fres: si li aministre medicines stiptiques, si com aloes, encens, et mirre, et sarcocolle, acaice, et semblans autres, ensi que tu preignes aucune de ces choses, ou toutes ensamble, et les confit avec vin stiptique ou avec abun d’uef ou avec aisil; et les met sus le nout en estoupes, et l’estraint bien, et ne la desliier en mains jors; et puis la desloie, et rencomence une autre, tant que li nodations soit ostee; ou tu estrain sus une piece de plonc bien faite; car li proprietez dou plonc si est qu’il oste toutes les enfleures desus les membres; et se li nodation est ja convertie en durteit ausi com piere, et il est besoing de l’oster, si la cope desus, et fent la superfluiteit apparent; ou tu la reis a aucun raseur, tant qu’ele soit ostee, et la cure tant qu’ele soit sanee.	Therefore take care that the joint is fresh: if it allows, administer styptic medicines such as aloes, incense, and myrrh, as well as sarcocolla, acacia, and similar others, so that you use any of these things or all together, and prepare them with styptic wine or plenty of egg or with honey; place them on the joint in vials, and bind it tightly, not letting it loose for several days by hand; then remove it, and start another one until the swellings are gone; or you can bind it over a well-made pad; for the properties of the padding so completely dissipate all swellings above the limbs; and if the swelling has already turned to hardness like stone and needs removal, cover it with a poultice and let the superfluous part be seen; or you can send it to any barber until it is removed, and cure it when it is healed.
dou membre qui est foibles aprés la garison	of a limb that is weak after the siege
Quant li brisure de l’os est restoree, et demoure aprés li membres foibles et subtilz, si avient por mout de causes: de coi l’une est por ceu qu’il fut liiez trop estroit, et ne fut mie liiez si com il covenoit; ou por ceu qu’il i ot trop de liiens, et ne pooit venir li norrissemens au membre; ou por multitude d’arosement; ou por trop grans movements, ne mie en son houre; ou por ceu qu’il a poc de sanc en son cors, si est foibles.	When the fracture of the bone is restored and remains after the limb is weak and delicate, it happens for many causes: one of which is because it was tied too tightly, and not as it should have been; or because there were too many bindings, preventing new growth in the limb; or due to excessive swelling; or from too great movements, not at their proper time; or because there is little blood in his body, so it is weak.
Et li cure si est que tu faices mengier le malaide, et faire le cors tendre, tant que li sans soit multipliiez en lui; et li aministre bain, et li done joie et liesce; puis met poix sus le membre, si que li poix atraie a li grant norrissement, et l’arose sovent d’aigue tede, tant que li norrissement corre au membre; et reviegne a sa figure natureil.	And the treatment is that you make the patient eat and strengthen the body until the flesh multiplies within him; give him baths, and provide him joy and ease; then apply ointment to the limb, so that the ointment draws toward the great growth, and frequently wet it with warm water until the growth reaches the limb; and return to its natural figure.
dou membre tort aprés la santeit	of the limb twisted after recovery
Quant li membres est tors aprés la restauration, et li os brisiez apert, et li forme dou membre est laide, toutevoie ne pert mie son ovraige natureil: si ne croire mie les folz qui dient c’on doit brisier lou membre tout de noveil, et maint fol mire ont ce fait en nostre terre; et cist ovraiges est blamez, et en vient grans malz, et par aventure li mors; toutevoie, se li nodations et li torture sont fres, si covient k’il soient arosez d’aigue chaude, ou herbes mollifians soient cuites, si com foilles de vismalve, et racines, et mellilote, et semblans choses; et li fai I emplaustre mollificatif, si com dyaquilon bien fait, et tu pren le muscillaige de vismalve, et la confit avec graisse de geline ou oile de sisament, et fai emplaustre sus; ou tu pren figues graisses, et les broie avec fien de colon, et semblans medicines que amenuisent le soudement.	When the limb is twisted after recovery, and the broken bones are exposed, and the form of the limb is ugly, all in all, it does not affect its natural function: one should not believe the fools who say that one must break the limb completely anew; many such foolish acts have been done in our land; these works are blamed, and they bring great harms, and even death by chance; therefore, if the swellings and tortures are fresh, it is necessary to treat them with warm water, or cook herbs that soften, such as the leaves of vismarl, roots, marjoram, and similar medicines; then apply a softening plaster, well made, and take the muscilage of vismarl, mix it with gelatin fat or silk oil, and apply it over; or take fatty figs, grind them with colon flour, and use such medicines that quickly alleviate.
Et aucune fois est ostee li nodacion por froter continuelment et longement a mains moistes.	And sometimes the nodes are removed by rubbing continuously and for a long time with wet hands.
Et soit amenistrez movement au membre chescune houre.	And may the limb be moved each hour.
Et se li tortuositez est enveillie et endurcie, ausi com piere, et besoins est de l’oster au fer, si la covient coper jusc’a l’os, a l’incisoire subtil legierement; et mettre cusenson et estude en la cure.	And if the tortuosity is aged and hardened, like stone, and it is necessary to remove it with iron, then it should be cut down to the bone using a sharp incisor gently; and great care and skill are needed in the treatment.
Ci encomence li livres des dislocations	This begins the book on dislocations.
Dislocations est issue d’aucune jointe de son leu, por coi il ne se puet muevre, et est li membres mal figurez, et sent li malaides grant dolor et grant lesion.	Dislocation occurs when a joint moves out of its place, which prevents it from moving, and the limb is misaligned, causing the patient great pain and injury.
Quant dislocation vient a aucun, si le covient maintenant ramener sens targier.	When dislocation comes to anyone, it is fitting now to reset it without delay.
Car s’on tarde, si enfle li leus, et par aventure si le remet on a poines au leu; por ceu ne covient mie c’on le mueve a l’oure k’il est enflez: maintes fois fait venir spame et autres dolors; toutevoie, quant ce avenra, si fai sainier lou malaide, puis le laisse, tant que li apostemes chas soit apaisiez; puis arose le membre d’aigue chaude et d’oile, puis le ramoinne legierement, et cure chescun membre si com li cure venra en son leu.	For if one delays, the shoulder will swell, and by chance, if it is set with pins at the swelling; for this, it is not fitting to move it while it is swollen: many times it brings about spasm and other pains; nevertheless, when this happens, make the patient lie down, then let him rest until the abscesses are fully healed; then apply hot water and oil, and reset it gently, and cure each limb as it comes back into its place.
Et j’ai ordenez les chapistres des dislocations des lou chief jusc’a piez.	And I have ordered the chapters on shoulder dislocations from the head down to the feet.
des mandibules	of the jawbones
Poc avient que les mandibules soient desaluees andous, et li dislocations d’ambedous est selonc II manieres: ou elles sont un poc ostees de lor leus, et mollifies un poc; ou elles sont desaluees entierement, et pendent vers lou pis, et cort li salive de la bouche qu’il ne la puet tenir, ne ne puet clore sa bouche, et envoloupe sa langue avec la parole.	Often the jaws are dislocated sideways, and the dislocations of both sides occur in two ways: either they are slightly displaced from their joints and somewhat softened; or they are completely dislocated, hanging towards the chin, and stop saliva from the mouth so he cannot hold it, nor can he close his mouth, enveloping his tongue with speech.
Quant li dislocations est petite, si revient par li em plusors disposicions.	When the dislocation is slight, it often returns to place through natural means.
Et s’elle est entiere et acomplie, si covient que tu la ramoinne hastanment, et ne targier mie; et en tel maniere que li ministres teigne le chief dou malaide, et boute li mires som pochet de l’une de ses mains en la racine de la dislocation de la mandibule dedens la bouche, se li dislocations est de II pars; et li autre doi des mains soient defuer, por mettre igal; et comande au malaide qu’il les amollisse, ses mandibules, et les mueve de toutes pars.	And if the dislocation is complete and thorough, you must quickly reset it without delay; and in such a manner that the attendant holds the patient's head, and places a cloth or poultice from one of his hands at the root of the jaw dislocation inside the mouth, if the dislocation affects both sides; and the other hand should be free to ensure equality. Instruct the patient to soften and move his jaws in all directions.
Et li mires la mete igal, tant qu’elle reveigne en son leu.	And place the joint equally, until it returns to its place.
Et se li ramener est griés, meismement se ce sont les II mandibules ensamble, si les arose d’aigue chaude et d’oile, tant que les ramoinnes legierement; ne ne targier mie dou ramener, si com nos avons dit.	And if the reduction is difficult, especially if it involves the two lower jaws together, apply hot water and oil, gently resetting them; do not force the reduction, as we have said.
Et quant elles sont ramenees igalment, et li bouche dou malaide clot bien sens mollifiier, si met sus drapelz moilliez en cerote fait d’oile roset et de cire, puis le lie legierement de molz liiens; et dorme li malaides sus son dos, et ses chiés soit estans entre II cussins, si qu’il ne lou mueve ne a destre ne a senestre, ne ne s’efforce mie de maixier, mais preigne legiere viande, tant que les dolors soient ostees, et soient noees les mandibules; et puis menjuce ce qu’il vuet legierement, et ne se travaille mie d’ovrir la bouche au mengier et au boivre, tant que li mandibule soit bien noee et sanee.	And when they are reduced equally, and the patient's mouth closes well, gently soften it by applying moistened cloth in a paste made of rose oil and wax. Then loosely tie it with soft threads; and let the patient sleep on his back, with his head between two cushions so that he cannot move left or right, nor force his jaw to close. Instead, give him light food until the pains are gone, and secure the lower jaws. Then allow him to eat and drink lightly as he wishes without opening his mouth for eating and drinking, until the mandibles are well set and healthy.
Et se les II mandibules ne pueent estre remises a point a une houre, et ne sont mie converties a lor leus, si en vient fievres et sode acostumees, et par aventure solution de ventre, et par aventure vomist cole pure.	And if the two mandibules cannot be reset to place within an hour and are not completely returned to their sockets, then fevers and stiffened conditions become accustomed, and by chance there may be a collapse of the abdomen, and by chance pure vomiting occurs.
Et quant tu verras ceu, adonc saiches que c’est perdicions; et maintes fois muert cil cui il avient, en VIIII jors.	And when you see this, then know it is fatal; many times those who suffer from it die within nine days.
de la forcelle	of the forceps
Li forcele ne puet desaluer dou costeit dedens la continuation de li et dou pis, et est desaluee aucune fois au defuer, et bien le sent on.	The forceps cannot dislocate downward along the continuation of the bone and outward toward the foot, and is only dislocated once at the fracture, and one can feel this clearly.
Et li restauration si est que li malaides gise sovin sor son dos, et estende ses bras; et puis presse le leu forment a ta palme, et elle revenra; puis met sus l’emplaustre et lou bendeil, et l’estraint; et li chiez qui est devers lou coute ne puet desaluer; se poc non, et se il desalue aucune fois, si le ramoinne a son leu, si com nos avons dit; puis met sus l’emplaustre et le bendeil, et l’estraint, et coumande au malaide qu’il se repose tant qu’il soit sanez; et ensi meisme est ramenez li chiés de l’espale, quant il est desevrez de son leu.	And the restoration is that the patient lies often on their back and extends their arms. Then press the bone firmly with your palm, and it will return. Place a plaster and a bandage over it, and tighten it. The head near the cut cannot dislocate; if at all, then reset it to its place as we have said. Place a plaster and a bandage over it, tighten it, and instruct the patient to rest until they are healed. Thus, the head of the shoulder is brought back when it is displaced from its place.
de la dislocation de l’espaule	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li espaule n’est desaluee fuer que selonc III manieres: de coi l’une est qu’ele desalue a la partie de l’assele au desoz; et li seconde est a la partie dou pis; et par aventure desalue a la partie desus, et ceu avient poc; et ne desalue mie derrier por l’espaule, et ne desalue mie dedens por les ners; et plusors fois desalue desoz vers l’assele, meismement a ces qui ont poc de char, car a ces saut ele fuer hastanment; a ces qui ont assez char, saut ele a poines, et rentre a poines.	The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: one, it dislocates at the part of the socket outwards; and the second, at the part of the humerus; and by chance it dislocates upwards, which happens seldom; and it does not dislocate backwards for the shoulder, nor internally for the nerves; and often it dislocates from below towards the socket, especially in those who have little flesh, because in them it springs suddenly; in those who have enough flesh, it springs with a wrench and returns with a wrench.
Et par aventure avient a aucuns homes percussion ou casseure, et enfle li espaule d’un aposteme chaut, et cuide qu’elle est desaluee par ceu.	And by chance it happens to some men from a blow or fracture, and the shoulder swells with a hot abscess, and they think it is dislocated for this reason.
Il covient donques que tu l’esprueves, tant que tu en soies certains; et adonques encomence la cure.	It must therefore be tested thoroughly until you are certain; then begin the treatment.
Et est conue li dislocations quant il est aval vers l’assele, et met difference entre l’espaule malade et la saine, et tu troveras entre lor diversiteit manifeste; et troveras au chief de l’espaule une fosse, et desoz l’assele au tochier le chief de l’espaule, ausi com se ce soit uns oes; et ne puet li malaides ramener sa main a son neis, ne movoir de nulz movemens; et ausi, s’elle est desaluee en haut, si n’est mie occultee, car tu le trueves manifestement au tochier; et ceste maniere de dislocation n’est mie fors a ramener, quant elle est novele, ou se li enfes est malaides.	And it is known that dislocations occur when the head slides toward the armpit, and you make a difference between the sick shoulder and the healthy one, and you will find a clear difference between them; and you will find a hollow in the head of the shoulder, and beneath the armpit at the edge of the shoulder blade, as if it were a bony prominence; and the patient cannot bring his hand to his nose, nor move with any movements; and similarly, if it is dislocated upwards, it is not hidden, for you find it clearly when palpating; and this manner of dislocation is not easily reducible when new, or when the child is sick.
Et li maniere est que li ministres lieve la main dou malaide en haut, puis met tes peuchas desoz l’assele, et lieve la jointure a force en haut au leu; et li ministres lieve la main, et l’estende en haut, pues le mette desoz; si venra hastanment.	And the manner is that the ministers lift the patient's hand upwards, then place their palms under the armpit, and dislocate the joint with force upwards to its place; and the ministers lift the hand and extend it upwards, then place it there; it will come quickly.
Et s’elle ne vient si com nos avons dit em mains jors aprés, si covient ke li malaides soit baigniez en aigue chaude; et li amenistre arosement mollifiant et assouajant, si com decoction de altee et de fenugrec et de mellilote en aigue, et soit amenistree; puis soit sovinez li malaides sus son dos, et mette on desoz l’assele un sto de lainne igal, ne trop mol ne trop dur, puis mette li mires son talon sus le sto, et lieve le chief de l’espaule vertuousement, et traie la main dou malaide; et uns autres ministres teigne lou chief dou malaide, si qu’il ne se mueve aval; celle espaule revient tout maintenant, et se tu vues si le ramoinne selonc ceste maniere: et est que tu faices estre present I home qui soit plus grans que li malaides; et soit drois devers lou costeit, et boute s’espaule desoz l’assele dou malaide, et lieve l’assele en haut, si que li malaides pende en l’ar; et uns autres ministres traie la main dou malaide aval devers lou ventre.	And if it does not come as we have said with the hands a few days after, it must be that the patient is bathed in warm water; and the attendant apply soothing and assuaging remedies, such as decoction of althea and fenugreek and marigold in water, and apply them; then cover the patient's back, and place a woollen cloth evenly, neither too soft nor too hard, under the armpit; then place the patient's foot on the cloth, and lift the shoulder blade properly, and pull the hand of the patient upwards; and another minister hold the patient's head downwards so that it does not move downwards; this shoulder will now return, and if you wish to reset it in this manner: ensure that a person larger than the patient is present; place them facing the side, and insert the shoulder under the armpit of the larger person, then lift the larger person's arm upwards, so that the patient's body hangs by the arm; and another minister pull the hand of the patient downwards towards the abdomen.
Et se li malaides est trop legiers, si pent avec lui aucune chose pesant, et li dislocation revient maintenant.	And if the patient is too light, he may add something heavy to him, and the dislocation will return now.
Et le ramoinne on ausi en autre maniere: et est c’on fiche I lonc tison en terre, dont li chiés soit ausi reons com I pistal, et ne soit ne trop gros ne trop graile; puis soit mis desoz lou malaide, mais k’il ait drapelz souef sus, et li malaides soit estans dou lonc dou fust; puis soit estendue sa main aval d’autre part forment, et li jointure revenra en son leu hastanment; et s’elle ne vuet revenir por toutes ces choses que nos avons dit, si fai ceste cure: pren I tison de II bras de grant et IIII dois de large, qui ait le chief reont por mues entrer em parfont desoz l’assele, selonc ceste forme:	And the dislocation is also reset in another manner: and it is so that one sticks a long poker into the ground, where the head of the shoulder should be as round as a pike, neither too large nor too small; then it is placed under the patient, but he should have a cushion under, and the patient should be stretched lengthwise from another direction firmly; and the joint will return to its place quickly. And if it does not want to return for all these things that we have said, do this cure: take a poker of two arm's length in height and four fingers in width, which has a head round enough to enter perfectly under the armpit, according to this form:
puis lie sus le chief dou fust drapelz souez, que li fust ne blece lou malaide, puis le met desoz l’assele dou malaide; et estende som bras sus le fust dou lonc, et lie l’ajutoire sus le fust, et lou bras au chief de la main, puis met le bras sus I eschillon d’une eschiele dou large, et soit estendue li mains aval, et soit laissiez li cors pendans d’autre part: li jointure reva ens maintenant.	then bind above the head of the bone with a cloth, so that the bone does not swell for the patient, then place under the patient; and extend your arm above the long bone, and bind the auxiliary above the bone, and the arm to the head of the hand, then place the arm on the ladder of a large ladder, and let the hand hang downward, and leave the body hanging from another part: the joint will now recover gradually.
Et quant elle est ens, en quel maniere que ce soit, si covient que tu mettes desoz l’assele une spere de laine igal, puis met l’emplaustre aparilliet de poudre dou molin, avec encens et aubun d’uef, sus toute l’espaule et entor, puis l’estrain desoz l’assele avenanment, et torne le liien sus l’emplaustre, et embraice la main a son col, et soit li mains demorans ensi.	And when it is dry, in whatever manner it may be, you must place under the pillow a pad of wool even, then apply the plaster prepared with flour of mill, with incense and egg yolk, over the whole shoulder and around, then remove the pad from under the pillow as appropriate, and turn the bandage over the plaster, and embrace the hand at its neck, and let the hand remain thus.
Et covient qu’il menjuce poc, tant que li membres soit confortez, car il sanera plus tost; et puis menjuce plus aprés V jors ou VII, et le mueve; et s’il est fermeis et il n’est mollifiez, si est sanez.	And it must be eaten little, so that the limb is strengthened, for it will heal faster; and thereafter eat more after five or seven days, and move it; and if it is firm and not softened, then it is healed.
Et se li jointure est fuer de leu por moistor que i est venue, ou por autre cause, si covient que tu i aministres cauteres a III pertus, si com il est mis devant ou chapistre des cauteres.	And if the joint is dislocated due to moisture or for another reason, it must be treated with three punctures of the fire cautery as described in the chapter on fire cautery.
Et se tu fais tout ceu, et il deslie aprés VII jors, et li jointure ne se tient, et ne puet lever som bras amont, adonc saiches que li nerf au chief de l’espaule sont copeit ou estendut ou amollis; et saiches que li jointure n’iert jamais fichie en son leu.	And if you do all this, and it dislocates after seven days, and the joint does not hold and cannot lift the arm upward, then know that the nerve at the head of the shoulder is cut or stretched or softened; and know that the joint never returned to its place.
Li dislocation qui est devers lou pis, et les mameles, ou derrier, si est faite par impulsion, et estendement de mains, et i aministre on autre lieure; et cure tant qu’il soit sanez.	Dislocations that are around the buttocks, and the breasts, or behind, are caused by impulse and extension of hands; and they are treated until they are healed.
Et se aprés la sanation vient grietez au membre, et tardemens em movement, si use li malaides bain maintes fois, tant que celle grietez soit alegie, et reviegne a sa premiere nature.	And if after the healing comes cracks in the limb, and delays due to movement, the patient uses baths many times until those cracks heal and return to their original state.
de la dislocation dou coute	of the dislocation of the shoulder
Saiches que li jointure dou coute est desaluee a poinnes, et a poinnes revient; et s’est desaluee de toutes pars, et meismement devant et derrier, et li dislocations n’est mie reponue, car on la voit bien et sent bien; et desalue selonc chescune figure.	Know that the joint of the shoulder is dislocated at points, and returns to those points; and it is dislocated from all sides, especially in front and behind, and the dislocation is not replied to, for it can be seen clearly and felt clearly; and it is dislocated according to each figure.
Et quant tu joins le coute malaide avec lou sain, si le pues veoir apertement.	And when you join the diseased part with the healthy one, you must clearly see it.
Car li jointure est chevee, et ne puet ploier lou bras, ne touchier son espaule a tout.	And the joint is fixed, and cannot bend the arm or touch its shoulder in any way.
Et covient que tu le ramoinnes ainsois que apostemes chaus i viegne, car se apostemes chaus i venoit, si seroit grief li ramener; et par aventure ne puet estre ramenez dou tout en tout, meismement quant ele est au derrier; si vaut pis que les autres dislocations, et est de plus grant dolor, et par aventure i vient li mors.	And you must first reset it as abscesses heal and come to an end, for if abscesses heal and come to an end, it would be grievous to bring them back; and by chance, they cannot always be fully reset, especially when it is in the deepest part. Such dislocations are worse than others, and cause more pain, and by chance, they may even lead to death.
Et li restauration si est, quant elle est telz c’on la puet ramener, que tu li estendes sa main a tes II mains; et ses bras soit espandus, et les mains dou mire selonc le coute entor, desor et desoz, et boute la jointure a ses peuchas ensamble, ou a la racine de sa palme, tant qu’ele reviegne a son leu.	And the restoration is such that when it can be reset in this manner, you extend its hand with both your hands; and its arms are spread out, and the hands positioned according to the edge of the cut around, above, and below, and place the joint at its proper position or at the root of its palm until it returns to its place.
Et se li dislocations est au devant, si revient quant il double sa main a sa main, et fier de la racine de la palme lou coute qui est desaluez.	And if the dislocation is at the front, it returns when he doubles his hand to his face and fixes the root of the palm with the knife which is dislocated.
Et s’il ne vuet revenir au leu, si aministre fort extension; et est que dui ministre estendent le bras, et le teignent dui ministre, si qu’il ne se mueve a l’estension; puis torne le bras de chescune part, puis que tu as envoloupeit un drapeil double lonc et large; et quant li mires a jointe la jointure a sa main, si l’oigne d’aucun oile por amolir la jointure, puis boute la jointure forment, tant qu’ele reviegne; et quant elle est au leu, si met sus emplaustre sec avec aubun d’uef, et l’estrain forment, et pent le bras au col dou malaide, et le laisse aucuns jors, puis le deslie.	And if it will not return to its place, give strong extension; and two ministers extend the arm, and tie it with ministers, so that it does not move in extension; then turn the arm in every direction, then wrap it in a double long and wide cloth; and when you join the joint to his hand, apply an eye for softening the joint, then form the joint, until it returns; and when it is in its place, put on a dry plaster with egg yolk, and bind it firmly, and hang the arm at the neck of the patient, and let it be for some days, then release it.
Et se li jointure est ferme en son leu, si deslie lou liien, et le laisse; et se tu vois que li jointure n’estrigne bien, si rencomence l’emplaustre et lou lien, et le laisse ensi aucuns jors, tant qu’il soit fermement mis; puis le deslie.	And if the joint is firmly set in its place, loosen the ligament, and leave it; and if you see that the joint does not fit well, reapply the plaster and the ligament, and leave it for some days, until it is firmly placed; then loosen it.
Et se il sent grieteit aprés le ramenement de la jointe, et elle se muet, si le baigne et frote bellement, et presse tant qu’il soit assouagiez; ou tu met sus la jointure une naige de mouton grasse, puis la laisse I jor et une nuit, puis l’oste, et lou fai entrer ou bain; et quant il sue, se li frote la jointure tempreement, puis remet la naige sus, et puis entre ou bain; et ensi fai II fois ou III, tant qu’il soit sanez; et se tu vues, si met sus fien de vaiche moiste chaufeit avec burre, et l’estrain sus; si revenra a sa disposition.	And if it feels fractured after the resetting of the joint, and it moves, then bathe and gently rub it, pressing until it is alleviated; or you may place a fatty sheep tallow on the joint, then leave it for one day and one night, then remove it, and apply hot water therapy; and when it sweats, thoroughly rub the joint, then reapply the tallow, and again apply hot water therapy; and do this two or three times until it is healed; and if you see, place warm moist sheep's dung heated with butter, and apply it; it will return to its proper position.
li dislocation de la main	the dislocation of the hand
Li jointure de la main desalue, et li revenue est legiere, plus que les autres jointures Toutevoie, il la covient ramener au leu hastanment, en l’oure meisme qu’ele est desaluee, ainsois que li leus soit enflez, ou qu’il i viegne aposteme chaut.	The dislocation of the hand is severe, and the return is light, more than other joints. Therefore, one must reset it to its place quickly, as soon as it becomes dislocated, just as the shoulder swells or an abscess forms hotly.
Et li ramenemens si est que tu mettes la main malaide sus une tauble, et estende li ministres la main, et li mires la mette igal, ensi que il mette sa paume sus l’aparance de la jointure, et la boute tant qu’elle reviegne Toutevoie, il covient que vos regardez s’il est bien a leu; adonc mette li malaides lou dos de sa main sus une tauble a l’estension et au ramenement.	And the resetting is such that you place the injured hand on a table, and extend the fingers of the hand. Then, hold the palm so it aligns with the joint, and keep pressing until it returns to its proper position. You must ensure it is properly set; then, place the back of the injured hand on the table for extension and resetting.
Et se li dislocations est au dos de la main, si mette li malaides son dos de sa main sus la tauble, et li mires mette sa main sus cele apparance de la jointure.	And if the dislocation is in the back of the hand, place the patient's back of the hand on the table, and the helper place his hand on that appearance of the joint.
S’elle revient maintenant, c’est bien Se ce non, si l’estrain d’emplaustres apaisans apostemes chaus, et lou laisse ensi sens rencomencier.	If it returns now, that is well. If not, apply a plaster to ease the abscess and let him be thus until it begins again.
Et s’il ne le puet soffrir, et tu ne la pues mettre au leu aprés aucuns jors, si demore li jointure torte; et ne nuist niant au malaide fuer que tant que li mains est amoillie, et ne puet estraindre aucune chose a tout: adonc saiches que li nerf sont copez, ou li artere; si n’i a autre engien fuer que d’estraindre par cautere delez le cas, et par aventure n’i vaut autre chose.	And if he cannot bear it, and you cannot put it back in place after several days, the joint will remain crooked; and it does not harm the patient as long as the hand is soft and cannot grasp anything at all: then know that the nerve is severed or the artery; there is no other means but to apply a fire cautery near the case, and by chance nothing else works.
Et quant li mains est au leu, si met sus l’emplaustre que nos avons dit, puis l’estrain et le laisse V jors, puis le deslie et laisse ensi.	And when the hand is in place, put the plaster that we have said on it, then bind and let it be 5 days, then unbind and leave thus.
Et s’il ne la puet bien movoir, et il i a aucune grieteit, si la moille d’aigue chaude, et le frote tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if it cannot move well, and there is any stiffness, apply warm liquid gelatin and rub until it heals.
de la dislocation des dois de la main	of the dislocation of the fingers of the hand
Aucune fois sont desaluez li doi de la main a chescune part, aucune fois au dos de la palme ou au ventre; adonques estent le doi, et boute la dislocation a tes pouchés tant qu’il reviegne, puis sostien lou chief dou doi, et le pent vers la partie ou il est desjoins; et le laisse II jors, et puis le met igal celui jor; et de nut le lie, si com nos avons dit, et lou deslie de jor, et lou fai movoir, et le relie la nut; et fai ce sovent, tant qu’il soit estroit, et tout ausi fai, se il est desaluez au ventre de la main, et fai si com tu as fait ci devant, tant qu’il soit sanez; et tout ausi fai, quant il est desaluez d’autre part.	Sometimes the fingers of the hand are dislocated in any direction, sometimes at the back of the palm or the palm's center; then straighten the finger, and hold the dislocation with your thumb until it returns to place. Then support the end of the finger, and bend it toward the part where it is disjointed; and let it be 2 days, and then keep it straight for that day; and bind it as we have said, and unbind it each day, and allow it to move, and rebind it at night; and do this often until it is tight. If it is dislocated in the palm of the hand, do so as you did before until it heals. And similarly, if it is dislocated in any other part, do so until it heals.
dou desaluement de l’eschinee dou dos	of the dislocation of the shoulder blade from the back
Quant l’eschinee dou dos ou dou col est desaluee, ou il en i a plusors desaluees, si n’i a point de cure, car li mors haste le malaide.	When the shoulder blade from the back or neck is dislocated, or there are multiple dislocations, there is no proper treatment, for death comes quickly to the patient.
Et li signes si est que li egestions saut fuer sens volunteit, ne ne la puet tenir, et maintes fois sont mollifiez aucun membre, ou les II cuixes ou li dui bras ou I Et maintes fois se muet li eschinee a IIII pars; celle qui se muet au derrier si est apelee «gilbositez»: li cure si est que tu rewarde se li gilbositez est venue d’enfance: si n’i ait point de cure ne de sanation dou tot.	And the signs are that the evacuations come without consent, nor can they be held, and often the members become soft, or both hips or both arms. And often the shoulder blade changes into four parts; that which changes at the back is called "gilbositez": the treatment is to reward if gilbositez has come from childhood: there is no cure or healing for this.
Et celle que vient de cheoir ou de percussions ou de semblans choses, dirent li ancien manieres de cures par grans paroles, ou il n’a mie en toutes grant profit; mais je l’ai abregiet selonc mon entention, et ai formez estrumens en diverses manieres.	And that which comes from falling or impacts or similar things, the ancient methods of treatment with grand words say they have no real benefit in all cases; but I have abbreviated them according to my intention, and formed instruments in various ways.
Je dis que en la gilbositeit que vient au pis devant, nen a engien ne santeit; et ausi cele que vient droitement en II costez, et ne puet on curer fuers que celi proprement qui vient au dos, si com je dis; et est que li malaides soit estendus sus sa faice en I leu igal, et ait de l’estrain desoz lui, qu’il ne se blece; puis fiche I tison au chief en terre forment, et I autre as piez, et lie un liien pardesoz les asseles dou malaide, et I autre as hainches, et as genous, et as chevilles; et dui ministre saichent les liiens, li uns au chief et li autres as piez, parmi les II tisons; et soient bien fermez, li tison si com nos avons dit, et li mires mette ses paumes sus l’espinee forment, tant qu’ele reviegne.	I say that in the carbuncle that comes to the buttocks before, there is no cure; and so it is with that which comes directly into two sides, and one cannot cure it outside except the one that comes properly to the back, as I say; and it is that the patient extend his body on one side equally, and have an arrow beneath him, so that he does not blister; then stick a brand in the head in the ground, and another at the feet, and tie a rope under the armpits of the patient, and another at the hips, and at the knees, and at the ankles; and two ministers know the ropes, one at the head and the other at the feet, among the two brands; and their hands be well fastened, the brand as we have said, and the prisoners put their palms on the spine in form, until it returns.
Et s’elle ne revient par ceste cure, si pren une tauble de III bras de lonc, et chevé desoz la paroit, et li malaides soit en costé, et boute le chief de la tauble desoz la paroit, puis met le mileu de la tauble sus l’espinee; et mette li mires ses piez sus l’autre chief de la tauble, et presse bien, tant qu’il reviegne au leu; et se tu vues, si le fai au tornet qui torne a la main.	And if it does not return through this treatment, take a board of three fingers in length, and wedge it beneath the wall, and if the patient is on their side, place the head of the board beneath the wall, then put the middle of the board over the spine; and have the patient place their feet over the other head of the board, and press well, until it returns to its place; and if you can, do this at a mill that turns by hand.
Et est que tu fiches II tisons au chief dou malaide d’un bras de grant, et devers les piez II autres, et ait entre chescun tison, desoure et desoz, une paume d’espaice de lonc; et ait en chescun tison I pertus, ou li tornet corre, et soient li tison fermement en terre, si qu’il ne se muevent; et entre chescuns II tisons ait I tison tornant, sor coi li liien tornent, et ait en II tornans II petis tisons d’une paume de lonc, por torner le tornet; et puis lie lou lien qui est parmi les asseles au tornet devers le chief, et l’autre liien devers les piez a l’autre tornet, et chescuns des ministres torne son tornet a tout le liien, et li maistres mette l’espinee igal si com nos avons dit.	And you insert two pincers into the head of the patient's arm from one side, and towards their feet on the other side, placing a palm-width piece of spice between each pair of pincers; and in each pincer, place a hole where the mill turns, ensuring the pincers are firmly fixed in the ground so they do not move. Between each pair of pincers, place a turning pincer where the joint turns, with smaller pincers of a palm-width between them to turn the mill. Then tie one rope among the axles to the mill near the head, and the other rope to the other axle near their feet. Each minister turns their mill in opposite directions along the rope, while the master keeps the spine aligned as we have said.
Et quant elle est igalz, si met sus emplaustre desiccatif avec abun d’uef, et puis les estoupes, et puis l’estele d’une tablete de III dois de lonc, que porpreigne lou leu de la gilbositeit et la partie de l’espondile sainne, puis le lie d’un liien, si com nos avons dit, et use li malaides de norrissement subtil, tant qu’il soit sanez; et s’aucune chose vient en la fin de la santez, si covient aministrer medicines amollissans et asouajans, avec l’estele que nos avons dit ci devant; et aucune fois i aministre on une piece de plonc, et aucune fois vient li apparance en la derriere spondile dou dos, et cuide on que ce soit dislocations; et c’est li os qui apert, por coi on n’i doit mie avoir presumption: par aventure feroit venir la mort.	And when they are even, place a desiccative plaster with abundant egg, and then the stoppers, and then the string of three long pieces, that purpurgues the leukoma of the yellow bile and the healthy part of the spine, then bind it with a bandage as we have said, and use the patient for a subtle healing until they are healed; and if any matter comes at the end of the healing, then you must administer softening and soothing medicines with the string that we have mentioned earlier; and sometimes one administers a piece of flax, and sometimes the appearance in the rear spine of the back is seen, and one should think it is dislocation; and this is the bone that shows, therefore one must not have presumption: by chance it might bring death.
des dislocations de la hainche	of the dislocations of the hip
Saiches que as jointures de la hainche et as jointures de l’espaule ne vient fuers que dislocacions soulement, ne n’i vient mie si com as autres jointures; et li jointure de la hainche est desaluee selonc IIII parties: dedens et defuer ,et devant et derrier; et plus dedens c’aillors, et poc desalue devant et derrier.	The joints of the hip and the joints of the shoulder come from dislocations alone, not in the same way as other joints; and the hip joint is displaced according to four parts: inside and behind, in front and behind; more inside it leans towards, and less displaced in front and behind.
Et li conoissance de sa dislocations dedens si est que quant on joint la jambe malaide avec la sainne, si est plus longe, et apert plus li malaides genous que li sains, et ne puet li malaides doubler son genoil au feu; et est li leus qui est delez enflez d’aposteme chaut, por ceu que li chiés de la cuixe vient lai.	And the knowledge of a dislocation inside is that when one aligns the injured leg with the healthy one, it appears longer, and the injured knee is more exposed than the healthy one. The injured knee cannot bend as far as the healthy one; this is due to the swelling from an abscess, because the head of the femur has moved out of place.
Et li signe de celui cui il vient au defuer, si est que cist accident sont contraire a ces devant.	And the sign of him to whom it comes to fail, is that this accident is contrary to those before.
Et li signes de celui cui avient au devant, si est qu’il estent bien sa jambe selonc l’acomplissement; toutevoie, ne double mie le genoil sens dolor, et s’on le vuet faire aler, si ne puet avant, et retient son urine, et enfle li angre, et quant il vait, si passe sus le talon.	And the signs of him to whom they come before, is that his leg is well positioned; however, he cannot bend the knee without pain, and if one tries to make him walk, he cannot do so and retains his urine, and swells the veins, and when he goes, he passes over the heel.
Et li signes de celui cui il avient derrier, si est qu’il ne puet espandre son genoil, ne doubler, et est celle jambe plus torte de l’autre, et li angre est mollifié, et est li chiés de la cuixe au leu desoz les costes.	And the signs of him to whom it comes behind, is that he cannot extend his knee nor bend it, and this leg is more twisted than the other, and the veins are softened, and the head of the thigh is at the spot below the ribs.
Li ramenemens de ceste semblance de dislocation si est que tu rewarde se li dislocations est anciainne, et elle demore selonc sa disposition, si n’i a nule cure; et n’i covient mie qu’il ait presumption.	The treatment for this sign of dislocation is that you realign it if the dislocation is old, and it remains in its position, then no further treatment is needed; and it must not have any presumption.
Et en celi dont li dislocation est fresche, et c’est des IIII manieres de dislocation, si te haste que tu tornes la jointe, et l’esten dedens et defuer, et la muef a destre et senestre; par aventure si revenra, et n’a mestier d’autre cure.	And in that which concerns the fresh dislocation, and it is of four kinds of dislocation, so hasten that you turn the joint, and stretch it inside and outside, and move it to the right and left; perhaps it will return, and has need of no other treatment.
Et s’il ne revient en ceste maniere, si covient que tu apareilles I ministre fort, et esten la jambe fort a II mains, ou a I liien que soit liiez sus lou genoil; et uns autres ministres estende sa main desus en teil maniere qu’il boute ses mains desoz ses asseles, puis l’estrigne d’un souef liien sus la cuixe; et uns autres tigne lou chief dou liien; et estendent amont et aval tuit a une fois, tant que li malaide soit levez de terre a une fois, et demoure pendans.	And if it does not return in this manner, you must prepare a strong minister, and stretch the leg strongly with two hands, or at the ligament that is tied above the knee; and another minister extend his hand over in such a manner that he places his hands under the patient's armpits, then tie a bandage around the thigh; and another hold the head of the patient; and they stretch up and down all at once, so that the patient is lifted from the ground at once, and remains hanging.
Ceste maniere d’estension si est commune as IIII semblances, et se li dislocation est revenue, si com nos avons dit, c’est bien.	This method of extension is common for the four similarities, and if the dislocation has returned, as we have said, it is well.
Se ceu non, si covient mettre cure a sa semblance Quant li dislocations est au pardedens, si covient que tu sovines le malaide sus son costeit sain, puis met le liien sus la racine de la cuixe, et le leu qui est desoz l’angre, puis estent le liien en haut devers l’angre, et devers la forcele; puis preigne uns autres ministres ses bras, et embraice le gros leu de la cuixe malaide, et l’estende au defuer forment: si revenra a son leu maintenant; et ceste maniere de dislocation est plus legiere des autres.	If not so, it is necessary to treat its similarity. If the dislocation is in the shoulder blade, you must attend to the patient on his healthy side, then place the bandage at the root of the thigh, and below the angle, then set the bandage above the angle and towards the spine; then have another minister embrace the large part of the affected thigh and extend it firmly: it will now return to its place. This method of dislocation is lighter than others.
Et se tu ne la pues serrer en ceste maniere que nos avons dit, si covient que tu lies les II piés dou malaide ensamble d’un fort liien souef sus les II talons, et sus les II genous, et soit li jambe malaide estendue II dois plus que li autres; puis soit pendus sus le chief d’un fust, et soit en sus de terre II bras de lonc; puis comande a I ministre qu’il embraice le chief de la cuixe, et soit uns autres ministres pendans avec le malaide, qui embraice forment la cuixe, car li jointure revient maintenant hastanment.	And if you cannot tighten it in this manner as we have said, it is necessary that you tie the two feet of the patient together with a strong cord above their two heels and knees, and let the affected leg be extended about two lengths more than the other; then hang it from the top of a stake, and suspend the long arms with the patient. Then command one minister to embrace the top of the thigh, and have another minister suspended along with the patient who firmly embraces the thigh, for the joint is now rapidly returning to place.
Et quant li dislocations est au defuer, si gise li malaides, si com nos avons dit en celui qui a gilbositeit, et estraigne I liien sus la jambe malaide proprement, et sus le peis ausi; puis met II tisons, I au chief et I autre as piez, puis fiche I tison entre les cuixes au malaide emmi la forme; et ait plantei de drapelz moistes entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide, puis estende chescuns ministre devers lui, et li mires mette igal a sa main la dislocation.	And when the dislocations are displaced, the patient lies down, as we have said in that which has gilbositeit, and draw the thread above the diseased leg properly, and also on the calf; then place two sticks, one at the head and the other at the feet, then insert the stick between the thighs of the diseased person in the form; and plant moist cloths around, so that it does not blister the diseased person, then stretch each minister toward him, and the eyes place equally to his side the dislocation.
S’elle revient, c’est boin.	And if it returns, that is good.
Se ce non, met sus .ie. table, et le presse ensi com nos avons dit en la gilbositeit, et gise li malaides sus le sain costeit.	And if not, place it on the table and press it as we have said in the gilbositeit, and let the patient lie on the sound side.
Et quant li dislocations est devant, si covient estendre la jambe malaide hastanment, et selonc ce que j’ai dit; et mette li mires sa paine d’estre sus l’angre malaide, puis presse a l’autre main, et l’estent aval devers lou genoil.	And when the dislocation is in front, it must be stretched the bad leg quickly, as I have said; and put the pin to stay above the bad knee, then press with the other hand, and stretch downward toward the knee.
Et se li dislocations est au defuer, si ne covient pas estendre le malaide aval, ne lever sus la terre, ains covient qu’il soit ausi com se li hainche estoit desaluee au defuer, si com nos avons dit dou couchement sus les II hainches; et soit sus sa faice, et li lien estendut si com nos avons dit ci devant, et doit om presser sus la jointure a la table; et sera a point quant li malaides estendra ses jambes, et elles seront igalz; adonques ajoste les cuixes, et met l’emplaustre, et l’estrain d’un bendeil, si que li hainche ne se mueve; et se repose III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie, et met l’emplaustre sus; et se tu vois qu’elles soient igalz, si l’estrain, si com devant, et le laisse III jors; puis le deslie, et lou fai aler belement, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And if the dislocation is on the side, it must not be stretched downward or lifted from the ground, but it should be positioned as if the hip were dislocated to the side, as we have said regarding lying on the two hips; and it should be held with a splint as we said before, and one hand should press at the joint. It will be right when the patient stretches his legs, and they are equal; then adjust the thighs, apply the plaster, and the bandage so that the hips do not move; and let it rest for three or four days, then release it, and apply the plaster again; and if you see that they are equal, hold it as before and let it rest for three days; then release it, and allow the hip to heal properly, until the limb is strengthened.
de la dislocation dou genoil	of the dislocation of the knee
Li genous est desaluez selonc III manieres: c’est a savoir, dedens et defuer, et derrier; et ne desalue point devant.	The knee is dislocated in three ways: namely, internally and externally, and behind; and it does not dislocate in front.
Et li signes si est que tu comande au malaide qu’il plie sa jambe a sa cuixe, et s’ele ne s’aert a sa cuixe, saiches qu’il est desaluez; et li restauration de toutes si est que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et estende sa jambe s’il puet, et li met ton dos sus sa faice, et met son piet sus tes piez; puis pren son genoil a tes paumes, et retrai entre tes dois, puis plie les II costez dou genoil forment; et uns autres ministres estende son piet, tant que li genous reviegne a son leu, et li signes est qu’il aert bien sa jambe a sa cuixe legierement; et met l’emplastre sus, et fai aerdre la jambe a la cuixe, et les loie ensamble fort III jors ou IIII, puis le deslie; et ne se travaille mie li malaides d’aler, tant que li membres soit confortez.	And the signs are that you instruct the patient to bend their leg at the thigh, and if it does not fit against the thigh, know that it is dislocated; and for the restoration of all this, you make the patient sit upright, extend their leg if possible, and place your back against their thigh, putting their foot on yours. Then take their knee with your palms, pull it gently between your hands, and form the two sides of the knee properly. Have other attendants extend their foot until the knee returns to its place, and the sign is that the leg fits easily against the thigh; then apply the plaster and heat the leg to the thigh, binding them tightly for three or four days, after which you release the bindings. The patient should not move much during this time until the limb is strengthened.
Et se li membres n’est a point, si aministre estendement fort, si com nos avons dit en la cure de la hainche, tant qu’il soit sanez	And if the limb is not in place, administer strong extension, as we have said in the treatment of the hip, until it is healed.
de la dislocation dou talon	of the ankle dislocation
Li talons est aucune fois esmeus, et aucune fois desaluez plenement, et dedens et defuer.	The ankle is sometimes injured, and sometimes fully dislocated, both inside and out.
Et li signes si est que li cheville est enflee, et tent avant a la partie ou elle est desaluee: li ramenemens si est legier, et le doit on estendre legierement a ses mains quant il est esmeus soulement.	And the signs are that the ankle is swollen, and protrudes forward to the part where it is dislocated: the correction is slight, and one should gently extend it with their hands when it is only injured.
Et quant il est desaluez dou tot, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide droit, et le tigne I ministres fors par la jambe, desus la cheville; puis trai le piet a toi a ta main destre, et puis a la senestre II fois, puis l’estent en haut, et boute bellement lou piet en haut; et fai ce II fois, si com nos avons dit, em boutant et en traiant lou piet; s’elle revient, c’est bien; se ce non, si rencomence l’ovraige, car il revient; et s’il ne puet revenir ensi, si fai gesir lou malaide sor son dos sus terre, et fiche I passeil fermement en terre entre ses cuixes, et lie drapelz entor, qu’il ne blece lou malaide; puis teigne li ministres la cuixe, et uns autres ministres estende lou piet a ses mains ou a I liien, k’il lie sus le col dou piet; puis estende chescuns ministres igalment, et li passelz soit adés entre les cuixes dou malaide por retenir le malaide quant on l’estent; puis mette li mires igal la dislocation a ses mains, et uns autres ministres teigne la jambe sainne au desoz, et li dislocation revenra hastanment.	And when it is fully dislocated, you must seat the patient upright, and hold them by the ministers outside the leg, above the ankle; then pull the foot towards your right hand, and twice to your left hand, then extend it upwards, and firmly place the foot at the top; do this twice as we have said, by pulling and pulling the foot; if it returns, that is well; if not, restart the procedure, for it will return; and if it cannot return in this way, let the patient lie on their back on the ground, and drive the stake firmly into the earth between their thighs, and tie cords tightly around them to prevent the patient from moving; then hold the thigh of the healthy leg beneath, and another minister extend the foot at their hands or at the ankle, tying it above the foot's neck; then equally extend each minister, and the stake should be placed firmly between the patient’s thighs to keep the patient from moving when they are extended; then place your fingers evenly on the dislocation at your hands, and another minister hold the healthy leg below, and the dislocation will return quickly.
Et quant elle iert a point, si met l’emplastre et estoupes sus, et l’estrain forment, et lie lou piet a la jambe, et warde les ners qui sont sus la cheville derrier, que li liiens ne soit trop estrois; puis le laisse II jors ou III, et se li liiens amolist, si l’estrain; puis le deslie au tier jor ou au quart, et deffent a aler lou malaide par IIII jors; et s’il va devant cel termine, ce n’est mie seurtez qu’il ne desalue encor.	And when it is at point, put the plaster and stops on, strain forment, and tie the foot to the leg, and guard the nerves that are above the ankle behind, that the ligatures not be too tight; then let it for two days or three, and as the ligatures mollify, so unbind; then release at the third day or the fourth, and defend going the patient for four days; and if he goes before this term, it is not safety that he does not dislocate again.
Et se apostemes chaus i vient, si covient que tu l’apaises, si com nos avons dit autre part, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if abscesses chase away, it is necessary that you appease them, as we have said elsewhere, while they are diseased.
des dois	of the two
Quant li doi sont desaluez, si les covient bellement estendre sens travail, et c’est legiere chose.	When the two are dislocated, it is necessary to extend them beautifully with effort, and this is a light matter.
Et se li dislocations est en aucun nout dou dos dou piet, si covient que tu faices seoir le malaide sus I leu plain ou sus .ie. table tot droit, et met ton piet sus ce qui apert de ces jointures, puis presse a ton piet forment, tant qu’il reviegne; et quant il est igalz, et il n’i apert nient, si met desoz la plante dou piet une table a II chiés, puis l’estrain forment, et le laisse III jors, puis le deslie; et le fai reposer, tant qu’il soit sanez.	And if the dislocation is in any part of the back or foot, you must make the patient sit on a plain seat or on a chair completely upright, and place their foot over what appears to be the joint. Then press firmly on their foot until it returns to its proper position; and when it is equal and nothing appears amiss, put a stool under the sole of the foot, then hold firm, and let them rest for three days, after which you release it; and make it rest until it is healed.
de plaie et de dislocation ensamble	Of wounds and dislocations together.
Quant plaie vient avec la dislocation, et on la vuet restorer, maintes fois avient que li malaides muert: si ne soies mie presumptuous en la cure, se tu n’es saiges en l’art et tu ne l’as useit longement, et se tu n’es pitous et misericors et tardis, ne mie hardis; et use au comencement de choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et laisse le malaide en la main Deu, se tu n’i vois esperance de santeit; et quant tu i vois esperance, si ramoinne maintenant le membre au leu, ainsois que li apostemes chaus i viegne; et quant li membres est a leu, si aministre choses apaisans aposteme chaut, et cure la plaie, si com il covient, d’oignemens desiccatis; et se avec la dislocation a brisure, et os menus desevrez, si les oste, et fai ce que nos avons dit en maladies simples; et te garde d’entrer en voie de paour, selonc ce que j’ai dit, car ce te vaut mues selonc ton Creator, et por la saveteit de t’arme et de ton cors.	When a wound comes with dislocation, and one sees hope for its restoration, many times the patient dies: so do not be overly presumptuous in the treatment, if you are not skilled in the art and have not used it long, and if you are not always pitiful and merciful and slow; but at the beginning use calming treatments for hot abscesses, and leave the patient to God, if you see no hope of recovery; and when you see hope, now reset the limb to its place, as the abscesses die away. And when the limb is in place, administer calming treatments for hot abscesses, and treat the wound as it should be with drying ointments; and if there is dislocation with fracture and small broken bones, extract them, and do what we have said in simple diseases; and guard against entering a path of fear, according to what I have said, for this benefits you according to your Creator, and for the knowledge that arms you and your body.
Amen	Amen
