O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre,
For the operation with the hand is considered deprived in our region and in our time, except that somewhat of its knowledge and the traces of it remain; and nothing remains of it but some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have changed greatly and led to errors and superstitions such that the meanings of it are sealed off and its strength and art have been weakened.
And it seems to me that I revive that through the organization of this treatise according to the method of exposition and declaration and abbreviation; and so that it comes with the forms of the tools of cautery and other instruments of the work as well as by adding to the explanation, and by preparing it, which is a necessary cause.
But the reason why no skilled practitioner is found with their hand in our time is that the art of medicine is long, and it requires its practitioner to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which Galen mentions within so that one knows the joints of the members and their forms, and the connection and separation of them; and there is knowledge of the bones, nerves, and veins, and the number of those, and their extension; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and the places of their origin.
And for this reason Hippocrates says that a name does not matter much, but rather in the deed it is small, and especially in the art of the hand.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Here is the translation line by line:
And I saw another doctor who attempted to remove a stone from a man who had suffered in his condition, and the stone was large, and he came to him and extracted that stone with a piece of the bladder, for which that man died on the third day.
And I have already called for extracting it, and saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, he would die during the procedure.
And I saw another doctor who took pay from a duke of our land for surgery, and he came upon a black castrated man who had a fracture in his thigh; and the doctor prepared with his ignorance, extracted the fracture, on the wound, with pillows and splints with strong tension, and did not leave the wound room to breathe.
And then untie the bandage according to his desires, and then dress [the wound], and then keep it dry for some days and command that we untie the binding; and thus remain until the thigh and foot become inflamed, and reach destruction.
And I was called to him, and prepared to loosen the binding, and relief from his pains was achieved.
But however corruption was already confirmed in the member, because it could not be restrained, and the corruption did not cease to spread throughout the member until the patient was in danger.
And you see another doctor who perforated a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated after about those days, during which the malignancy of it was magnified by its lord.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And by this, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation be divided into two parts: one part of the operation which is associated with health, and in the work where there is danger in the most critical conditions.
And I have already expressed this throughout the entire book where I describe an operation in which there is error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to keep this in mind and let go of that, so that the pages do not find a way to speak and disgrace you.
And therefore take up your weapons with diligence and under the protection of God, and treat your patients with happiness and firmness.
And use the best method by the grace of God leading to health and favorable outcomes, and leave behind terrible illnesses that are difficult to heal, and protect yourselves from what makes you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and in your name does not escape you: for more remains to your glory, and further on in this world and later for your sanctities.
When translating this line from the medieval medical treatise: Do not treat a bad illness improperly, so that you are not named as a bad doctor.
And I have already divided this book into three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter is ordered concerning the head to the feet, in the forms of instruments and in the tools of cauteries, and about what is necessary for the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, on drying and piercing, and on cupping, and on plasters, and on the extraction of arrows and similar objects, all chaptered and ordered according to the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the treatment of fractures and similar conditions; a chapter ordered from head to foot, and concerning the forms of the instruments.
It is necessary for me to say the quality of the benefits of that cautery and of its harms, and in what condition cautery is prohibited.
Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the usefulness and harm of cauterization is long and prolix, subtle due to science, and secretively hidden; many wise people have already spoken about it, and there are disagreements among them, and for me, a little bit of their discourses is enough, fearing lengthiness.
And therefore, I say that cautery is beneficial to all complexions universally, whether they are with matter or without matter, except for two complexions, which are cold complexions without matter.
In a cold and dry complexion with matter, there is disagreement; for some say that cautery is beneficial for that, and others say the opposite, that cautery is not suitable for a disease that is caused by heat and dryness, because the nature of fire is heat and dryness, and it is inappropriate to treat a cold and dry disease with something that is burnt and dry.
And let it be said by those who say the opposite, that cautery provides benefit in all cold and dry diseases that occur in human bodies, because when you compare the body of a person and its moistures to the constitution of fire, you find the human body to be moist.
And I say by the speech of that person, who has experienced this to me several times openly.
But nevertheless, this does not apply to one who is already experienced and trained in the chapter of cautery from previous exercises, and has known the diversity of human constitution and the disposition of diseases within them, and their causes, and the accidents related to them, and the duration of time for those.
But in other constitutions, there is no need for fear, especially in cold and humid diseases, for all doctors agree on these, and they do not disagree about treating them with cautery.
And know, sons, that the secret of healing through cautery with fire and its goodness is that it is better than cautery with burning medicine, because fire is simple, and its action only reaches the member being cauterized and does not harm the adjacent members except slightly.
But the action of burning medicine spreads to other members that are nearby, and it can cause a difficult-to-heal disease in the affected member and greatly aggravate it.
But fire, by its sublimity and the goodness of its substance, does not do this; it only purges. And we have known this through experience and long study of the art to understand the truth of the causes. And for this reason, I am excused from a lengthy discourse. But if it were not for the fact that my book has not been read in this brief pause, where the secret is hidden with fire, and the quality of its operation on bodies and its expulsion through which diseases are expelled, demonstrated with philosophical discourse, which would sharpen your minds.
And know, children, that they forget the time in which it is appropriate to perform cautery and consider the best time of spring.
And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, so that the harm caused by accidental timing is overshadowed by the benefit of what is drawn out through cautery, and especially if the cautery is for necessary pains or severe pains, urgent and swift, which do not tolerate delay because it is feared that malevolence may arise from them, which is greater than a small harm entering over time.
And this does not fall upon your steps, or, children, it is only valued by the common people and foolish doctors; thus, for that disease which is healed by cautery it is not always recommended, and its consequences are paused.
And the cause is not as they think it to be for this, because a cautery is only in place of medicine which alters the composition and dries out the humors which are the cause of the pains.
And yet, cauterizations that are excessive on the medicine due to the desire for its health and the virtue of its operation and the greatness of its master.
And it is possible that their illness may return at some time in the future, according to the condition of the patient and the location of their illness, and the strength of them, and what is prepared in the body due to the accumulation of excesses within them, and what is acquired by them through food and similar causes; but if the illness for which a cautery is administered is a subtle illness in a member with few excesses and humidities, like a dental cautery for pain and similar treatments, it is possible that such pain will not return to them, although this happens rarely.
And it is commonly said that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this saying is true, not in the way many understand it, for I believe it is not a cure that truly benefits either through medicine or any other cause without cautery.
And the cause is contrary to that; the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine is only when we administer methods of cure in certain illnesses, and those medicines do not confer benefit, and then at the end of treatment, one administers cautery, and it proves effective for that. And here, in this context, cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding of the common people and too many foolish doctors.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they only said this because of the purity of gold and the excellence of its substance.
And they said that the site of cautery does not matter, which is not absolutely true, for I have experienced this and found that it only applies to some bodies more than others, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron as they claimed; however, when you perform cautery using fire and gold, it is not entirely clear, because it ignites according to the quantity you want due to the hardness of the gold, which prepares to receive heat; and if you place it over a flame, the gold melts from the fire, and some flakes fall into the fire, causing inconvenience for the practitioner.
And because of this, cautery with iron should be performed more lightly and more precisely to ensure the correctness of the operation.
And I have already organized this chapter concerning the cautery according to chapters, and I have arranged those of the head among the feet, so that I can quickly provide the inquirer with what they seek from it.
The first chapter.
This cauterization confers dryness and heat on the affected area, which are the causes of numerous rheumatic fluxes, called running nose, from the head to the ends of the fingers and ears, as well as excessive sleeping, toothache, and sore throat, and universally all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cauterization is as follows: first, order the patient to be cleansed with a purgative medicine for three or four nights, according to the strength of the patient, their age, and their habits.
And then command that they shave their head with a razor. Then have the patient sit between your hands on a low bench and place their hands on their feet.
And then place the palm of your hand near the nose between their fingers, close to the nostrils. However, when your middle finger has reached the spot, mark that place with a probe, and then heat the olive cautery, which is of this form:
And then place that over the marked area with a bandage, in such a way that it descends gradually, with which your hand should gradually tighten it, and you turn that.
And then lift your hand lightly and look at the area, and if you see any part of the bone uncovered, about the size of a grain of barley, then raise your hand; and if it does not return with that tool, use another one, if it is cooled down, until the bone appears as I have told you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the area and leave it there for three days.
And then place over it a piece dipped in oil and leave it there until the heat of the inflammation is destroyed. And then treat the area with a tetrapharmacum ointment until it is healed.
And they say that when the wound remains open, it is better to wash it frequently, because it is healthier and more beneficial.
And some of them say that the area around the bone should be cauterized, and the cautery should be held until some part of the bone's substance adheres to it.
And then scrape away what is adhered to the bone, and then clean it.
And others said that with the cautery reach the hip, press strongly into the bone until it smokes, and this is the method of small alphectomy. And they believe that from that place, vapors rise from the head.
And if the wound is kept open for a long time, then it should be treated before it becomes consolidated.
But I have not seen these two types of cautery used on everyone, but rather only on some people out of fear; and leave that aside, you must tell me, it is better for health when it is so; for the head is damaged by the disruption of its continuity just as we have testified in other parts of the body, and especially when the patient's head is of a fragile nature.
And the first type of cautery is safer and better, you must tell me; and from that use and perform it for health.
Second chapter.
About the cautery of the head.
When chronic and prolonged pain occurs throughout the head and persists in the patient, and treatments such as scrapes, poultices, head cleansings, plasters, ointments, salves, and similar remedies have been used without success, especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that has not proven effective, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong constitution by nature; and if it is not fragile and you find significant coldness, then cauterize it with another type of cautery for a short time. And then cauterize that area on top of his head using a cautery until the vein is severed. Cut the vein and expose the amount that has been recounted from the bone, then cauterize it with a cautery at the back of the head in the spot called the sinus, which is the location where the suction cup is placed. And lift your hand in this procedure, and do not expose the bone, for the patient will find much greater pain from this than from all other cautery procedures on the head.
And I want to describe this cautery in its proper place, because the cautery with which you cauterize the forehead and the occiput should be finer than that with which the middle of the head is cauterized; and this is its form.
Third chapter.
On the cautery of non-traditional migraines.
When severe pain occurs in the part of the head or is felt within the eye, first purify the head with medicines and administer the other treatments that I have mentioned in the sections on diseases; if all this does not help, then cautery can be applied in two ways: either with an acute burning medicine, or with iron.
And using a cautery with medicinal burn is that you should take an onion, and clean it and bind its extremities from both ends. And then cut into the painful area on the temple with a slanted lancet so that it reaches the affected spot, where the pain is hidden.
And then apply pressure on it with a bandage using constant compression, and leave it for the space of three hours; and then remove the bandage and place the area in the open air, and let the wound heal for two or three days, and then place something over it soaked in balm until the spot becomes warm.
And then treat that area with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, do this with some cauterizing medicines, which I have written about in the second treatise on cauterizing medicines.
Also, perform cauterization with an iron according to this method: prepare the cautery iron which has the following form:
It is called a "clavilh," because the end of it resembles the shape of a clove with some curvature, and in the middle part of it, there is a small protrusion.
And then place it over the painful area, and hold your hand — so that the artery beneath does not stick — and rotate the iron little by little with speed.
And if the quantity of it that is adhered by the pressure of the chain is such that half of it, and lift your hand so that the artery is not pressed which is below, so that there does not come a flow of blood.
And then soak cloth in salt water and place it on the area, and leave it there for three days; and then apply cloth moistened with ointment, and then treat with salve until it is healed.
And if you must, cauterize using the tip of the surgical knife as a cautery, and be careful not to cut the artery in this non-traditional migration area.
Capitol quart.
From the cauterization of ancient migraines.
When you treat migraines with what we have said about the previous treatment and what we have said in the divisions of diseases, and if the treatment is not effective, and sometimes because of the illness, what we have said about the first cautery with medicine or the cautery with fire is not enough for him, then it is necessary that you heat the scalpel cautery until it becomes white-hot, since you mark the location of the pain with a line as long as half a finger, or something similar; and then place your hand over it once and press it so that you cut through the artery and reach the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to be cautious about the continuation of the jaw, which is damaged by chewing, and that the tendon does not adhere, and the nerve that moves it does not spasm.
And if it is about the protection and caution of blood flow from an artery that is to be cut, for in cutting it there is fear, especially for one who does not know what he is doing and is inexperienced and rash; and he leaves the operation at its beginning.
And I come with a reminder of the regimen for blood flow accidents from arteries according to its manner, in its place in this book.
And if you see that this disease is not alleviated by this cautery and the body of the patient seems to tolerate it, cauterize that spot in the middle of the head as we have recounted, and treat the plague until it is healed.
And if you wish, administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on arrow wounds with a cautery having two blades, and this kind of cauterization is better and more appropriate.
Capitol .v.
Of the cauterization of ear pains.
When pain in the ear comes from cold and is treated with laxative causes and with the other cure that I have mentioned in the division, and if the pain does not diminish, then apply the cautery, which has the name puncta, of which this is the form:
And then puncture near the inflammation, and lead it around the entire ear just as a wheel is turned, or in the circle of each part if the pain is in each one. And then gradually extend with the cautery from the rim of the ear as you sense the area with your hand.
And if the cautery of pointed tips is applied all over the ear, clean that area, and then treat the places in between to ensure they heal.
Chapter VI.
On the cautery of tumors.
A tumor that is treated with cautery is one of the types that come from phlegm, as we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases.
The cautery is not suitable for the type of tumor that results from drying or spasm of the nerve.
When you treat that type of tumor with diets and purges and fumigations, and if your treatment does not improve the condition, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first at the edge of the ear, the second slightly below its temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the diseased part, because softening does not occur except in the part that appears healthy.
And the method of cautery is to apply the cautery directly at the upper part of the outer ear slightly above the horn of the head, and on the temple in another place, the length of which should be according to the length of the little finger, and keep your hand with the cautery until half the thickness of the area has been burned.
And this is the shape of the cautery, and it is made of iron, the shape of which has been previously described. However, it is more refined if you see it somewhat like this; and it is necessary to reduce any excessive thickness a little.
Then treat the area with what has been previously processed until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
On the cautery of old apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you treat it with what we have said but your treatment does not take effect and the patient has no fever, then apply cautery at four points: on all the horns of their head; and in the middle of the head as we have said; and with a cautery on the nape. And the method of the cautery is done according to what has been said above.
And it has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more behind; then it should be treated with what you proceed with.
Chapter VIII.
On cautery for forgetfulness caused by flame.
Give to the patient at the beginning juniper berries and pills that purify the seed.
Then shave the entire head of the patient and apply a plaster of cerate, as described in the treatise on plasters, to their skull.
And apply that several times, for that is a method of cautery. And do this according to the order of the doctors I have already mentioned.
And if he is well healed by those methods; but if not, then apply three cauteries to the back part of his head, which should descend from the highest part of the head towards the lower part near the neck. And leave between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and then treat the cautery with what has been prepared.
And if you apply more intensity and the patient can tolerate it, then make the cautery in the middle; and if you want even more intensity, now cauterize it over both sides.
Then treat that area until it heals; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form previously given.
Chapter IX.
On the cautery of the appendix and the relaxation of the entire body.
You should proceed with the relaxation of the head using jars and what we have said; then shave the patient's head, and then cauterize it in the middle of the head with a cautery, and with cauteries on all sides of the head, and with a cautery on the back part of it, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the disease of the body's excessive relaxation and the patient can tolerate it while the disease is severe, then cauterize it with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and finally with a cautery until the swelling of the spine subsides, and lift your hand. And then treat that which needs healing, and this should be done with an olive cautery.
It appears you've provided a section marker or heading, "Capitul .x.", which likely means "Chapter 10" in an old text. Without more context or content from the chapter, I can't provide a translation or summary. If you have specific text from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, please feel free to share it!
This phrase appears to be in an archaic form of a Romance language, similar to medieval Latin or early Italian/Spanish/French. It translates to:
No es cauterizat le epilemtic sino aquella epilemcia es per flecma.
And therefore, it is necessary to treat the brain of the patient at the beginning with herbs and with the other cure that we have mentioned in the section when the illness is severe and the patient can tolerate the exception of the medicines.
And if it is a child who cannot tolerate the medicines, then administer small doses and mix them with masticatory substances that are easily digestible for several days beforehand, improving the food.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and with another cautery on the back of the head, and on each temple of the head it is also cauterized. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize that with the cauteries I have mentioned, having paralysis and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And let it be an olive cautery according to what is preceded.
And if the patient is a child, then apply a subtle cautery according to this method.
Chapter XI.
On the cauterization for melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize that area with the cauteries we have mentioned in the section on paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess that turns to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give them something to drink that purifies their brain according to what has been mentioned previously in the division.
Then shave the head of the patient, then properly apply a decoction made from it around the circle, and then place that in the middle of the head.
And the patient should sit sideways, and be held from all sides.
Then apply an ointment; and it is better to use old sheep's fat. And warm that over the fire with moderate heating by measure, which is said to be endured when it is more in it. And then place that in the middle of his head within the circle, and leave it inside so that it is warmed.
And do this with the patient for one week, following another regimen of good food until he is healed; or if you wish, cauterize that area making small points according to what is best for him, but ensure that your hand holds a cautery so arranged: this is a type of cautery which moistens the brain equally.
And then place that cloth soaked in vinegar or in ashes of wine lees.
Capitol .xii.
Of the cautery of water descending into the stomach.
When it is declared that water begins in the bile by the signs which I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient something that cleanses his head, and protect it from all moisture.
And let that person sweat in a bath for several days.
And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that area with a cautery at the center of the head; then cauterize that area with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of water retention in both eyes, or from one side if it is the start of an issue in one eye.
And with the cautery, incise all the veins and arteries that are below the chin; and place the cauteries at that length along the width of the temples.
And be careful of blood flows when it is being cauterized; and if you see any blood flow, stop it with some medicine, which is available to you.
And I come with wisdom in the extraction of arteries and the cutting of them and caution with blood flows.
And sometimes it is cauterized on the head between two bones with two specially made cauteries.
Chapter XIII.
On the cauterization of old tears.
When tears of the eyes are old and persistent and travel through the veins and arteries that are visible on the surface of the head, and it is confirmed that this is due to excessive cold phlegm, then cauterize that area with a cautery as described in the chapter on the beginning of water flowing into the eyes. Use a cautery at the middle of the head and two cauteries between the temples, and two cauteries between the bones at the back of the head. And if additional treatment is needed, then cauterize the area on the outer side of the eye socket above the eyebrow endpoint with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.
From the cauterization of nasal odor.
When you treat that ailment with what we have said in the division and your treatment does not improve, then prepare and give to drink to the patient decoctions for three nights; and then shave his head, and cauterize the ailment moderately with olive oil cautery. And then cauterize that area with a clover-shaped cautery, using two cauters on both eyebrows, leaving the hair slightly untouched.
And be careful of the artery so that you do not burn it.
And this is the form of the clamp cautery.
Chapter XV.
On the cautery for softening the eyelids of wounds.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by disease or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
And if you do, cauterize that area above both eyebrows a little with two cauteries in all parts, and extend them towards the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand using the cautery, but to the extent that one-third of the eyelid is attached.
Chapter XVI.
On the cautery of the eyelid of the eye when the hairs turn inward and poke the eye.
When the hairs of the nose are converted into internal parts in such a way that they irritate the nose, cautery is performed on those areas in two ways, either by iron or by burning medicine.
If you burn with fire, command the patient before this to shave their hairs just as those which are cleaned, so that they are shortened and leveled; and if you need to, pluck them from their roots, then hold the skin of the area with a bandage so that it is not harmed until the hairs have grown back.
When the hairs have grown back and are leveled, then place the head of the patient in your lap, and then apply something over the eyelids of the area with a tent-shaped device, which should be according to the shape of a leaf of merta, and the beginning of the device should be close to the hairs.
And then apply something soaked in egg white or in a paste of flour on the wound.
And then heat the cautery, which has this shape.
And then cauterize over the figure which you have marked, little by little, in small sections, until the surface of the chain, which appears like a myrtle leaf, is completely burned.
And the sign of health in your work is that you see the eyelid of the wound already contracted and the hairs standing up from the puncture of the wound.
And then raise your hand and leave it like that for three days, and then apply something on it with bandages until the scar is healed. And then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
But if any cause returns through the hairs near their root and the eyelid is softened, then apply the cautery again over that area just as you did initially.
And if the hairs are in the eyelid area, then cauterize that place so that it is raised to its natural position and smoothed out so that the hairs do not irritate the eye.
And the cauterization with burning medicine commands the patient to pull out the hairs so that they are extended and smoothed, and then make a shape like a miter leaf from linen cloth.
Then take soap known and fresh ashes in the amount of an uncia or however much is needed, and thoroughly mix those ingredients without cooling them; then spread this over the linen cloth that has been made in the shape of a miter leaf, and place it on one eye or both; and let the eye be covered immersed in egg white, and the patient's head should be in your hand.
And place your finger on the medicine and press it slightly without damaging it until the patient feels the sting of the medicine, for the sting is like that of fire.
And when you perceive that the intense sting has occurred, then remove the medicine and wipe it away with your finger; once the sting ceases, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water; now consider if the eyelid has already been raised as needed, and if so, clean the constriction with fire or incision, for it is then done well; but if not, return to applying the medicine on the area where it did not take effect and continue until your operation is smoothed out and the eye contracts.
And then place over the wound a barrier so that the bond of adhesion is prevented, and then treat it with an ointment or another substance to promote healing.
And it is necessary for you to perform your operation with vigilant diligence so that no part of the medicine falls into the eye, and if the eyelid becomes softened near those days and any cause of hair punctures the eye, then reapply your medicine to the area where the eyelid has been softened, just as you did at the beginning, and then surround it with a substance that promotes healing.
And this is the form of the mithra leaf.
And know that the veins of men are diverse according to their size and smallness, and therefore according to this your treatment is made.
And the path to complete knowledge should not be hidden from one who studies this art.
It seems like you've provided a chapter or section heading, "Capitol .xvii.", which likely translates to "Chapter XVII" in English. This indicates the start of the seventeenth chapter in a text. If you need further translation or information from this chapter, please provide more context or text.
On the cautery of a fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the eye.
When you treat a fistula as we have said in the divisions of diseases and your treatment does not agree, then it is necessary that you cauterize it according to this method: command the patient to place their head on your shoulder, and hold the patient’s head with one of your assistants between your hands in such a way that it is not moved or agitated with their own head.
Then apply some infused oil or a poultice of lint on the wound of the patient.
Then ignite the cautery, which has the following form:
which should be hollow, like the shape of a reed or a vulture's quill, at one end where the cautery is made.
And if you wish, it can penetrate through the other end. And if you want, let it be done in such a way that it penetrates.
However, the one that is concave is better for your work.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and extract the pus from it and dry that area. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
And then place on it the cautery which is well ignited, and hold that with your hand a little distance from the nose, so that your hand does not burn or disturb the patient, and then place the cautery on the nostril and char that area.
And if at the beginning of your cautery you penetrate into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, as needed; and leave it that way for three days, and then place a poultice on that wound and surround it with a drying ointment until it heals.
But if ten days have passed and it is not healed, then apply a sharp corrosive medicine to it until the bone is exposed and scraped as appropriate in its chapter.
And there is another method of cautery for a fistula which some earlier practitioners described: insert into the site of the fistula and open it, then place in that fissure a thin wire that matches its shape; and pour into that an amount equal to one inch of melted lead; hold the wire firmly with your hand so that the patient is not moved so that the melted lead does not reach beyond that area; it is necessary to place over the patient’s fistula site something like egg white or water, because lead adheres to the location of the fistula and heals it through a miraculous healing process.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, that is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a probe into the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose so that it returns to its proper place.
Capitol .xviii.
From the cautery of the split in the foot.
When white motes cause splits in the lips, especially in the lips of children,
Therefore, when you treat those fissures with what we have said in the divisions and your treatment is not effective, then use the small knife-like cautery according to this form that is shown:
And let the cavity be adjusted according to the delicacy of that area.
And place that heated instrument carefully into those fissures so that the cautery reaches the bottom of the fissures.
And then treat it with ointment until it heals.
Chapter XIX.
On the cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
When an abscess forms at the root of the uvula or on the palate or at the roots of the teeth, and then it swells, and then it bursts, and then it becomes old, and pus flows out and a fistula is formed, and if you treat it but it does not improve toward healing, then you must ignite a cautery according to the size that fits into the fistula. Then insert that ignited cautery into the track of the fistula, holding your hand so that the heated iron reaches the bottom of it; this procedure is done once or twice. And then treat it with what we have mentioned for healing until it heals.
And if the pus is separated and it heals, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to expose the area and remove the corrupted bone, as will be detailed in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.
Of cautery of the teeth and of softening of the veins.
When the veins are softened by humidity and the teeth are painful, and you treat those with medicines but without success, then place the head of the patient on your knee, and then apply the cautery in such a way that when you place the quill over the tooth, you quickly insert the ignited cautery into it, and hold your hand slightly so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching to the root of the tooth.
Then remove your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
Then the patient should rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and afterward spit it out, for the painful tooth is fixed, the softened gum is strengthened, and the corrupted humidity is dried.
Chapter XXI.
On the cautery for toothache.
When toothache is caused by cold, or if it is frozen or inflamed, or if you do not achieve healing with medicine, then apply cautery in two ways: either use cow dung for the cautery, or use fire.
Here is the translation line by line:
And then repeat that several times until the heat from the fire reaches the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, soak wool or cloth in the aforementioned mixture, place it on the painful tooth, and put a heated iron over it until the heat reaches the core of the tooth's cavity.
However, when cauterizing with fire, you should pay attention to the thickness of the tube or iron, and it should have some roughness in the core so that the intensity of the heat does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then heat the cautery to the shape it will take, and place it on the tooth while holding your hand until the cautery is cooled; do this several times until the pain is reduced, whether on that day or the next day.
And it is necessary that, due to the application of that cautery, the patient fills their mouth with a good mixture and holds it for an hour, then rinse it out; this is the form of the cautery.
And cauterize whichever extremity you wish according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the cannula:
Capitol .xxii.
Of the cauterization of extrophetus (likely meant to be "extrophalus," a term referring to hernias or protrusions).
When the hernias are caused by phlegm and cold humors and do not obey digestion through medicines and you wish to digest those lightly, then you ignite the cautery in the shape of which is as follows, having two hooked ends so that smoke comes out from one end, and place that ignited cautery over that swelling once, and repeat if necessary until it reaches the core of the swelling.
And if the abscess is small, then apply the cautery according to the size of the abscess, and afterwards leave it for three days and place something over it so that what the fire has burned is covered until it is healed.
And then treat it with ointment and bandages until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On the cautery for hoarseness of voice and constriction of the windpipe.
When the humidities affect the canal of the lung, especially when this is due to cold constitution, then it is necessary that the patient be treated initially with laxative medicines, and then apply cautery to the appropriate area at the base of the throat in the affected region.
And be careful not to penetrate too deeply with the cautery into the throat, and do not burn more than a little of the tissue there.
And cauterize that area with another cautery at the joint of the neck in the last vertebra of the patient. And the cautery of it should be done with a heated needle following the previous method.
And then treat that with what is used before it heals.
Capitol .xxiiii.
Of the cautery of lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are caused by infiltrating humidities, and the patient does not have fever or tuberculosis and it is an old illness, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the collarbone at the places of the upper and lower ends; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot between the two mounds; and let the cautery be in the shape of a claw as per the previous form.
And if you wish, let your cautery be a point using the cautery that is called puncta, the form of which you precede in the puncturing for ear pain.
And let there be points inside the eyes at those locations; then treat that with the method that is preceded, until it is healed.
And let the cautery have three ridges for this kind of cautery: with one application, you can make three cauteries according to this form.
Chapter XXV.
On the cautery for titillic, which is at the top of the helper [likely referring to a specific part of the body or an assistive structure].
When the head of the joint is dislocated due to lubricating humidities and does not stay fixed during its return, you must place its dislocation in such a way that it customarily returns, and then with a slight movement, it is dislocated so as to be felt, just as we have testified; therefore, first reduce the dislocation, and then the patient should be turned over onto their back or side; and then lift the tendon which is inside the joint upwards with your left hand's fingers if the joint is dislocated on the inside.
And then heat the cautery which has two heads; and this is its form:
And then cauterize the tendon so that it penetrates from one side to the other; and the result will be a figure formed by four-headed cauteries.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this method, and that is why the cauteries are eight.
And then place salt on the cautery points, and subsequently ensure that the patient is calm, and do not move the limb for some time until it is comforted.
And if the dislocation is in the upper part and this has occurred, then cauterize over the muscle with a chisel cautery or with multiple pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed, the humidity is reduced, and the patient is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On the cauterization of the stomach.
When cold and various humidities come into the stomach and that part deviates from its composition and increases phlegm in it, and if you continue with the methods of treatment but do not confirm this, then the patient should lie on their back, extend their hands and thighs, and then cauterize that area with three cauteries: place one cautery under the feet to the length of a finger using a chisel cautery, and with two other cauteries beside each side of the first cautery so that it forms a triangular shape; space them out so they do not touch to avoid excessive burning.
And if the depth of the cautery is two-thirds the thickness of the chain.
And the shape of the cautery should be according to this form with this addition: And if you wish, use a large cautery in the middle of the stomach area as per this form; and this should be a circular-shaped cautery according to this form.
And let the stomach be cauterized punctually for those who are afraid of this cautery: it is that you place upon the stomach points according to the quantity you wish with a probe, and then cauterize those points with a cautery; and then treat it with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Chapter XXVII.
On the cauterization of cold spleen.
When pain in the spleen occurs due to cold or moisture or excessive wind that deviates from its normal composition by superfluous discharge, and if the patient is treated with what we have said but does not improve, then the patient should be made to lie on their back, and you place three cauteries according to this form and this quantity right over the spleen below the hypochondria, taking care of the position of the body.
And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straight.
And do not move the cautery with your hand.
And if the quantity that is added equals half the weight of the chain, and it is not adjusted more; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them lie down, with their limbs already extended, and raise their arms.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these areas with a knife-shaped cautery, when you are subtle and prudent in the art.
And be careful not to proceed too much in the cauterization, and attach the weight of the entire chain so that the whole body is attached and reaches inside the intestines, for the chain here is subtle; and be aware of this.
Chapter XXVIII.
Of puncturing an abscess of the liver with a cautery.
When there is an excrescence or abscess in the liver and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient will experience heaviness and pain which is intensified.
And if it is in the membrane of the liver, then the pain is greatly intensified and often even exhausts the doctors' efforts to cure it.
Therefore, the patient should be turned over on their back; then examine the site of the abscess with a probe; then heat the cautery which is shaped like a rod, the form of which was described on the previous page. And cauterize with that cautery until all the pus is drained, until it reaches the core, until it no longer discharges pus.
Then treat it in the same way as other abscesses until it is healed.
And this form of cautery should only be used by those whose study in the art of medicine is extensive, and who have knowledge of many illnesses; however, one might sometimes dare to attempt this operation with experience, but it is better to leave it to those who are skilled.
Capitol .xxix.
From the text provided and the structure of the language used, it seems like an old form of Romance languages mixed with medieval medical terminology. The phrase "De cauterizacio de plauresi" can be broken down as follows:
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor,
And then submerge it in oil and dry it by the fire; then cauterize with a cautery at that place which is between the continuation of the collarbone and the neck; and with two small cauters guide them, slightly inclining towards the part below the beard; and with two cauters on that which declines between the fifth rib and the spine, slightly inclined to the parts behind; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot; and with another over the stomach, and with three cauters at the parts behind; and with one cautery at that place which is between the two shoulders, and with two cauters on each side of the foot, placing the cautery which is between both shoulders.
And you do not need to hold the cautery with your hand, but rather apply it at the site of the wound itself.
And the ancients have also said that some people use an iron cautery resembling a ray and heat it, then apply it to the area between the ribs, until they reach the abscess and the pus is evacuated, just as we have described for the abscess of the liver.
And in this perforation with cautery there is no fear, for one dies as soon as you intervene at the site of the fistula which cannot be healed.
The text provided seems to be in a medieval Romance language with similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. However, the line you've asked for translation is simply "Capitul .xxx." which appears to be indicating the beginning of chapter 30 (".xxx" being Roman numerals for thirty).
Regarding the cauterization of the tonsils.
When you treat the disease of the armpit with what we have said about treatment in the division and if your treatment does not achieve results, then cauterize it according to three methods, all of which are correct. One of these is to make three or four linear cauteries along the length of the armpit according to the shape of the cautery for fat, the shape of which has preceded [been previously described].
And there should be the thickness of a finger or a little more between each cautery, and the method of the cautery should be the method we have mentioned for fat cauterization as well.
And do not move your hand during the cautery; and the patient should be lying on their back.
And another method of cauterization is to burn the cautery very intensely, the cause of which we have mentioned in the chapter on muscle dislocation, and lift the chain that is along the armpit towards the side where the patient lies on their left side.
And let your elevation, with which you lift the chain, be according to the length of the body, so that cauteries are made according to the width of the body.
And then insert the two burning cauterizing agents into that area where you penetrate with them from one side to the other.
And then remove the cautery; and thus four cauteries are made.
And if you want, cauterize with a cautery having three vents.
And then you treat the cautery after it has stopped bleeding for several days, because it is more convenient than other preceding causes in the treatment.
Capitol .xxxi.
From the cautery of dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.
When you treat the dropsical with the methods of cure which we have mentioned in the division and do not achieve your treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize using four cauteries around the navel and one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the spleen, and another cautery on the liver, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and a cautery at the center of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach. And the depth of the cautery should be determined according to the sharpness of the instrument.
Then leave the cautery open so that it burns for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient from treatment immediately after the cautery because it is necessary for two intentions to be added to it, and thus it will quickly aid in their recovery.
The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be claw-like, according to the previously described form, and the shape of the cautery with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped, according to its previously described form.
Capitol .xxxii.
Of cautery of feet and of the thighs.
When the feet are inflamed with dropsy and filled with watery fluid, you should cauterize the feet on the sole of the foot near what is between the thumb and the little finger, lift your hand with the cautery without twisting it; then raise your hand, but do not completely return it, because the watery fluid subsides.
The cautery should be in this form: Then make two cauteries on both thighs, and on each thigh a cautery should be made with the blade end of the knife-shaped cautery. And the cautery should be according to the length of the thigh: place one at the top and the other at the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauteries.
And leave the wound open for a long time so that some water may drain from it.
Then treat it with those causes which we have mentioned.
Chapter XXXIII.
Of the cautery of the abdominal area.
When the abdominal area is weakened by cold and moisture that debilitate its functions, those being digestive and retentive which are in the stomach and intestines, it should be treated with curative methods and not through confusion, and sometimes patients may suffer from a cautery to exhibit strength, then you should cauterize that area with a large cautery on their stomach according to the previous cautery of the stomach, using a circular cautery and four small subtle cauteries around the navel, with a subtle claw-shaped cautery; and also use a cautery on the alcatin over aloes gran, or with two cauteries.
And if you remove the excessive humidity and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize that on the penis and on the intestines, and strongly apply two cauteries over the stomach and near the groin, for this is a perfectly effective cure which cannot be wrong.
Capitol .xxxiv.
Of the cauterization of old hemorrhoids.
When it is in the nature of old hemorrhoids or one of thick humors infiltrating or corrupted humidities, and they are treated with what we have said in the division and you do not agree with your own treatment, then cauterize with three cauteries on the pus near the lower spine and small triangular area, and with a cautery above the navel by two fingers.
And if you suspect that the stomach of the patient is chilled and their food is not digested, and their face sometimes becomes inflamed, then cauterize that area over the stomach with a large cautery as previously indicated; and with one cautery on the spleen, and another cautery on their liver with a claw-shaped cautery, and leave the cautery open for some time, and then treat them internally so that they may be healed.
Chapter XXXV.
On the cauterization of the throat near the removal of them (the tonsils).
When you cut away the tonsils, then heat the cautery that resembles a ray. And introduce that fire into the severed artery, and finally place your hand inside so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood comes.
And do this once or twice, for if they are too many [points], then cauterize each of them as we have recounted, and afterwards treat those with whatever ointment you deem appropriate until it is healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery over an ulcer, it is more delayed in healing.
The given text appears to be in an archaic or constructed language that has elements of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The term "Capitol" followed by ".xxxvi." seems like it might indicate a chapter number (Chapter 36). Here is my attempt at translating this particular line:
Of the cautery of fistulas that are formed naturally in the regions of the body.
When nature does not obey the treatment we have recommended for it, and the patient is frightened by this, they should be treated with cautery.
When someone has an old fistula in the natural posterior region, and it discharges pus and corrupted moisture, what is most appropriate to do is to probe it with a fine needle, and then determine the depth of it with the aforementioned needle.
Then heat the cautery that resembles a ray. Then apply the heated cautery to this fistula according to the depth measured by the probe.
And repeat the cautery on that area until those corrupted tissues are thoroughly burned, once or two or three times, according to the extent of your need.
And be careful not to burn the nerves and veins; or if the fistula extends to the body of the bladder or the intestines, be cautious around all those areas; do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy area and you think it is not penetrating deeply.
And then treat the area so that it may heal.
And if the area is sealed, and its materials are cut off from it, and remains this way for a long time, then you know that it is entirely cured.
And if the materials are not removed from it, then you know that they are penetrating either into the marrow of the corrupted bone or that this comes from those causes which will lead to a recurrence in its place.
Chapter XXXVII.
On the cauterization of hemorrhoids.
When hemorrhoids cause pain due to cold or excessive wind (gas), and because of this, the sitting of the patient is hindered, then it is necessary to cauterize those areas over the hemorrhoids with a cautery, applying a nail-shaped cautery specifically to each hemorrhoid to prevent recurrence.
And strongly cauterize them with the second one slightly apart, so that three linear cauteries will result, and thus they will be more effective in healing.
Capitol .xxxviii.
Of the cautery of the bladder.
When you encounter a bladder that is weakened and softened by cold and moisture to the point where the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize it in the part just below the bladder, where the pubic hair begins. Cauterize with one cautery on the right side, and with another on the left side of it.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the number of stones in the bladder; cauterize that with a cautery on the lower part of the back, or with two cauters if necessary.
And let the cautery be in the shape of a clamp according to how it is processed.
The line "Capitol .xxxix." appears to be an indication of a chapter or section number in Roman numerals. In English, this can be translated as:
Of the cauterization of the thigh.
When cold and humidity come to the thigh, and for this reason impregnation is prohibited, and the menstrual flow of women is corrupted, and the provocation of it is delayed, and pain occurs due to the retention of it, then the area must be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery on the most affected side, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be like a claw.
Chapter XL.
On the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
When cold and moist humors are infused into the area of the ankle, and they cause it to slip out of its proper place, a sign of this is that one leg appears longer than the other when compared. And the site of the dislocation is identified where there is pain.
Then it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the area of the ankle with a circular cautery, after you have marked the site with your finger around the dislocated area as it has turned, and in such a way that the dislocation falls at the center of the circle.
And here is the translation of the given line:
And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize that area with three olive-sized large cauteries.
And let the cautery be performed according to the extent of the spread throughout the entire chain; then treat that which needs healing within.
It appears you've provided a chapter or section heading, "Capitul .xli.", which translates to "Chapter XLII" in English, assuming the Roman numeral ".xli." refers to 41 and is followed by the next sequential number. If this is part of a larger text or if you need further assistance with translation or context related to this chapter heading, feel free to ask!
On the cautery of the sciatic vein.
When pain comes to the upper part of the body and is caused by cold and moisture, the patient is treated with what we have said and do not add anything else, for this is outdated. Now you must purge the patient of thick humors with foul pills or artificial pills or similar ones; then cauterize that area.
And the method of cautery in this case is according to two methods: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
It is done according to two known methods, one of which is to cauterize that area on the broad part of it with three triangular cauteries in this form; and make a good depth with those. And the space between each cautery should be the quantity of the thickness of a finger, and the cautery should be olive or grain-shaped.
Sometimes the cautery should be placed directly on the top of the ankle, making four cauteries in total.
And if you wish, cauterize with a circle, which precedes the form in the cautery of the dislocation of the ankle, where the circle should contain and burn the entire length of the tendon.
And this is the method of cautery for gout when pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.
But if the pain extends into the thigh, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the thigh at the location where you ask the patient where the pain is; and with one cautery on the calf, about four fingers away from the outer part.
And if the cautery is knife-like, and the depth of the cautery should be according to the degree of protrusion of the chain.
And if the patient tells you that the pain is spreading around the area near the toes of the feet, then cauterize that area where they indicate with a cautery using three points or four or more if needed from there.
And if the patient tells you that the pain is moving from the knee to the thigh, then cauterize that area with a blade-shaped cautery.
And be careful in all cauterizations that you do not use the cautery so much that you burn nerves or major arteries, and by this means, you do not harm the patient or cause contraction.
And I have seen some who cauterized on the ankle and continued the cauterization so excessively that the burning heat swelled until it reached the foot, and the fire penetrated and corrupted the entire foot. Then a strong discharge from the stomach occurs, and as a result, death may follow.
And if the pain is in two separate parts, cauterize each one according to this method.
And the wise ones said thus in the cauterization with this type of cautery, of which this is the method: make a circle of iron whose circumference is half a palm; and its hole should be as wide as a date bone or slightly less.
And within that circle there is another third; and the space between them is the width of a thumb; and those circles are opened from both sides; and the length of those rods is one or two thumbs, and make on those edges of iron decently arranged in the circles; and this is the form of it:
And it should be ignited in the fire until it reddens and sparks, and then it should be placed on the affected area of the ankle, with the patient lying on their side. And therefore, cauterize that area with three round cauteries at once.
Then leave that for three days; then treat that with a plaster and leave the wound open for several days; then cure that with ointments until it is healed.
Diet of Albucasis: oh, sons, we have rarely used this kind of cautery due to the fear of its appearance, and because few have found it worth looking into.
However, for those who have suffered well from it, apply it to the affected area with that cautery.
However, for cauterization with adhering medicines, you should make two circles using a perforated armula similar to the keyhole of an iron door; let the length of the walls be such that they are about two nuts or keys in size.
And if the space between each of these is equal to the thickness of a finger; and they should be placed below and above, and they should contain each other in this form:
And then place your hand over the area of the ankle while the patient is lying on their side, and press your hand firmly on the part of the ankle; then take warm water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that should be close to a small fire little by little, and keep that for about an hour, and the patient must endure the burning and adjustment — for this treatment causes such burning as if from fire — until the burning subsides.
And then lift your hand with the instrument and clean the entire ankle with warm water.
And then let that rest for three days and place something over it until the blackness from the burning is gone, and leave it like that for several more days, and pus will flow out of it; this is the final stage of healing.
And then treat that with ointments until it is healed.
And if the pain spreads to the thigh or the abdomen, apply the same treatment as was done for the ankle, ensuring it contains water accordingly.
And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Take an equal part of alkali and unextinguished wood ash, mix them together, and place the mixture in a new bowl, one part of which should be pierced with a small hole according to the amount that can fit inside.
And place the bottom of the wound over another inflamed ulcer, and pour on it an alkaline substance and hot water that covers them to a finger's depth, and then compress them with your hand for good compression, and let the sharp water that flows from it descend into the part of the inflamed ulcer.
And then mix all that water, and pour it over another living cause and another renewed alkaline, because at that time it will have strong acidity, which is administered in many medical operations and in the cauterization of other members, as this operation is done with fire.
And among some of the medicines with which a broad cautery is performed, thus as with sulfur and honey and soap mixed in this way.
And Gualia recounts of an ancient man's operation and cure with which pain in the ankle and sciatic vein is treated, and he greatly praises that method, saying that no other cure is necessary, and that one is healed by doing it once as recommended, for he puts that joint in a bath and is already free from that.
And it is that wormwood should be taken, and if wormwood cannot be found, a fresh fig should be used; and it should be crushed with a little salt and placed on the ankle where the pain is, or on the thigh, or on the abdomen, and bandaged.
And it should be left on for the quantity of three hours or for the amount of time that the patient feels relief from the application.
Then place it in a bath and when the body is warmed, immerse it in the soil, for the pain will cease and be healed.
And know that it is not necessary for anyone to use cautery with these medicines except near the evacuation of the body.
However, Escorides says that when the venous wound is cauterized with goat's milk, it greatly benefits; and the cautery should be applied in the following manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, then place it between the toes and over the wound.
Then take dried goat's milk and inflame it with fire until it becomes charcoal; then place it on the wool and spread it out. And then repeat this, and do not stop doing this until the sensation of the bite reaches up to the ankle and relieves the pain.
And this method of cautery is called cow cautery.
Chapter XLII.
On the cautery of foot pain.
Sometimes pain in the feet is caused by various reasons, such as from a fall or from impact or from excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to these, due to the infiltration of cold and humid matter.
And cautery should only be applied in this specific case which is caused by the infiltration of cold matter.
Therefore, after evacuating the patient with suitable pills and similar treatments, three lines should be drawn on the foot where the pain is, according to its width, and then make marks with a tenth of an inch between each line, placing five cauteries or more, depending on the tolerance of the patient and their strength.
And let the cautery be done with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize with three cauteries or with four using a medial claw-shaped cautery according to this form:
Chapter XLIII.
On the use of cautery at the onset of jaundice.
This disease often appears in small children; and the sign of its onset in children is that it affects their structure, causing stiffness and movement difficulties.
And you will find that the lower vertebra of the spine and the bones begin to protrude over the other vertebrae.
And therefore, when you see this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery according to this form: that the cautery should be applied evenly over the entire part of the vertebra.
And if you wish, cauterize around the circumference of the vertebra with a pointed cautery in two lines or three. And let the points be made close together.
Then treat the area in between so that it heals with what we have said.
Be careful not to apply the cautery to swelling that has been caused by nerve spasms.
Chapter XLIV.
On the cautery treatment for gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and when pains occur in the feet, doctors customarily call this condition gout properly.
And thus, when gout caused by cold is treated with this method of cure and the pains are not alleviated, then use cautery to relieve them.
And it is that you should cauterize around the joint of the foot in a circular pattern with multiple cautery points.
And let the cautery be an olive-shaped one, which has the following form:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pain rises into the fingers or other joints, and this often happens, then apply cautery to each finger with three or four burns from all sides using an olive-shaped cautery.
And if more cauteries are necessary than these you have, then apply the cautery but do not press your hand too hard with the cautery beforehand; only hold it around the size of a finger.
And if the pain spreads into the finger and hand, then apply the cautery that we have described in its chapter.
And if the pain is in the muscles only, and it is called suagra (possibly a variant of "sciatica"), then puncture around the spine as it curves, piercing along those two lines.
And if the pain remains in the wrists, then puncture around the spine on each wrist and on the palm of the hand.
And if the pains can approach over several days to the joints or muscles, then cauterize those areas all around with the help of aids.
And do not evacuate the patient of good regimen and reception of medicines, for if a good regimen is followed and phlegm is evacuated with this cautery, they will be healed, God helping.
Capitol .xlv.
From the cautery of ruptures.
When there is inflammation in the knees and the intestines appear before the hernia, and this begins to happen nearby, then you must order the patient to leave their food for the day and use laxative causes so that the discharge descends from their belly.
Then follow the patient with your hands on their back, and command them to keep their body still until the hernia or the intestine appears or is expelled.
Then return and, with your fingers, carefully examine the rupture over the bone of the pelvis, using an instrument whose tip is similar to half a circle, directed towards the lower parts of the body.
Then prepare the cautery, which has the following form:
until it becomes red hot and gives off sparks. Then return the intestine or hernia to its proper cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out again.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion underneath. Another servant should be on the patient’s chest, and another on their feet, with one holding the patient’s hands.
And then place the cautery on that mark with your hand holding the cautery straight, and get that into the bone of the heel in the middle of the wound; and repeat with that again if you have not achieved it in the first attempt to reach the bone.
And carefully observe the condition of the intestine during your cautery, so that you do not burn the intestine, which could cause death or other serious harm to the patient.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your operation is not successful.
And it is necessary that the cautery for children be delicate according to their size and proportion.
And then care for the area of the cautery for three days with ointment until the scar from the fire is healed.
And then treat that area with other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient should lie on their back for forty days until the area and the wound are fully healed.
And it is necessary to control the patient's nutrition according to the length of their treatment time, which reduces the patient’s abdomen, and to prevent the intestine from coming out due to the effort of healing.
And then when one wants to lift [the patient] after about forty days, then administer a properly prepared remedy, and let them have it for another forty days.
And let them be reduced in labor and the excess of food and drink, and loud voices, for when they use this regimen of complete healing, they will be healed.
And I will describe the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if they do not heal, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and let what is protruding from the hernia be as much as one-third of it; then treat that as we have said, and it should not be tightened.
And some of the earlier [physicians] have said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is marked out with a template.
And it is a paused line that you place across the widest part of the side where the rupture is, and another line above; then apply your hand with a claw cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.
Of the cautery of contusions.
When pain occurs in higher limbs due to trauma or impact and that pain persists for a long time and does not improve with usual treatments using medications, then it is necessary to use a pointed cautery to cauterize.
And the cautery should be applied to the entire limb according to its size and smallness, strength and weakness, and the location of the injury and pain.
Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; and if not, then apply the cautery again. Because typically such pains require punctures on the limb near the area of pain, so you must continue to use the cautery until the patient is healed.
Chapter XLVII.
On the cautery of leprosy.
Some lepers see great improvement with cautery, especially those suffering from a type of leprosy caused by the putrefaction of blood and melancholy.
And when you wish to cauterize the patient, first determine if the leprosy is common and can be cured with the methods we have described in the division. If not, and you fear that the corruption may spread throughout the entire body and all its composition, then cauterize on the head with five cauteries: one at the center of the head, another slightly below it near the forehead where the hair ends; two on both temples; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
And place your hand with the cautery slightly inside so that it presses on the bone a little, and from there remove the scales, so that the expiration of thick vapors is relieved from him; and cauterize over the bladder as necessary.
And if leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then you must cauterize that area with those cauteries which we have mentioned in the chapter; and with a cautery on the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on both cheeks, and with two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, and with ten cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and with one large cautery on the vertebrae near the hip, and one on the hip itself, and with two on the knees, and one on each knee, and with two on the elbows, and one on each elbow, and with two on the ankles, and one on each ankle; and cauterize that over all the joints of his fingers and toes, and over each heel of his feet, and over the joints of his wrists.
And be careful of the nerves that are on the heel so as not to burn those.
And sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the pelvis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the spleen.
And know that the more you apply cauteries, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery, just as they do not feel it on their skin, because their body is already numbed.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or few according to the limbs and joints, as dictated by the specifications of the tools.
And then treat the cautery with flour mixed with honey and with other treatments until it is healed.
Chapter XLVIII.
Of cautery for stupor.
When any limb is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it does not heal, then you should cauterize that numbed limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
And let your cautery enter the incision of the cord a little bit. Then treat that area with ointment until it is healed.
And sometimes a numbness that affects the hands and feet, and the vertebrae of the back, is cauterized to address the weakening of the nerves which affect that limb, and the numbness is reduced.
But do not undertake this unless you are knowledgeable about the anatomy of the limbs and the distribution of nerves throughout the moving body.
Chapter XLIX.
On the cauterization of moles that are malignant.
When a mole is old and does not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you should cauterize it with a cautery applied slightly according to the amount of protrusion of the mole until the whiteness and color of it are reduced, and its color changes.
And then treat it with flour of bran and lentils mixed with anointed oil and leaves of arnica, and with the blood of a dove or the blood of a wren, each in equal parts and all mixed together, and then line a cloth and place it over the area until it is healed.
It seems like you've provided a section marker or title that indicates the start of a chapter or a significant division in a text, possibly from an old document or manuscript. The ".l." could mean "Chapter 1" or a similar indicator in a numbered or lettered sequence. If you have more text following this marker that needs translation or explanation, please provide it so I can assist further!
This phrase appears to be in an old form of Latin or a related medieval language. It translates to:
When cancer begins and you want to remove it, then cauterize the area with a circular cautery around it as described.
And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the latter cautery in the middle of the area; but I do not agree with this, for I fear that it might become ulcerated, and I have seen this happen several times.
And it is better that it be cauterized around the area with a circular cautery, as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Chapter II.
On the cauterization of abscesses.
When an abscess is delayed in maturation, and this is due to excess fluid or the condition of the patient, who may be old and frail, with little blood, or because of the season, and you wish to hasten the maturation of the abscess; then cauterize around it with small pointed cauteries; and afterward leave it so that it will mature more quickly.
And if you want to perform the perforation with a cautery, then ignite the cautery which has this form: and place it in the most suitable location for penetration before the skin is pierced.
And if the cautery in that most suitable location is left there to alleviate the pain of the arm; then treat it until it is healed.
Chapter II.
On cautery for corrosive wounds.
Corrosive is a spreading corruption in the limb, which corrodes it as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you find such a corrosive in an area that can withstand cautery with fire, then ignite a few small and large cautery nails as appropriate for the location where the corrosion is.
And then cauterize the area thoroughly until you eradicate all of the corrosion and leave no cause for it to remain.
And then leave it for three days, and apply over the cauterized areas a dressing made with oil mixed until all the scars are removed and all the corruption is eradicated.
And then treat that with flesh-generating ointments.
And if after about three days the flesh grows healthy without any corruption, that is good; but if not, then reapply the cautery to the areas that are corrupted.
And corrosive treatment is sometimes applied with sharp medicine, for that serves as a substitute for cautery. However, cautery with fire is a quicker method.
And I have already described the treatment with sharp medicine in the section, so use that when you need it.
Chapter LIII.
On the cautery of claws and other similar parts.
Often found in the areas called claws, which are swollen and inflamed parts that affect the foot. Cauterization on these can be done in two ways: with fire cautery and with hot water cautery.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qualisia feyt deferr segon la quantitat laqual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.
And then place that heated cautery on the shoulder, and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the shoulder until the cautery reaches the depth of the shoulder. And leave that for three days until it begins to sweat (or drain) the arm. And then apply a plaster made from crushed wild mallows mixed with salt, and leave the plaster on that area for one night, because this will help root out its foundations.
And then treat the area with an ointment made from generative flesh until it is healed.
And if the condition does not convert and you frequently encounter it on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you must administer these cautery treatments with water. Take a quill from an eagle or iron or bone of vulture, and place that over the claw; then pour into the quill a small amount of hot water, and hold your hand, and rotate it with the compression of your hand all around, pressing the edge of the quill against the root of the claw; the hot water will find its way through the pores of the claw's root. Let the patient endure the sting of the hot water for an hour, and then remove that, as the claw along with its roots will be eradicated.
And in this way, with those, one approaches the other until you cover all of their parts throughout the body.
And then treat those pus formations where the roots of the claws have been eradicated using ointments that cause flesh to regrow.
The text provided appears to be written in an archaic or constructed language that combines elements from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The phrase "Capitol .liiii." seems to indicate a chapter or section number (likely chapter 44). Here is the translation:
From the text provided and its structure, it seems like the language is an archaic form of Romance languages mixed with some Latin influences. Based on this understanding:
When there is a tremor due to cold in the nerves or by fever of cold origin, or for another similar cause, then you must apply cautery with four or five cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, placing one cautery between each vertebra; and also place a cautery on their feet and over their stomach using olive oil.
And the tremor of the patient subsides and hastens the healing of the cold disease.
Chapter 5.
On the cautery of various accidents to the body.
When there are swellings and pustules on the body, which are formed from thick corrupted materials; therefore, at the beginning when they appear, it is necessary to apply cautery over the head of the fistula with a fine cautery using myrtle twigs, the end of which is extended by fire; or with long razors used in surgery; or with a lens-shaped cautery.
And sometimes the cautery is also applied at the beginning of its expulsion in this manner; and it is not believed to be harmful, and the excess is disrupted by doing this, thus healing from them.
But however it is necessary that this be done near evacuation with bloodletting.
Capitol lvi.
Of cautery of blood flow accidentally caused by an artery cut.
Watch out for blood flow from an artery that is cut during the treatment of a wound that leads to swelling or at the beginning of abscesses or cauterization of the limb, and similar situations, as it is difficult to stop it.
Therefore, when this happens to someone, then you should press with your hand on the opening of the artery, and place your finger over it to tightly hold it so that the blood flow stops, ensuring that it does not continue.
Then place the olive-sized small and large cautery irons into the fire, several times, and blow on them until they are thoroughly heated.
Then take one of those, either small or large, depending on the location and the wound where the artery is broken, place it over that vein quickly after you have removed your finger, and hold the cautery until it seals and constricts the bleeding.
And if blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove your finger and withdraw the cautery, then take another heated cautery from those that are prepared in the fire, and continue to do this one after another until the bleeding is stopped.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, and do not bring any other mischief upon the patient.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding in those cases except by one of four methods: either with a cautery as we have mentioned, or by extraction when it is not extracted, for when it is extracted, the ends of the vessels are burned and the blood flow is restricted, or that it be bound with a thread or with a ligature by strong constriction, or that medicines which have the power to constrict the blood be placed upon it; and they should be compressed with a poultice by proper constriction.
And he who administers proper constriction by ligature and constriction with bandages or by the position of burning and similar causes, should only apply it slowly.
But if this happens to someone and the doctor is not present nor medicine available, then press with the index finger on the opening of that vein as we have said, and apply great constriction inside so that the blood stops at the main part of the wound, and do not remove your finger from the artery; and above the artery sprinkle cold water with a very strong degree of coldness until the blood is congealed and thickened; and if cautery or medicine is necessary, use it accordingly.
About incision and puncture and cupping and bloodletting and plagues and their equivalents.
We have already said in the first chapter about all diseases in which cauterization with fire is appropriate and with combustible medicine, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for them along with the forms of the cauteries; and I have ordered the chapters from the head down to the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter in the same manner, so that the seeker may be relieved concerning what they have asked about.
And before I begin this, son, you must understand that in this chapter, what is terrifying here is similar to what is in the first chapter on cauterization.
And because great caution is required, for in the operations described in this chapter, many times there is evacuation involving blood, which is essential to life, such as venesection or incision on an abscess, or exposure of a foreign body, or purging of a plague, or extraction of an arrowhead, or removal of a stone and their equivalents. And with all of these is accompanied fear and trembling, and in the majority of cases, death.
And I warn you that this should not happen to you in which there is danger, because sometimes your ways of treating must be changed due to various diseases. And of them there are some who will die from their illness and this is quick because of the death that follows it, and this due to the intensity of what they find in their sickness, and by the length of their illness, and with the illness comes fear which signifies death.
And among those is the one who gives you their possessions and says that you are hoping for health with them, and their illness is deadly.
And therefore you should not consent to those who come to you in this manner; and your caution should be greater than desire and your greed; and do not presume any reason for this except certain knowledge that confirms what you must do, and which by subsequent successful outcome is praised.
E usatz en la curacio de totz vostres malautes de pronosticacio e indicacio de lu al qual es salut convertida, quar en aquel es a vos ajutori sobre adquisicio de fama e de memoria, de lausor e de gloria.
O, sons, God inspire in you His understanding and does not remove direction and protection from you, for this is in His hands.
And I have ordered this chapter distinguishing by sections according to what was previously covered in the chapter on cauteries, about the treatment from head to foot, so that it may be made easier for you what you ask of this and of which you have need.
First chapter.
On the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Know that this disease often occurs due to childbirth and when the wet nurse squeezes the child's head too tightly.
And sometimes it occurs due to hidden causes that are not known.
But I have only seen this disease in children; and in all those cases, death followed closely, and thus it seems to me that it is a fatal condition for them.
And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of the child was so enlarged that he could not support himself due to the size of his head, and the humidity increased until it caused death.
And this humidity is either added between the tendon and the bone, or it settles below the bone on the spine.
For the operation in that case where the humidity is between the tendon and the bone and the abscess is small, then you must cut at the middle of the head with a slit horizontally, and the length of the slit should be about two fingers so that the humidity can flow out, and this is the form of the spatula.
And therefore, if the humidity is more increased and the abscess is larger, then there should be two slits according to this method:
And if the humidity is below the bone, a sign of this is that you see the sutures of the head open in all parts and water is squeezed out when you compress it with your hand on the inner parts, and this was not previously noticed. You must cut at the middle of the head with three slits according to this method:
and then extract all the humidity from it; and then secure the slits with bandages and poultices; and then wash over it with wine and oil until the fifth day, and then remove the binding and treat the wound with lint and ointments, and bind the head evenly; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
And there is another method of incision, which you should consider in relation to the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, because sometimes it may be more towards the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left; and thus pay attention with the incision where the abscess and the accumulation of water appear, and do this according to what is best possible for you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery, so that blood does not flow and the patient does not die from that flow of blood with the evacuation of humidity.
Second Chapter.
When catarrh or rheumatism occurs in the eyes or foot, and this has been long-standing, and you do not achieve healing through medical treatments, then the final remedy in this case is to incise those two arteries.
And thus, when you want to incise those arteries, the patient should raise their head, and then rub the area with a coarse cloth so that the arteries appear, and then tie the neck of the patient tightly with some cloth; and then identify where the pulse is felt; and the locations of each artery are near the ears, though they may be hidden in some people.
And then mark the artery with a probe, and then incise each one with an acute spatula reaching through to the bone, and this is done across the width of the head.
And if you want, insert the spatula under the artery and break it at the points above.
And the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, because when any vein is cut open, blood flows out with a pulsating exit, which sprays out frequently.
And if the artery does not appear at the binding site, then you must measure from the earlobe a distance of three fingers' width, and then mark it with a probe, and go into the bone.
And what is needed to let blood is a quantity of wine unciae, and strongly from it do not let more or less, and all this is according to the amount that appears of the patient's strength and the fullness of their artery.
And then examine the wound, and if there remains any cause of infection on the bone, then cut away that part so that it does not become abscessed with a cautery.
And then strengthen the wound with poultices and linen bandages, and then treat it with ointments until it heals.
Chapter III.
On the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
When an individual suffers from chronic migraines or sharp pains, caused by moistures and qualities in the veins of the temples, or if they are severe and similar to these, and treatment with medical methods does not help, then we resort to extracting the arteries in the temples, or cauterizing them as we have shown.
And the method of the operation and extraction is that the patient shaves the hairs that are in the temples; then locate the visible artery in the temple where it can be shown to you by its pulse, as it is hidden in only a few people due to thick hair.
And if it is hidden from you, then the neck of the patient should be stretched with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery appears clearly to you. And now you take the spatula, which has the following form: And then you carefully scrape the vein with that instrument until you reach the artery; and then insert it in there and extract it from the superior parts until you remove it from the vein and uncover it from the tunics which are left behind, from all sides.
But if the artery is delicate, then wrap it with the tip of a needle, and then divide it in part according to the extent to which its ends are elongated and contracted, and there will be no blood flow, for if they are not divided, the blood will not rise fully.
And then evacuate one to three ounces of blood.
And if the artery is large, then you must tie it at two places with strong double-threaded silk or with long cords, and do not worry about putrefaction before the wound heals and the blood flow stops.
And then cut away the excess that is between two ligaments; and do this at that time or around another appropriate time.
And if you want, cauterize that area with a cautery between the bone using a knife-shaped cautery before cutting off the extremities of it, and let it stay in place for the same procedure.
And it is better to perform the procedure when the patient does not have a fever or a hot temperament; for cautery is one of those causes that help to dry out excessive moisture, and therefore it is better in treatment.
And before the extraction of the arteries, fill the area with an old cloth, and place it over the wound properly dressed, then treat it with dry medicines to promote flesh growth and use bandages until it is healed.
And if while you are working another time blood flow from the artery starts again, then you must act to stop that bleeding, either by using a cautery or by filling the area with a cloth, and hold your hand firmly until the bleeding is stopped. And if none of those causes is present for you, then place your finger on the spot where the blood has congealed, and apply a cold water compress to the area until the sharp pain subsides, and be firm as needed.
And the lighter method for extracting an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two blades, since you have marked the two spots with a probe, and then place them, light a fire, until they reach the bone and divide the vein into two places, so that what is between the ends of it is elongated, because they are not fully consolidated by this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two blades should be similar. However, if the sharpness of the two blades is less, it is better, because if they are as sharp as two blades close to each other, they will not cut the flesh too quickly.
Therefore, since there is some thickness in them, the heat of the fire is retained in them, and the flesh is cut easily.
And this work is better than all other works and lighter.
And let the space which is between two ribs be the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
Chapter four.
On the treatment of acute and acidic tears of the eyes.
When those tears are acidic, and it is the condition of those veins which are on top of the head that have become inflamed, and you do not find any cause for medical treatment in this regard, sometimes the face of the patient becomes red, and they feel a tingling sensation on their forehead as if it were an ant's crawl. The eyes themselves become weakened to such an extent that the eyelashes are noticeable, and the eyelids are scratched by the sharpness of the tears. Ancient bitter remedies were used in the treatment of this condition, and I do not name that treatment lightly.
And you command the patient to pluck the hairs that are on their forehead, and then make three incisions in the forehead equally spaced according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is about two fingers: the first incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose at the middle of the forehead, the second according to the length a little past the movement of the eyelashes which are in the lacrimal area, and the third on the other side.
And be careful of the beginning of the arteries which are on two sides, and stretch your hand from the continuation of both jaws. And if the space between each incision is the quantity of three fingers placed together.
And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloths with which to dry the blood.
And then insert the spatula with two sharp ends, of which this is the shape of the incision: The sentence "que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio" can be broken down and translated as follows: Here is the translation of the sentence: And then stretch this spatula and insert into the first incision another instrument which is called a knife, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And place the sharp edge of that instrument against the attached flesh and on the side of the lion within the bone, and drive it in until it reaches the middle fissure, and with that cut off all the vessels descending from the head to the toes.
And if the incision needs to be continued on this part of the chain (possibly referring to a specific area or structure), then do this in the middle fissure between another fissure.
And since a considerable amount of blood flows out, press the areas where the clotted blood is located.
Then place in each crack some old wool, and put over those powders mixed with wine and oil and vinegar, and ensure that it does not develop an abscess due to heat.
And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a strong infusion of hot or warm water, and then treat it with basil ointment mixed with rose oil and other remedies until the wounds are healed.
Chapter 5.
On the treatment of tears through catharsis and the descent of humors from within the head.
When there is a good and continuous catharsis occurring, and at times the humors of the patient are weakened slightly, and their vision is already debilitated, and the eyelids are ulcerated and the area around the eyes is inflamed with hair loss, and there is acute pain in the forehead along with subsequent sneezing, you should know from these symptoms that the materials and catharsis do not come but from small veins within these areas.
And the best treatment for that is this: command the patient to shave their forehead, then make an incision in that area at the center of the forehead, a small one in width (and begin with the fissure from the left temple towards the right temple; and let the incision go through the bone; extend your hand beyond the swollen temples which are affected by chewing), until the bone is exposed.
Dry all the blood with a sponge or with dry cloth and then fill between the two lips of the wound with old wool or cloths. And then apply it with powdered material mixed in wine and oil so that it does not lead to an abscess forming.
And when you unbind it and see that the abscess has already decreased, then you must rub the area where new flesh begins to grow, and then treat it with a drying regimen that promotes the growth of flesh, just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and from these an ointment is made and applied to these areas for the nativity of the flesh.
Chapter VI.
On the treatment of what affects the ears.
All causes that affect the ears are of four types: either it is a mineral stone or something similar to a stone, such as iron or glass; or it is from a plant, such as sesame or bean; or it is a fluid cause, such as acidic water and vinegar and their likes; or some kind of small creature.
And therefore, when a stone enters the ear or another similar cause from those causes that do not fit or grow in the ear, and expose the ear to the sun, if you find the stone, then distill some substance of violet oil or sesami into it, and then administer its extract, and make them sneeze with condizi, and plug the nostrils before the sneezing occurs. And then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the earlobe, and stretch the earlobe upwards to the points where warts have appeared, because warts are often caused by these reasons.
And if it is not expelled, then administer extraction from them with the instrument called subtlety of epicyclical gestures of which this is the form:
And if it is treated with gestures, that is good; and if not, then administer the extraction of it using an ounce of finely ground powder.
And if it is not caused by that, then make a cannula of iron and insert the end of the cannula into the ear canal, and seal around the cannula with wax and softened oil so that only the cannula remains open. Then extract with your breath using strong suction, for it helps greatly as we have recounted.
But if it is not resolved in this manner, then take some frankincense or similar prepared substance with which birds are caught in small quantities, and place that at the end of the ear, and then wrap something over it properly. Then insert that into the ear canal easily, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
And if it is not resolved by all the methods we have described, then you must consider incising that area before it develops into an abscess or spasm.
The method of incising that area is to first bleed the patient from the saphenous vein and extract blood according to the patient’s strength, then grasp the earlobe between your fingers and turn the ear upwards, and finally make a small incision at the edge of the earlobe, removing the pus from the deeply pressed area. And if the crack of a lunar shape reaches to the stone, and once the stone is found, remove it with appropriate instruments; then quickly close the crack at that moment, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the cause for the issue in the ear is one of the growths that have grown and become inflamed, then administer its treatment and extraction; but if it does not respond to this approach, then take a thin, delicate spatula according to this method: and use it to remove the growth that has occurred in the ear.
And do not perform this when you think it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear. Place it in several small pieces, and then extract them with tweezers or delicate movements, or by incision as we have said, for the extraction is easier this way.
However, when water has entered the ear, the patient should start with a sneeze under certain conditions, and fill their ear with some old cloth, and jump on the ear that contains the water; if it is thus expelled, it is good. If not, then take thin stone rods and levers according to the length of a finger, heat them slightly over fire, and have the patient insert one of these into the opening of their ear, jump a bit from that side, and strike the stone inside the ear with another stone. Therefore, do not stop until all the water has been completely removed.
Therefore, do not stop until all the water has been completely removed. And already the water should be poured in such a way that you take paper or reed, and put one end of it into the ear and extend the other end with fire until its middle part is burned.
And then introduce another syringe and do this so many times until all the water is extracted, and squeeze that with a cannula as was said above about the stone extractor.
Here is the translation line by line:
And in the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it as we have said in the section and in the treatment of distillations and do not complete your cure, then you must look at the ear to the sun.
And therefore if any sign of worms appears here, then extract them with gestures or with fine needles; but if no cause appears, then take a tube that is narrow at one end and wide at the other, which has this form: And insert the thin extremity into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; and then suck with that through strong suction, and do this multiple times until all the worms have been expelled.
And if you do not obey the instructions, then plug and seal the tube's circuit with wax as we have said; then administer distillates that have already proven effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the section on distillates.
And let your effusion be with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, which has the following form: And make it of silver or ceramic, leaving it straight, with a small tube in which there is a flat surface on top.
And thus it should be designed to fit into the cavity of the tube that will be necessary for containment. And if you want, take the rod and wrap the end of it with a small piece of cloth, then pour oil into the concavity of the ear or juice from some herb, or any of these medicines into the tube — which is in the ear — and then insert the wrapped rod into the ear and press gently with your hand to force the oil into the ear's cavity so that the patient feels the oil inside.
And that which is inserted into the ear should already be slightly warmed by fire. And be careful that the substance you will instill into the ear is not too cold, for medicines for the ear do not tolerate that.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of ear blockage.
Sometimes, some children are born with unperforated ear drums from their mothers, and this can also happen to adults; blockage in the ear canal due to plaque or excess flesh in that area. This blockage sometimes occurs in the anterior part of the ear canal which does not allow sound through, and at other times it is on the outer parts.
And that which occurs in the anterior part of it, which does not allow sound through, is often in a more difficult condition to heal.
And in the case where sound is perceived, you should expose the patient's ear to the sun and observe it. And therefore, if an obstruction appears, open it with a fine spatula of this form:
If the extremity of it in which the width is small, one part being sharp and the other not; and the spatula be two-sided like a lion so that it does not injure the ear.
And therefore, if the obstruction is due to flesh grown in the ear or on it, then take that with fine needles and cut out that flesh with great ease until all of the flesh is removed.
And if there is obstruction in the ear canal, then take a thin piece of wool and warm it slightly over fire, and then insert it into the ear canal.
And therefore, if you find that the patient breathes easily with this [method], due to the gravity of exhaling, it alleviates the pressure on them easily; and be careful not to harm the nerves in the ear.
And then place in the ear a piece of cloth of the same size as the width of the tube that you have wrapped with Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take some wax, boil it in water, powder it over the crushed and sieved area and use it; and if you find the ear already abscessed, then you must remove the wax and replace it with another piece of wax that you will wrap in cerot made with rose oil, until the abscess begins to soften; and then care for it until it is healed.
But if there is a flow of blood, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use another treatment that stops the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
The text you provided appears to be in an old Romance language that combines elements of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here is a translation of the given line:
For the treatment of athelzil, which occurs in the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.
Therefore, you must hold those with tweezers or with an ounce, and cut them away from their roots with a knife, and then place something over the cut areas.
And if pain with a flow of blood occurs, then you cauterize those areas with a subtle lens-shaped cautery.
And the best cauterization is performed near the incisions and observed blisters when there remains any cause of the eruptions; and when they are cauterized with fire, those eruptions are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for swelling that occurs in the eyelids.
Small swellings often appear in the eyelids due to some cause which resembles swelling in its strength and hardness, and thus the swelling is called by this name.
And it is an accumulation of thick moisture beneath and above the eyelid.
Therefore, the procedure for it is to consider whether the swelling is occurring in such a way that it appears from the eyelid and is soft all around; and the cause of it is slight.
Therefore, make an incision across it along its width, and then drain it completely from all sides until it dries out, and then suture it with a needle and close it.
And if the wound is large, then you adjust it with stitching; and care for that inside until it heals.
And if it is small, you will not suffer harm from that because the heat of it restores that area and causes flesh to grow.
And if the swelling is declining towards the inner parts of the eyelid, you should turn inside the eyelid and suspend the swelling with an ounce, starting from where you determine initially, and press that area all around; and if the eyelid at first is elongated, this does not matter in any way.
Then at the beginning, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area with something that causes flesh to grow until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the treatment of swelling above the eyelid over the eye.
Swelling is a gray substance that is generated in the tissues of the upper eyelid, and it mostly affects children. It aggravates the eyes of those affected and often occurs during summer; they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears accumulate in their eyes due to this.
And therefore you often find them lying on their faces all the time, and they sleep with their faces down; and so at the eyelids of their eyes, the eyebrows are wet, which have already been covered by swelling, and an indication of cataract is apparent in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel a hardness inside them.
And some method of operation is as follows: the patient places his head on your lap, and then you place a cloth over both of you and make it warm, and create a circle according to the quantity which contains arthernach (likely an archaic term for a substance or ingredient) from all sides, and then place that over it and press with your thumbs all around so that arthernach is aggregated in the middle of the circle, and then introduce moisture into the center of that using a spatula inserted lengthwise through a slit, and the slit should not be larger than the one made in flaubotomy (likely an archaic surgical procedure).
Here is the translation of the provided line:
Therefore, extract that with cloths which you have wrapped around the areas mentioned on the outside and pass between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
And be careful not to insert too deeply with the spatula so that you do not reach the bone and displace it.
And if the artery does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, then place a small piece in the fissure with ease before the artery emerges; and then extract that as we have said; and then apply cloth soaked in warm water and sweet wine over the area and press them with powder.
And so, they use salt that is placed and left in the cavity of the fissure so that it can remove that moisture.
And then treat that inside so it may heal.
And if you encounter an abscess in that area, then treat it with soft plasters until it heals.
Chapter XI.
On methods of touching the stomach.
When thick hairs grow on the eyelids of the eyes, different from natural hairs and old, these cause harm to the eye and lead to various diseases such as constant tearing and softening of the eyelids and conjunctiva, which can result in the destruction of the eye, a condition called entropion. This is treated in four ways: by cauterization with fire; by sharp medicines as mentioned before in the chapter on cauteries; by surgically correcting and suturing; or by using cannulas, which I will explain.
Therefore, you must hold the head of the patient still; then turn the eyelid with your left hand. If it turns easily, that is good; if not, insert a needle into the area where there is pus below the eyelid, and push the needle through with thread near the margin of the eyelid where the hairs grow, close to the hairs. Pull the thread up toward the upper part with the eyelid and turn it back in place.
And then insert into the part inside the eyelid with the hairs aligned using a spatula from the larger lacrimal duct into the smaller one; and then extract the bile and place small particles of cotton or cloth on the eyelid; and then sew over the eyelid with thread, and it should be thus as in the figure of a myrtle leaf.
But however it is necessary that the figure according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid be considered, for this already varies among people, for some require a large quantity to be cut from the eyelid according to the extent to which the eyelid has become droopy.
Then place the spatula over the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the larger tear duct towards the smaller one. And if your incision is close to the natural hairline, just as it is for most of the king's [patients].
And then insert the needle into one of the two angles of the chain, and then scrape that entire area, and then adjust with a stitch the two lips with thread or fine wool glue, and clean the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous from the glues over both eyebrows with some viscous causes, if you want to do this, and if not, don't worry about it.
And then remove the suture of the glues within three or four days, and then take care of it.
And if you want, leave the wound without suture, and care for it with things that dry and constrict, because the eyelid being raised requires the sealing of the wound and the addition of something; however, suturing is better. Therefore, this is what the ancients taught about treating such conditions.
However, one must be careful with the patient, and it is of good practice, and not out of fear.
And there is another method in surgery, which involves shaping the eyelid like a myrtle leaf, and then lifting the eyelid with three separate needles arranged in this form:
If it is not possible to do that, hold the hooks, and if this is not aligned, then take a needle with thread and insert it in the middle of the figure, and place the other thread near the larger lacrimal duct, and the second thread near the smaller lacrimal duct, adjust between those threads equally, and then with those lift your hand with equal elevation, lift all the chain on which is marked as we have recommended.
And then bring together the two lips of the wound with suture, and treat the inside so that it heals.
And if an abscess occurs at your incision or your fissure, treat that abscess with poultices and the like, and with ointments.
And sometimes you may encounter an eyelid where the hairs are inverted; then you must use what we have mentioned about incision there; however, in some cases, suturing is more refined.
To cauterize with cans (reeds) follows this method: And it is that you turn the eyelid inside out and split the structure within as I have described; then, make two reeds or two fine strips whose length should be according to the length of the eyelid and their width should be half the width of the spatula. And you have already made incisions at the ends of each section where you have the threads.
Then add each one with subtlety over what is superfluous on the eyelid of the eye, and constrict the reeds of each section with strong pressure, and leave it that way for several days, because the bond will die due to the constriction, become detached, and fall off on its own.
And if it is delayed, then break it at the bones, and then treat the wound until it heals.
Therefore, when it is secured, the eyelid is lifted and the hairs do not poke.
And this is the form of two canes which you will make according to this design: and there should be the quantity of the length and the width neither more nor less.
Chapter XII.
On the removal of stubborn hairs piercing the skin with a needle when the hair is hard.
When there are unnatural, hard, rough, and piercing hairs on the skin, then the procedure is that you take a fine needle and insert it into some fine linen or silk, and then carefully adjust the ends of the needle and hold each one subtly in your fingers. And let the length of the threads be the quantity of one palm.
And then you place another fine thread under it in ointment, and hold the ends of that thread if you wish.
And then place the patient's head on your lap, and bring them close to the light so that your work may be clear, for it is a delicate and precise operation.
And then insert the needle into the root of the hair that requires treatment, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid before removing it from the natural hair.
And then pull the hair up and insert it into the eyelash area, and let the hairs be one or two or three, not more.
And then pull your hand with it until the hair is moved into the eyelash area on the eyelid along with the natural hair.
But if the eyelash area is pulled and the hair is not moved, pull the eyelash area to the sides with the solution that you have prepared, until the hair is embedded into the desired place in the eyelash area.
And cover it with the vision of the eye, for when you move the eyelashes and the solution, grow everything and seal the eye, and leave the seals for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows on that good flesh.
And if the hair is shorter, then you attach a long natural hair, and lift it with that, or let it be within so that it is stretched out to some space, and then you elevate it.
The text appears to be in an archaic form of a Romance language with influences from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Given this context, let's translate the provided line:
For the given sentence:
When the eye exhibits spasms, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it contracts inward or to one side, either right or left, due to poor healing from wounds, burns, or cautery, and this condition is called "leporina," and this spasm can be natural or accidental, and it is caused by improper healing from wounds, burns, or cautery, or by similarity to such maladies.
The method of the operation is that you cut through that area of improper healing and separate the lips there, and place a piece of linen cloth in between them, and tie them together until they are healed.
And it is not necessary to treat it with methods that dry out the causes forcefully; for if you do this, the spasms will return worse than they were at any time before.
Use methods that soften the area, such as fenugreek. Fumigate with water in which fenugreek seeds are boiled, or use an unguent of daturia, which should be liquefied with some oils, and soak the cloth in this mixture, then treat the area with it.
And the treasure of your cure is that you should pierce with any instrument that is not consolidated according to the form that fire at the beginning.
And this operation that we have mentioned is nothing but some correction of dislocation that does not return the area to its original form as it was before.
Chapter XIV.
Here is the translation of the provided line:
This inflammation which is made in the lower eyelid, which is properly called stye; and it can be of a natural origin or an accidental one.
And an accident is caused by a blow or by a cut or by cautery or by other similar causes.
And the method of the operation is that you take a needle with double thread, and insert it into the flesh, making it pass from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh at the points above with the needle and pierce it with the needle, and cut with a wide spatula. And then return the shape of the eyelid as needed; if not, take the reed and place it in the cut shape, and use that to turn the eyelid, creating the two slits on the side of the eyelid.
And let the ends of the two slits be at two angles of the incision that you have made where they converge, and from them form an angle such that when they come together, a figure is formed.
And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
And then remove the flesh in the amount that is the width of the sharp object left behind, which is the eyelid.
And then align the separated parts and sew them together with wool thread; then treat them with what we have mentioned of the mollifying medicines and the warm compresses until it is healed.
And if you need to make an incision due to a fissure or suture or cautery, then you must make a flat incision on the skin of the eyelid as required. And then separate with a warm compress between the two lips as we have said.
In summary, regarding the treatment of incisions that are above or below, which occur during the operation, according to the form in which the incision is prepared, and that form varies in different ways.
And the skilled artisans always prepare in each manner that is possible for them until they restore the figure to its natural form or close to it, and they do so according to what is most suitable for the patient regarding the operation and the instruments in their best conditions.
Chapter XV.
From the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in many men, you will find that the upper eyelid is adhered to the white part of the eye, and it is restricted from easy movement and its natural functions; therefore, you must insert the tip of a probe under the eyelid, lift it up or extend it with a hook.
Then you should cut the adhesion with a fine spatula, which should not be sharp for incisions but slightly blunt so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and use the spatula in such a way that its sharpness does not harm the eye.
And your incision should be such that it easily removes the adhesion, so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and the entire adhesion is healed.
Then you should put salty water into the eye with which you wash it; or distill juniper dissolved in water onto it.
Then separate the eyelid from the eye with goose fat, and place wool soaked in chicken egg white on the eye; after three days, use consolidating treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.
From the inflammation of the eyelid and the prominence of flesh around the tear ducts.
Know that the eyelid is considered in two ways: either it is nervous, and it resembles a hard yet subtle membrane; or it is non-nervous, resembling white frozen moisture, which when touched with an iron tool, if forced to take hold of it, breaks off and the tool does not penetrate it.
And both of these conditions do not begin except from the major tear duct, which gradually covers the sight and prohibits light and the movement of the eyelid.
However, the method of treating the inflammation is that the patient places their head on your lap, then opens their eyes, and you lift the eyelid with your hand, and then grasp the eyelid with a small doubly-bent tool and extend it upwards. Then take a needle and insert a horsehair or ox hair or cow hair, or something similar, or strong thread, or double the end of the needle little by little and place it in the middle of the eyelid, penetrate it with the needle, and secure the eyelid with thread; extend it upwards, and use the hair to pull out the part of the eyelid that touches the pupil. And in this way you should follow that by inserting the tool into the rear of him.
And then you incise the remainder at the base of the tear duct with a fine spatula or small scissors, and clear the flesh around the natural tear duct so that from this incision there will not be continuous flow of tears.
And sometimes the nail is removed with the sun one inch extended or with sulfur, as we have said, and then it should be extracted with a lion-shaped spatula, which has this form:
And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal membrane and cause a rupture, and that the pupil is not perforated.
Then, put a little finely ground salt or powdered cinnamon into the nose, and leave it there until the next day; then treat it with what is necessary until it heals.
And if the nail is not loose and you cannot insert the needle, nor can it be fixed in that way, then this kind of nail problem is treated with medicines and is healed as stated and detailed in the division.
And if you want to incise that area, then open the nostril of the patient and take a sharp, slender spatula shaped like this: with subtlety. And if it happens that it is rarefied and confused and you need to address this issue, then apply a distillation of your own urine mixed with powdered cinnamon or roasted cinnamon or finely ground salt into the nostril, and leave it there until the next day.
And then repeat the operation until everything that is harmful to him is removed, but rather let any opposing abscess be cauterized on the skin, because when you leave it there and treat the initial abscess until it is healed.
And then repeat your operation on that area until it is healed.
The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if noted in the nose for great harm, should be suspended with an ounce; and incise that from one side, and do not complete the incision so that you do not cut into the tear ducts.
And then drip into the lacrimal duct a strong decoction until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the incision of a sty and what is born from tight flesh in the nose.
Sometimes on the eyes of some individuals, hard flesh grows and covers the pupil, or approaches and presses tightly against the eyelids, drawing them outward at certain points and joining them to the edge like a railing.
The operation involves the patient placing their head on your shoulder; then open their eyes and gather all that hard flesh using appropriate tweezers or forceps; then incise the flesh at its beginning until it is all finished with the scalpel, being careful not to harm the eye during your procedure.
And let your incision be with the scalpel which you use to incise those areas or with the knife that we have recommended in the section on the nail, or with small scissors with which mustard is collected according to how it will come into form near this chapter.
When your incision is complete and all that flesh has been sutured, now fill the wound with finely ground salt, or sprinkle on it red powder resembling corrosive medicines, and place over the wound externally a piece of cloth soaked in egg white until it is ensured free from inflammation.
And if any cause for watchfulness remains and the bleeding is copious, and you fear an abscess may form, then leave the wound open and treat that abscess with whatever relieves it, and then repeat over it as needed until it is healed, and similarly deal with the flesh attached where this type of wound occurs.
However, you must ensure that all treatment of the wound is done either by natural means or accidentally through the use of tools, and do not put your hand into any of these procedures until you see that the member can sufficiently endure such an operation.
Chapter XVIII.
On the collection of blood in the wound.
Blood comes from toughened veins which lie over the wound and hinder proper treatment, and it can prolong the healing of the wound for many days.
Therefore, at the beginning, it is necessary that you determine if the wound in which there is blood is strong and there is no other illness besides the blood, then you should collect that blood.
And you command the patient to rest their head on your thigh, and then suspend those veins with an ounce or two according to your judgment; and let that ounce be of fine twofold according to this form:
Or use two ounces gradually in one course according to this method:
And then gather those veins with fine threads carefully, and wipe the blood little by little until you see those veins become free of mucus and are turned inside out.
And be careful not to lead the mucus with the tips of the spatula; and if your operation is in the middle of the day under the sun, be firm in your operation so that you only incise those veins.
And when you have completed this, then distill into the mucus some clear or red liquid so that its acidity can corrode what is stuck from the scab.
But if you cannot gather everything in that hour, then apply a plaster with something that reduces the pain, and leave it for several days until the pain is subdued and to ensure there is no risk of abscess.
And then repeat the same procedure on the second area until it is healed.
And this is the form of the forceps:
Chapter XIX.
For the reduction of nasal fractures.
When you treat abscesses with cautery or sharp medicine according to what was previously stated in the narration and it is not healed, then do not generate anything inside him but rather make incisions over the abscess until its maturity, and extract all the moisture that is within it along with the pus so that the bone is uncovered.
And then when the bone is uncovered and there is corruption or blackening in it, then scrape it with an instrument that has the following form:
E es nompnat de aspre cap, e sia feyt de fer indi, e sia le cap redon ayssi cum asir le qual sia fayt punctat per punctacio de lima o aliskalfati per punctacio subtil (ayssi cum es en la forma seguent).
And place that over the corrupted area of the bone, then rotate it between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that the corruption is scraped away.
And this should be done several times, and then restore the area with drying and styptic causes.
Therefore, if the area is consolidated and good flesh has formed and the body has separated from the pus and remains so for forty days, and it does not recur, and there is no abscess and no accidents occur, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then the goal is not to generate anything but to reduce the fracture to its original form, and according to this method: you must expose the bone using fire or sharp medicine, and once the bone is exposed, take a splint in the following manner:
The tip of the iron should be triangular, and the shaft should be gradually tapered towards the end in such a way.
And then place that over the bone, near the lacrimal area; extend your hand slightly from the wound, and then rotate your hand with the splint until it penetrates the entire bone, causing the patient to feel some air escaping when you hold their hand.
Therefore, now restore the area with astringent and drying medicines as has been mentioned.
Therefore, when the flesh and the area have hardened, the material that was flowing out to the outer parts returns inward, thus this makes the condition lighter on the patient.
Chapter XX.
On the reduction of a protrusion in the eye.
When the eye protrudes entirely and does not result in any damage or reduction to the vision, then you should first relax the patient, and subsequently apply bloodletting at the neck with scarification and good suction; and then place an ointment over the eye that is made from acacia, aloe, honey, and tragacanth, and finally secure the poultice on the eye with powdered lint.
And the method for the lint is to take linen cloths and cut them into pieces, and each piece should be folded into four layers; and make use of those cut pieces.
And then place those one over the other according to the amount that the wound needs. And then press on those with a hard cloth with strong binding; and repeat the cupping with suction and scarification; and then remove the cups and leave the wound exposed day and night.
But if the bandage becomes softened, then it must be made tight again.
And then remove the bandage day and night as we have said.
And if you find the wound already reduced, it is good, and if not, then repeat the poultice with the powders and binding and cupping until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the incision of the uveal part of the eye.
When there is disruption in the uveal part of the eye and it becomes prominent and protrudes from the eyelids like a grape of raisin, and takes on the shape of a human figure due to this, and you want to incise this, then the operation is as we have recounted: you insert the needle at the base of the uvea from below upwards, and then place another double-threaded needle in the lacrimal part, and make that penetrate while keeping the first needle in its position; and then incise the area where the double thread is located and lift with it the part of the uvea around the circumference of the needle, and press it firmly.
And then remove the needle and place over the wound wool infused in egg white, and leave until the thread comes out with the grape.
And then treat the wound with something that strengthens it internally so that the ailment may be healed.
And sometimes, gather from all sides with a circle of cloth around the swollen wound, and then pierce it with a fine spatula to reach the core of the wound, allowing the whitish moisture to flow out, and reduce the swelling, making it subside immediately.
And then strengthen it internally so that it may heal.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of hernias.
This illness, which is called hernia, is nothing but a swelling that appears in the groin, resembling descending water, but it is not that.
The method of treating it is to have the patient sit on a prepared and straight chair. Then take his head in both of your hands and press internally where you see the swelling coming out on either side. Then dry it so that it does not descend, and leave it like this, with the patient seeing the causes just as they appeared.
And if it does not descend downward, know that it is water.
And if the pus does not drain properly as we have said, then place the patient between your hands and take a fine spatula, and use it to separate the panniculus from the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tunic at the margin (inside the eye socket), until the pus is completely expelled.
Once it is completely expelled, then you should instill warm water into the nose, in which you have mixed honey, or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then it should be treated with other methods until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of water (discharge) descending from the nose.
We have already mentioned the types of discharge in the division and which ones require piercing with clear explanation, according to the health condition.
Now you must place the patient between your hands on a chair and tie their nose tightly with a binding agent.
And then place your left hand near the eyelid of his eye if the affected eye is the left one; or use your right hand if the eye is the right one.
And then use your right hand to take an almond if the eye is the left one; or use your left hand if the eye is the right one.
And then place the tip of the almond near the crown along the thickness of the ray in the white part of the eye near the smaller tear duct, and then apply the almond with force and rotate your hand in that manner.
And then penetrate into the white part of the eye and feel that the almond has already reached the desired location.
And it is necessary that the length of the path of the almond to the front be the same as the distance from the pupil to the end of the black part, which is the crown of the eye; for you will see the pupil with the vision of the eye through the clarity of the cornea.
And then place the almond in the location where the fluid is, and then pull it down once and then again; if the fluid descends quickly, you will see the patient regain their sight immediately, with the almond still in their eye.
And then rest for a while; if the water has drained down, then you wait another interval before any ointment is applied.
And then when it is cut and does not descend, you extract the ointment easily, and rotate your hand slowly with that; then dissolve a little clear gem salt in water and wash the hole inside with it; then place outside of the hole a plug or stopper or wool soaked in anointed oil and egg white and glue with this the hole shut.
But we and those of our time place upon that wound something crushed with egg white.
And if the ointment does not adhere to the interior of the wound due to its hardness—since there are some people for whom the wound is very hard—then you must take the spatula named alberid, which has the following form:
And then pierce that joint with it, and do not keep your hand in the wound for too long, but only make a fine place for the ointment.
And then insert the suppository as we have said.
And complete your work by preparing the patient's sleeping area properly, in which they should sleep on their back in a dark room, and all movements are prohibited.
And pause to understand the nature of the condition so that you can align their natural state, and do not turn their head to the right or left at all.
And apply the dressing according to its preparation within the third day.
And then remove that [likely referring to a dressing or bandage] in that dark room and expose it to fresh air, and show him some causes [possibly referring to explaining the reasons], and then reapply the dressing within seven days.
And it is not necessary to do this during the time of treatments or right before the infusion. However, it is necessary that you dilute this so that the water can gently pass through, considering it is strong and potent.
But if an abscess forms and you need to cauterize it, then you must remove the dressing before the seventh day, and treat it with something that reduces the abscess.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And then it is gently lowered from that position and turned onto its causes.
And know that in surgery it is not exempt for the student to see certain things several times, and then you must be bold during the operation.
And it has been reported to us by some of those who are in the Artach, and some said that fire is made in an Ayrac vessel which is pierced so that water is sucked up.
But however I have not seen anyone in our land who has perfected this, nor have I read this in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of medicines for which it is upon those who ignore them:
And let them be made of iron or of proper steel, and let the extremities of them have this triangular subtlety, the sharp end thus as that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.
Of the treatment of flesh hanging from the nose.
When on the nose there are various growths of flesh, some of which are caused by a mixture similar to moist scabs or nasal polyps; and this illness is called polypus because it resembles that type of growth. And if it is cancerous flesh, it appears pale and of a dark color; and if it is non-cancerous flesh, it is not of a dark color.
Therefore, in those cases where the flesh is not fraudulent nor cancerous, you should have the patient sit between your hands and expose them to the sun, clean their nostrils, and pierce the area with a needle in those fleshy parts. Then extract it from the outer parts, and then divide what you have grasped of those areas with a sharp and fine spatula inserted into one part until you know that all the flesh has been removed; because if any part remains which could cause separation to be possible, then you scrape it with one of the fine instruments easily until nothing remains that could cause any issue. If it is ruled by blood or an abscessed swelling appears, then you apply what is necessary; if it is one of the malignant swellings, then you cut and cauterize that area where blood needs to be severed and all the veins removed.
And then pour into the nose near the beginning something agreeable and mixed with water or wine. But if the nose is open and you process humidity into the palate from it, then know that it is already healed.
But if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside there is flesh mixed with pus over the bones of the nose to which incision has not been successful.
Therefore, now it is necessary to insert a thread into the nose where there is some thickness, and place crushed nuts on it, placing between each nut an amount equal to the width of a finger or thumb, and prepare the patient and insert one end of the thread into the nose with the aid of a reed or another suitable instrument.
And after this has been done, draw his own odor inward so that it reaches the nasal passages, and sit on his pillow, for children often mimic this action at school, and it is an easy method for those who wish to perform it.
And then place the two ends of the splint, one end that comes over the nose and the other that remains on the nose, and then apply a suturing of flesh with the knots that are in the splint, and do this until you know that the flesh is already secured with the knots of the splint.
And then extract the bile, and place near the nostrils during bloodletting a sponge, and do this for three days or more until the poultice corrodes all that is rotten in the flesh.
And at the end of the treatment, place a lead cannula in the nose for several days until it is healed.
And if you finish the treatment and it dries up, use that method.
And this is the form of the instrument used for purging with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
And do this with silver or amber, which should resemble a small open lantern, like a little shell, and the meat similarly.
And if you want to, make a closed tube like a cane, and the part of the instrument for purging should be open and flat; which should be placed at the back of the patient, with which you hold it when you heat it in oil or whatever other substances and suctionable causes you wish.
Chapter XXV.
About nasal polyps in the outer parts of the nose.
White spots appear as polyps in the outer parts of the nose, and they grow and change within a few days, during which time their condition should be monitored.
And because of this, you should incise it at the beginning of its appearance and remove all of it. Then place a cautery or a burning medicine on the area where it was removed.
But if the incision is delayed until it has grown larger, then consider whether it has become calcified, hard, dark in color, and less sensitive. In this case, do not touch it with iron, for it may be a chronic abscess; because sometimes one who incises such an abscess can cause great harm to the area that was affected.
And if the abscess is of a light touch and not of a dark color, and when incision is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and incise that without fear, and treat the area with something that dries and constrains until it is healed.
It seems like you've provided a section marker or chapter title from an old text, specifically ".xxvi." which in Roman numerals translates to "26". This likely denotes the 26th chapter or section of a document. If you have more content that follows this marker and requires translation or explanation, feel free to share it! Otherwise, if you need further context or details about how such numbering was used historically, let me know.
On缝合鼻子、嘴唇和耳朵当它们因伤或类似原因而断裂。
Understand that when you encounter a rupture of continuity in one of these cartilages, you should not place much confidence in that operation unless it is in certain men.
Therefore, when you encounter any cause of those wounds, you should consider if it is a fresh wound with its own blood, and then you align the two edges of the wound with sutures, and then care for the inside so that it heals.
And if the edges of the wound that has broken continuity are already separated and each is made whole, then you must pull each part of its visible stitches until blood comes out. And then adjust the two lips with sutures and tighten them, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder on them which you have ground finely, and place over the powder a piece of diafinicon plaster, or some other consolidating plaster, and leave that bandage for two days or three, and then remove it and replace that plaster until the stitches fall off by themselves, and finally care for it with ointment until it is healed.
And the method of suturing is that you close the discontinuity with needles as we have recommended in the suturing of the abdomen, or you can also close the discontinuity with stitches as you know how to do.
Chapter XXVII.
On the extraction of those causes that occur in the two lips within the partitions.
Often observed in some men within the partitions of their lips are hard swellings resembling lard, and some of these are smaller while others are larger.
Therefore, you must turn the lips and separate each of those hard swellings entirely, and then fill the space left by their removal with ground sage until the blood is constricted. Then wash it with sweet wine and treat the area with a styptic agent until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.
From the insertion of the flesh fitted into the gums.
There are many swamps above the flesh fitted into the gums, which the ancients called alveoli. Therefore, you must suspend it with a hook or hold it with forceps and incise its root, allowing the pus or blood to flow.
Then apply over the area some triassatum or other styptic or cicatrizant powders.
And if that flesh returns, then incise it again and cauterize it, because after the cautery it will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
On the extraction of teeth with force.
When on the surface of the teeth, both those inside and outside, and between the gums, there are sharp splinters, tartar, and some swamps that are blackened or yellowish-green, this leads to corruption in the gum and causes the teeth to become decayed.
And thus it is necessary that you seat the patient between your hands and place his head on your thigh, and scrape the teeth in which you find those scales and cause similarities to sand so that none of these causes remain, and this is done for the blackness and yellowness and other things so that they may be cleansed.
Therefore, if what is at the beginning of the reasoning remains true; good. And if not, then you repeat the reasoning on those things on another day and on the second and on the third until it comes to the final statement in which you want.
And know that teeth require various forms and many shapes of forceps according to what is prepared for your operation. And therefore, the razor with which the tooth is cut from inside is different from the razor used to cut between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors you should prepare, which you will see soon:
Chapter .xxx.
For the eradication of teeth.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
More importantly, when the patient is forced to have that tooth removed, you must be certain which one is causing pain, because often the pain can deceive the patient and lead them to believe a healthy tooth is the source. If you remove that one and the pain does not stop until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, for we have already seen this through barber surgeries.
Therefore, you must be certain which tooth is causing pain, and once you know this well, then you need to scrape around the tooth with a spatula that has some medicinal power, until it separates from the gum completely. Then remove it using your fingers or with fine scissors bit by bit until it comes out.
And then take large forceps with good gripping power or strong pliers, and hold the patient's head between your knees so that you have a firm grip and it does not move, and then pull the tooth straight out in such a way that you do not break it nor cause greater pain to the patient.
And if it is not easily removed, then take one of those instruments and gently remove it from all sides, exerting effort to extract it in the same manner as at the beginning.
But if the tooth is loose or decayed, then you must wrap a piece of cloth around the loose part and tighten it with the tip of a fine probe so that it does not break when you apply pressure to it with forceps.
And it is necessary that you perform carefully with scarification around all parts of the gum and be mindful of your strength so as not to tear that part and leave a wound, and return to the patient for the harm to be less severe than the initial pain.
And be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their stubbornness and audacity regarding the removal of them; for they often bring severe illnesses upon men which are harder to treat, and the roots of which remain unhealed, or that you extract it along with some bones of the jaw as we have testified many times.
And then for the extraction of it, the mouth should be washed with hot wine or sour wine with salt.
And if bleeding occurs because of this, just as it sometimes happens unexpectedly, then sprinkle some amount of zaugy (a kind of medicinal substance) on the wound, and if that zaugy does not work, apply a cautery.
The form of the forceps and delicate tongs with which a tooth is extracted should be long at the end, short in manipulation, and thick, so that they do not bend when using them for this task.
And they should be thick in the middle so that when you exert force with them, they do not bend, and their ends should be short.
And they should be made of Indian iron, properly fashioned with straight ends, and at the ends of these, there should be teeth that fit into each other and exert force through strong constriction. Sometimes, the ends of these are in the shape of the beak of a bird called ciconia, which is a stork, and they have a powerful constricting ability.
Capitol .xxxi.
For the eradication of teeth and extraction of the bones of the jaw that are trapped.
When you need to extract a broken tooth that has some root remaining, then it is necessary for you to place over the area a poultice made of bread for one or two days until the area is softened; and then insert forceps or pliers with ends shaped like the beak of a bird called stork or vulture, which is the form of the forceps:
The extremities of their limbs should be treated thusly like a file or an emery board.
And if you do not obey the sensation with these forceps or tongs, then you must cut into the root and peel away all the flesh and insert the instrument called an atalí, which is a small lever of this form:
And let one end be a small thick part, and it should not be inserted too deeply so that it is not broken.
So if by this the urine is forcefully expelled, it's good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular at the tip, in which there should be some thickness:
The form of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a finer tip.
And already with this instrument, which has two prongs, the form of which is as follows: and with other instruments which precede in the scraping of teeth; for it is often done with this instrument which resembles a large needle, and this is its form:
the curved or short triangular tip, which should be of some thickness, and not too fragile so that it does not break.
And you should know that the instruments for moving teeth are also similar to other instruments.
But the skilled and subtle artisan in the art can find by themselves according to what the operation and diverse diseases indicate; for there are diseases for which the ancients did not describe or leave proper instruments, due to the varied forms of different kinds.
But if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are fractured, or if you need to, then set the bone back in its place using what is appropriate from the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots, and assist with gestures, the form of which is as follows:
And if there is any small swelling in it, and it should be compressed or held by the mouth so that it does not escape or flee before all the pus has been expelled; then restore the area with appropriate medicines.
And if there is a small ulcer in the bone, then scrape that ulcer and its blackness, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of prominent teeth over the others.
When the prominent teeth do not follow their natural course and are more prone to this condition, especially among women, and particularly those who are more venerable; therefore, you must consider: if a tooth is close to another tooth and cannot be removed or loosened, then extract that one; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument, which has the following form; it resembles a pig's snout and should be made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp edge.
And let your incision be such that you cut it over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and ensure that none of the other teeth are damaged.
And if a prominent tooth is excessively rough, then file it with an Indian iron file, which has the following form:
And it should all be made of Indian iron and the file used carefully; and it should be made of ground points like a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth is filed little by little over several days easily, so that no other tooth becomes damaged or decays. And then tie that at the end, and shave that with sharp razors.
And if it is a tooth of which a part is broken and it harms the tongue, then you must file that inside so that the roughness of that fragment is removed and smoothed, and fill it so that the tongue is not hurt nor the speech corrupted.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver fillings.
When you encounter front teeth that have been displaced or loosened by impact or falling, and the patient cannot chew on what they eat, and you have treated it with styptic medicines but your treatment has not worked, then in order to prevent them from falling out, they should be secured with gold fillings and not silver ones, because silver can corrode and will fall out after a few days, whereas gold never changes.
And the filling should be of such fineness and thickness that it can enter between the teeth; and the method is to take the filling material and place twice as much between two healthy teeth, then increase it with two twists of the filling material between the damaged teeth, or if there is one or several, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And then repeat the insertion into the area where you began, and insert your hand with ease and skill so that it is not rough.
And let your grip be with which you hold the thread so that it does not slip from the roots of the teeth.
And then separate the excess bile from the extremities using forceps or tongs, and add those to each area by hand, and place them between the healthy tooth and the decayed tooth, so that they do not cause injury to the tongue. And then loosen that area as tightly as possible.
If it is loosened or broken, strengthen that or those with another thread in such a manner throughout its entire length.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the reaction of two healthy teeth and two diseased ones, just as you see these bound together:
And when it is done that one or two teeth are returned to their respective places at the gum line, and they have grown back as we have described, and that they remain in place.
And this is done only by skilled artisans and wise [individuals].
And sometimes a piece of cow bone is adapted as a cause [likely meaning "solution" or "remedy"], and it is fashioned into the shape of a tooth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is secured as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the condition that affects the tongue and prevents speech.
This condition that affects the tongue sometimes is present from birth, with which a person is born, or it is accidental and occurs due to an injury that has already healed.
And the operation is to open the mouth of the patient, with their head positioned in your lap; then lift their tongue, and subsequently cut that nervous ligament according to the width within which the tongue is separated from its root.
And if in that area there is any hardness or knotting, and this has been caused by the consolidation of an inflammation, then you cut and divide that area across its width between where you have already divided the ligament and dissolved the knot.
And take care that a fissure is not made in the layer of flesh and that you do not split the artery here, causing blood to flow.
And then wash the remnants of the incision with wine, or with vinegar, or with cold water; and then place a salve on it; this is a method where the patient keeps the salve under their tongue each night to prevent it from solidifying again.
And if a blood flow occurs, place finely ground vitriol over the area; but if the bleeding continues, then cauterize the area with a red-hot cautery which is suitable for this purpose. Then treat it with other methods until it is healed.
Chapter XXXV.
On the extraction of a ranula from the tongue.
Sometimes, a swelling resembling a small ranula appears on the tongue, preventing it from functioning normally; and it grows inside until it fills the mouth.
And the procedure is to open the mouth of the patient wide in front of the sunlight and examine the swelling.
And if you see it is of dark or black color, hard, and the patient feels no sensation in it, then do not touch it for it is cancerous.
And if it has turned white, indicating moisture, then insert your finger into it and incise it with a fine spatula, cutting it completely; and if blood flows during the procedure, then place finely ground vitriol on it until the bleeding stops.
And then return to your work before you have fully taken it out, before it is washed with sweet wine and salt; and treat that with another cure until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxvi.
From the extraction of abscesses from both ears and those that occur in the throat, as well as other abscesses.
When they appear in the throat swollen, these are glands that are somewhat similar, which develop outward and are called the tonsils. When you treat them with what we have said in the division and it does not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, of a dark color, with little sensation, then do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of a red color and the root is large, then do not touch it with iron due to the flow of blood; before you let it mature inside, then either you will extract it, or it will burst on its own.
And if it is of a white color, swollen, and the root is delicate, then that one needs to be incised.
And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess has rested from cautery with complete rest or if it has decreased somewhat; then make the patient sit facing the sun, and his head should be in your hand, and open his mouth, and the servant takes hold of his tongue with an instrument of noble design, which has this form:
And whether it is made of silver or iron, it should be sharp like a knife.
Therefore, when you press with that the tongue and the swelling is shown to you, and cut on that your garment, then take an ounce and place that in the swelling, and pull that outwards as much as you can. And here is the translation of the given line:
And here is the translation of the given line: And it is similar to forceps, but the ends of it are curved, so that the opening of each one is in line with the other, being sharp, which is made of iron and well-tempered.
But if this instrument is not available to you, then cut it with a spatula of which this is the form: It should be sharp on one side and blunt on the other side.
And after you have incised one thigh, incise the other in the same manner of incision, and then the incision will heal the patient from cold humors.
If there is an excessive flow of blood, use water from the decoction of pomegranate peel or myrtle leaves and similar styptic causes until the bleeding is stopped, then treat it until it is healed.
And at times there appear other swellings in the gums or on those two auricles, and incise those as I have said in the section about incising two tumors similarly.
And I have already treated a woman with an abscess that had formed in her throat, which abscess tended to a dark color, of little sensation, and it had already closed off her throat, the woman was breathing with great difficulty, and had already been deprived of food and water, and she would have reached death if it had lasted one more day or two.
And the abscess had risen so much that it broke through two paths to discharge through two channels.
Therefore, I decided to act surgically and inserted one of the instruments into one of the paths, and pulled it out, and a large portion was expelled. Then I incised the other path where I understood the abscess continued, and then I forced open the mouth, and pressed her tongue, and then I inserted the instrument into that abscess.
Then I removed a large part of it, and only a little blood flowed from it. Therefore, the throat of that woman was cleared, and she immediately began to drink water, and soon after took food. Thus, I did not cease to incise that abscess multiple times for a long time, and new abscesses would form in place of those, which I continued to incise until they were fully resolved.
Therefore, I have already gathered and cauterized the wound of him, thus stopping the bleeding; then I wandered about and do not know what God did with that one near me.
Capitol .xxxvii.
From the beginning of the swelling when it has become abscessed.
When they call it catarrh in the throat, and if it is swollen and elongated, then it is named perpendicular; and if it is found thick and round in a part, then it is called buba.
When it is treated with what we have said in the division, and you do not find your treatment effective, and nevertheless you see that an abscess has already formed and is hardened and subtle, then you must incise around the area that has aggregated; and if it extends to a certain length, and is bloody, of dark or black color, and does not feel sensitive, then you must attempt to incise it, for in this there is fear for the patient.
And when you see that according to the method I have described of its whiteness and length, you should make the patient sit and press their tongue with an instrument whose shape allows for this procedure, then insert the ounce into the new area, pull it down, and incise it using one of two instruments which are used in the incision of two halves.
And it is necessary that you do not incise beyond what naturally fits its boundary, for if you cut further, you will harm their speech.
And then for the incision, use what we have recommended in the section of two halves, and take care that it heals properly.
If the patient is frightened by the incision made on them, one must use ingenuity in the cauterization to address their fear, and the method of cauterization should not be harsh but rather with sharp water. Place the head of the patient on your thigh, then press their tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, and then take the water that has been specified in the chapter on cauterization, and warm it with that live heat source, and place it neither too thickly nor thinly, and use this to fill the concavity of the instrument which is shaped thus:
Let the extremity of it be concave in such a way that the medicine is placed like the concavity of a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine on the ulcer. The patient should lie on their side so that no saliva or mucus from the mouth mixes with the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not descend by any means into the throat of the patient and cause harm to them.
Then place your hand with the medicine and apply it to the uvula for a short period of time until you see it become darkened and soothed by the action of the medicine.
And if you wish, take some cloth and wrap it around the end of the reed, and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the reed with the cloth into a tube so that the cloth adheres to that tube, and do this as many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the grape, and then let it dry until it falls off after three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and then for the cauterization, clean around the grape with a cloth soaked in wine, and modify what is in its circuit of the medicine, and it should be washed with cold water, and treated externally with poultices, and internally with decoctions until it is healed.
And this type of treatment is safer than incision and longer in duration.
Sometimes the uvula is cured with something more subtle than cauterization and incision, for it is treated by fumigation in this manner: take candles, hyssop, origanum, rue, saffron, chamomile, bryony, and similar herbs; prepare all those ingredients or some of them in a pot, and let them be submerged in sour wine, and boil; the pot should be well sealed with suitable wax, and place a tube in the middle of the pot on which is placed a concave instrument made of silver or iron.
And insert the extremity into the mouth of the patient so that the vapor reaches the uvula over the canal, so that the uvula is moved or obscured.
And then apply to those dry spotted areas, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the occurrence of abscesses, because it would overly concentrate on the abscess, and you should not do that; instead, you should declare the treatment of the abscess with a cautery.
And if this instrument is not available to you, then take a reed and attach an eggshell to the end of it so that the patient's mouth can be cleaned, because the eggshell prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the extraction of thorns and other objects that adhere to the throat and other causes.
Spotted objects adhering to the throat or fish bones or some other cause.
Then you must extract what is visible of those objects, on which you focus your sight, by pressing the tongue with an instrument in front of light, so that you can see clearly what is in the throat.
And what does not appear and is hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because by doing so, the cause attached to the throat will be forcefully expelled through vomiting; or that the patient swallows a piece of raw radish or chicory root or a piece of dry bread; or takes a piece of dried sea sponge, and soaks it strongly with honey, and then the patient swallows that, because when it reaches the place where thorns are and is extracted, it will be forcefully expelled. And also take an eel and wrap it in honey, and place it inside until it is softly extracted; or take a leek and soften it and then insert it gently.
And if it is not forcefully expelled by the causes we have mentioned, then use an instrument made of lead according to this form:
And it should be thicker than a small tube, and at one end, it should have a curvature that allows you to insert it into the patient's throat easily.
And raise the patient's head upwards, and be careful not to touch the bones of their throat, so that you do not cause harm by pushing against the bone or spine, or have the doctor use their hand to guide it.
And although the patient himself interferes more, by his knowledge of the site of the attached cause and pushes into it, and pulls his hand with the instrument onto it, all this according to the quantity that is prepared for him inside before being plugged up.
Capitol .xxxix.
From the extraction of the leech attached to the neck.
When leeches are treated as we have said in the section of treatment with medicines and not compresses, consider at this time the shadow of the patient under the sun, because you have examined the tongue of the patient with an instrument that we have recommended.
Therefore, if you use bloodletting, extract it with a small instrument or with subtle maneuvers appropriately.
And if it is not possible for you to extract with that, then take a concave cannula and insert that into the throat of the patient, and then place an ignited iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this as many times (until the bloodsucker is dead and comes out of the throat) and the patient must abstain from water for the entire day.
And then take a vessel full of cold water, open the mouth of the patient in it, and wash the mouth with it; and do not remove it for any reason and let the patient gargle the water back and forth with their hand for about an hour, because the bloodsucker immediately contracts upon feeling the water.
But if it is not cured by what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with camphor or asafoetida using the instrument we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, as it may help.
And here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And if it does not work, then you repeat the fumigation several times, and abstain the patient from drinking, eating salty and spicy foods, and do not let them drink water; thus, it is necessary that this regimen be strictly followed.
And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodsucking (likely referring to bloodletting) is drawn from the throat when it is seen; and it resembles forceps in this way, except that there is some curvature to it: Here is the translation of the given sentence:
It appears that the text provided is not a complete sentence but rather a chapter or section title. Here’s how it might be translated:
In which is the summary of the discourse concerning abscesses and their incision.
These abscesses are various types, in different ways, according to their description, each one in this book.
And they are diverse in their puncture and incision by two methods, of which one is according to the type of abscesses themselves; and by what we understand about the humors.
And the second method is according to the places where they occur in the body, for an abscess on the head is different from one on the buttocks; and an abscess in a fleshy part is different from one in a joint; and each of them has its treatment by operation.
And some abscesses should not be punctured until the pus is fully mature or complete.
And other abscesses which should be treated when they are still raw and not yet fully matured, such as those near joints; for an abscess near a joint prolongs its existence until you can remove what is inside it, and this weakens or corrupts the ligaments or nerves of that joint, causing contraction of the limb. Or if it is an abscess near a major limb, and if you delay piercing it until it is fully matured, it will affect the main limb; or if it is near the buttocks, pierce it before it is fully matured; but do not puncture one that is raw or incompletely digested, except for those near the buttocks, so as to prevent its pus from spreading inside the buttocks and forming a fistula, or becoming incurable at the site. But you must know the time for the puncturing of the abscess, and this is when it has matured.
And you must know that it is matured when there is the cessation of pain and the end of fever, and also the reduction of heat and pulsation, and the sharpness at the head of the abscess, and other signs.
And you must know that the puncture should be made in the lowest part of the abscess where the pus is collected and from which the pus will come out for the healing of the prominence.
And the puncture should always be made along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in areas of the hands or feet, and in places of veins, tendons, nerves, arteries; and lastly, in all other places where reflection does not occur; for in those that do reflect, use the puncture according to that member.
And when the abscess is in a fleshy area, it is better to delay the puncture until the digestion of the second stage is confirmed, as we have said; for if you pierce it before that, the suffering of the poor patient is prolonged and much foulness results, and the lips of it become hardened and its depth worsened.
But some abscesses are punctured according to the breadth of the flesh or body part, due to necessity, or according to what the limb requires.
And it is necessary to administer a small puncture in small abscesses, and in large abscesses, a large puncture or multiple incisions according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And there are other abscesses in which it is necessary to hollow out the core and make an incision; when it is done thus, like cutting bread, and once it is done, it remains stable, just as you would treat those that occur in clusters of boils and buboes.
And there are those that are incised with a section having three angles; and there are others in which it is incised like the shape of a miter leaf, such as the abscesses on the ankles.
And among those in which a round section and a crescent section are administered, and similar to those.
And for that which is not as such like superficial lion's abscesses, you must puncture it with a superficial or flat incision only.
And when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, you should pierce it, not fearing to extract all of the poison at once; first extract part of it, then pack the abscess with a dressing the next day, then extract a larger portion, and repeat this process several times according to progression until it is completely drained.
And especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an elderly person in decline, because the animal spirit often dissolves with the discharge of pus, and the patient may die quickly, so you must operate carefully.
Take great care with this chapter and then your puncture in which you pierce these abscesses; you must clean the wounds and consider if the wound of the abscess is small, or is a flat section; now administer poultices of oil or old catgut; and if the abscess is large, and the fissures of the puncture are numerous, then you must place a plug in each tract until they come together.
And if in the abscess a part of the chain is severed or you have made it concave around its circumference, then you must compress it with old catgut or a thread made of oiled cloth, just as when you draw out pus or roots, with moisture; strengthen that by the third day; and then process it and cure it with whatever ointment is necessary until it is healed.
And if during the time of your operation there is a flow of blood, then you should administer cold water and sour wine in which you soak an oiled cloth, and place that on the site of the bleeding multiple times.
But if the bleeding continues, then you must administer treatment and cure using powders which I have recommended in various places of this our book and its sections.
And if it is during winter time, and the location of the swelling is near sensitive nerves, then you should infuse pillows with vinegar and hot oil, and place those on the affected areas.
And if it is summer and the areas are fleshy, then you must place poultices soaked in water and oil or wine and oil, and all this should be rubbed for up to three days as we have said, and then you must open the abscess, clean it out, and administer what is necessary for its healing until it is cured.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses universally, but according to the method of distinction, I have already spoken about each abscess individually in separate chapters.
Chapter XLII.
Of the section of abscesses which appear in the nape of the neck.
In the nape of the neck, small abscesses appear, and they are similar to nodes that contain tunics which are in their formation; and their contents are particles.
And from them come pus, and those contain a moisture similar to slime. And from those contain moisture similar to powder, and they resemble stones; and from those come the stony, hard ones.
And in the section of all surgeries and in the extraction of those where there is no fear, you should perform the extraction of those which do not cause contradiction or harm.
And the operation in cutting those is that you express those with an instrument the form of which comes close to this, which is called a lancet, within which you know it contains.
For if what is contained is moisture, then cut that with a longitudinal incision according to this superficial section:
And begin at the section of line B into line G. Thus, as the moisture is evacuated, you scrape that area which contains the moisture, and do not leave any cause behind, for if any cause remains, the problem returns repeatedly.
Then submerge a piece in Egyptian poultice, if it is available, and if not, in water and salt; and fill the wound with that and leave it there for another day, for with this you corrode all that is rotten from that membrane.
Then repeat the application of the Egyptian poultice a second and third time if needed, until you are confident that there is no rotten cause remaining from that membrane; now treat the wound with the poultice until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then you incise it in the following manner: with an incision having the shape of a cross, and extend once between the two lips of the incision and scrape it thoroughly, and apply your effort in extracting the membrane that contains it.
But if the arrow causes complications, then do what I tell you first.
And similarly, perform the section and cure of a calcified abscess as we have told you; sectioning a calcified abscess is easier, for it contains little blood and moisture.
And sometimes some of these abscesses that are on the head in some people contain no moisture at all; the cause is that I once tried to incise an abscess on the head of an old woman and found the abscess as hard as a stone, rough, white, which could not be broken, and if anyone were to strike it, it would hurt them.
However, in other accidental abscesses on the head this is not the case, such as the abscesses that occur on children's heads and around the earlobes; however, the sectioning of all these should be superficial.
And stop the puncturing of those from the lower part to relieve the flow of pus to the lower areas.
And then treat those with whatever is appropriate for that treatment.
Capitol .xlii.
Of the treatment of scrophulas which occur in the neck.
Swollen glands often cause these swellings in the neck and in the armpits and in the groins; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck are often generated between them, and all of these scrofulas have their own proper layer, just as in the knots and swellings of the head, as we have described.
And the types of these scrophulas are diverse, for some are stone-like, and some contain moisture, and there are malignant ones which do not obey treatment.
Therefore, in the one that you find to be of good disposition upon touching, where the color that is evident is close to the color of the chain, and it is soft throughout, and it is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the artery, and it is not hard, you should incise it with a superficial cut from the part above down to the part below along the line of G within the line of B, and scrape it thoroughly, and extend both lips of the chain with an ounce, or with several ounces if you need them, as we have said in the swellings of the head, and extract it little by little.
And it is more cautious that neither the vein nor the nerves be cut.
And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that it does not hurt your hand upon incision, or disturb the patient, and cut what is not necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and stop your operation, then apply finely ground vitriol or other powders which stop blood flow, and constrict the wound, and leave within that which alleviates the acuteness of the inflammation and softens the wound so it begins to become pus-filled. When the blood is congealed.
Then return to your operation until you have completed it.
And then use your index finger to check if there is any cause of the other small swellings, then incise those and clean them.
And if there is a large vein at the base of the swelling, you must not incise that swelling at its base. Before it is necessary to heat that with strong folded cloth and to leave that inside so that it falls by itself without harm.
And then fill the wound with old cataplasm which you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then treat it thus.
And if you incise that scrofula completely, then you must approximate the two edges of the wound and sew them immediately so that there is no remaining excess material above.
But if you see that there is excess material due to the size of the scrofula, you must understand how to incise the root of it, draw it out, and administer suture as mentioned.
And for those scrofulas that contain moisture, pierce it with a superficial puncture where you see the site of maturation, and make an incision to drain the pus at the base of the swelling, as we have said.
And then administer a puncture, using cautery and ointments similar to those, so that it corrodes the remaining corruption. And then when you see the wound already cleaned, then you treat it with an ointment of flesh-generating properties until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.
Of the section of the abscess plug that occurs in the groin.
The ancients performed this section on the abscess plug, and no one has been seen in our land who has done this procedure.
And this is the inscription of the speech of those [individuals].
More in men who have hemorrhoids, it must be avoided to extract the stone, because by doing this no benefit is made since all the veins and the larger ones of the patient are here.
And in those who have abscesses caused in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the illness is not in the bone, it is necessary to incise from the section of the epiglottis to avoid the destruction that is caused by perforation.
Therefore, when we want to do this, we must incise the epididymis leaving three circles of the epididymis untouched, or make four small sections across its width between two such circles, ensuring that the cut is made in the body part, not in the cartilage, and this area is suitable for sectioning because it lacks flesh and the blood vessels are sparse.
And if the doctor is inexperienced, it is necessary to extend the ligament of the kneecap with an incision, and then cut the ligament until it reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if there is any reason to do so.
Then incise the chipla as we have recommended; it is indicated by the section of the canal through the flap, which is that part that remains after the disruption and by the separation of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
When the hour is dreaded in which the perforation is feared, add two loops of the chain of the wound, and thus only the cartilage is affected.
And then administer medicines that promote flesh growth within so that it may heal.
And Albucasis says that the essence of the sermon we have recounted is that some of those abscesses have already obstructed the windpipe of the patient, and the patient has come near to death, and their breath is cut off, and some proceed to incise the epiglottis so that the patient may breathe at the site of the wound through some respiration and be saved from death.
And by this, you should leave the wound open until the malignity of the disease is consumed; and the malignity lasts for three days; and then after that, you should close the wound and treat it until it heals.
And what I have seen in my practice is that a servant took a knife and inserted it into her windpipe and cut a part of the trachea with it, and I was called for her treatment, and I found the sound like the moaning of someone dying, and uncovered the wound and found blood that had seeped from the small wound.
Therefore, it must be confessed that she had not cut any vein or artery, and the air came out of the wound, and she treated it until it healed.
And it does not harm the servant if there is no hoarseness in their voice, and after a few days they return to the improvement of their conditions.
And now I say that in the section of the hernia there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.
Of surgery on an abscess that occurs outside the throat area, and it is called a hernia of the throat.
This kind of swelling named hernia of the groin is a large swelling according to the body's color, and it occurs in women.
And it is of two manners, for it can be either natural or accidental.
And in the natural case, it is not something to be cured.
And the accidental is of two manners, one of which resembles fatty nodes, and the other manner is similar to an abscess, which is caused by arterial obstruction, and in that case, there is danger. And it is not necessary to apply pressure with iron unless it is in the case where it is small. And you should probe and examine it with your finger. If you find it resembles fatty nodes and is not suspended by any veins, then incise it as you would for nodes, and extract it using what contains the contents of the pouch and fluid; otherwise, thoroughly investigate its entire nature, and then treat the area with whatever is necessary for healing until it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
On the section of types of nodes.
About the various types of nodes, I have already described all their types in the division.
And it is necessary that I recount thus the difference between a knot and a hernia as if there were doubt.
So I say that in a hernia there is heat and fever and violent pains within until the boiling of the excess is calmed; and complete putrefaction occurs at which point the fever, pain, and heat cease.
However, in a knot, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a solid mass that is like a lion's paw in its own sack.
And it depends on the color of the body, and its beginning is like a seed, and it grows as a vein, being larger or smaller, and they are of two types: dry or fatty and containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are spots, as I have described in the division.
Therefore, when you arrive at the treatment of a knot, you must remove it and trace it back to its origin using a tool that is called an introitus, as its form will be described in the chapter that follows this one.
And it is the method of investigating abscesses and all knots, which is that you take this tool and insert it into the most moist area that you find in the abscess, and you will stir the contents with it little by little until you know that the tool has penetrated the core.
And then adjust your hand according to the size of the abscess, and then extract the foreign matter and consider what has been left behind in its trace.
And if the current humidity, of whatever color it may be, is extruded, then you incise it with a superficial cut as I have said in other cases of abscesses.
And if there is no humidity left in the trace of the foreign matter, then you know that it is fatty.
And dry it with a cut in the shape of a cross as follows: Do as you have been taught, and suspend it by the knots, and remove the chain from all sides with ease, and cover the skin or sack over it, if possible, and extract that pus along with the knot.
But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that pus entirely, and sometimes you must do this instead, and then you extract it in pieces to ensure nothing remains.
For if any of it remains, whether little or much, the knot will return accordingly.
And if you see that some small part remains from it, then complete the wound with some sharp and caustic powders, strengthen the wound, place over where the abscess sits a cautery, and treat that with another form of cure until it is healed.
And if the knot is large, then sew the two lips of it together and treat that with something that promotes healing.
But if the pulse is contrary or non-pulsating, then cut and fill the area with something like trissat which is vitriol, leave that in place for two or three days until the wound becomes pus-filled and the blood's boiling subsides; then return to incising what remains of the knot.
Chapter XLVI.
On the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
Of those, the forms of the instruments are of three types, some are large, some are medium, and some are small.
The form of the large instrument is as follows:
The form of introducing something small is this:
Here is the translation of the given line:
And these are the forms of the experienced ones, and they are called albedri, and one of those is called beryd.
And so of three spices, for among them are grain, honey, and a little [of something else].
The form of great experience, form of it:
The form of experienced midwife, in this case:
The form of poultice, form it as follows:
It seems like the text you provided is a mixture of languages similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here's an attempt at translating the given sentence:
And you make them round, thick, like large needles with which leather is sewn together, and they are made of citrus wood, or of wood or iron, or silver, and the best ones are those made of citrus wood.
And they make the practice of black plumes, which they agree that by those the fistulas in their cavity are opened where reflections occur, and are reflected with its light with those reflections.
And of three types, for some are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the stricture.
Forma del experient gran de plom:
Form of the experienced midwife with lead:
Form of the small lead instrument:
The forms of wounds are of various types, for some are simple curves, which have only one curvature, and they are of three types: large, small, and medium.
And from these are formed hooks, and they are of three types.
And of those hooks having two curves, and there are three types.
And they have three curves, and are of three types.
And all of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas: Form of an instrument having two curves: Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:
And these are the forms of the scalpels with which nodes and abscesses are cut and squeezed, and they come in three types, namely large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:
Forma del scapel migier:
Forma de scapel pauc:
The extremities through which a section is made are sharp, and the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a manner, but rather to ensure that there is caution during the lancing of nodes so as to avoid injury to veins or nerves, and through this the patient may be healed and find some tranquility from the burning sensation that arises from the lancing of the abscess.
And these are the forms of almagidas, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
They are made from barley and resemble the form with which alcohol is made.
And in the soft extremity, it is pricked with a hidden spatula and in that area, it reaches both inside and outside parts, as you wish, just as you see.
The forms of spatimis, which are hidden between the fingers causing the puncture of the abscesses and the patients do not feel them, and they exist in three species: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of cupping with which the blood flow is cut off, and there are three types; large, medium, and small; the forms of it:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut, e sian subtils.
And it is necessary that these sizes of cupping glasses be large, medium, and small, so that with those you can quickly draw off blood when needed, and at times when first there is no medicine.
However, do not use those for bleeding the entire body, and only use them on fleshy areas, such as in the creases of the arms and thighs, and in the creases of the breasts, belly, and knees, and similar to these in other fleshy moist creases.
And sometimes, other small instruments resembling little hooks according to this form are used; through which the blood is let when performing phlebotomy or proper incision of a vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round according to this form:
Chapter XLVII.
On the treatment of men's breasts that resemble those of women.
Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen due to the excess of sleep as they start to become flaccid, and then the breasts swell and resemble those of women, becoming pendulous and full of abscesses.
And for the one who wishes to treat this condition, you must incise those areas with a lunar section according to this form, from line B inward to line G, and then extract all the thickness, and then apply a wound-healing medication to the wound, and then suture the two edges of the wound together, and care for it until it is healed.
Here is the translation of the given text line by line into English:
And if you do not complete the incision of what needs to be cut due to the patient's restlessness and blood flow, then you must fill the wound with a cloth soaked in corrosive ointment and leave it there until it corrodes the fat that is inflamed, and then treat it so that it may heal.
It appears you've provided a section marker, "Capitul .xlviii.", which in English would be translated as "Chapter XLVIII." This likely indicates the start of Chapter Forty-Eight in a text or document. If you need further translation or have more content from this chapter that requires assistance, please provide it!
This phrase appears to be in an archaic form of Latin or a related medieval language. Here is the translation into English:
These swellings that come from a kind of scrofula, which are hard and contain a sac-like membrane.
And of those that contain humidity; and those that contain humidity must be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line G to the line B. And when all is evacuated which is in the abscess of the pus, then you fill it with old wool and clean the inside on the other day.
And then the cut should be closed and treated with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
And if the abscess is from the glands of the nodes and the scrophulas, then you should incise it in the same way as we have described in the section on scrophulas.
And if the plague has spread to the point of putrefaction, then apply a cautery as we have previously described.
Chapter XLIX.
On the section of abscesses that occur due to arteries or veins.
When an artery is ruptured, and the chain that is above it becomes solidified, then speckled abscesses may occur. The signs by which it is known that inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or a vein: for when the abscess is due to an artery, it forms a long aggregation in the area of the body; and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel a rustling sound within it.
And that which is due to veins appears round on the surface of the body.
And to incise on this swelling is an error, and especially so in those areas near the joints, and in the knees, and in the neck, and in many parts of the body; and it is large, therefore its treatment with iron should be avoided, and that which is in the extremities or head should also be avoided.
And for that which is caused by the inflammation of the artery orifice, make a longitudinal incision along the cord; then widen the incision with forceps and approach the artery, and free it from the tunics so that it is exposed.
And then place the needle and make it penetrate to the other side, and tie the artery with double thread in two places — this method is useful for you to learn in the extraction of two arteries which are in the temples.
And then separate the area between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood that is in it has come out, and the swelling is thus dissolved.
And then administer treatment in which pus is generated where the ligaments are inflamed; and then treat it with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
And if the abscess is due to vein constriction, then you must hold with your hand as much of the abscess as possible with a ligature, and then insert the needle into the place where you have held with your hand; make it penetrate; and use that double thread until you pull it out from the other side, and then tie off the abscess with a strong bandage as I have said to you in the vein binding of both sides with both ends of the thread.
And if you fear that the thread might be pulled out, then insert the thread with that needle throughout the abscess leaving the tip of the needle first, and secure the threads at four places.
Then dry the abscess in its middle until what is inside it is removed; then you cut off the excess of the ligature, leaving what is tied.
And then place over it a cushion that you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the treatment made with plasters and ointments until it is healed.
Capitulize the abscess which you encounter due to nerve twisting.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And the incision is made in the areas of the instep or the ankle, or in any place where the joints are painful.
And it is a severe abscess, and it resembles the color of the rest of the body, and it occurs in the major parts of the body where such conditions are disposed to occur, and when it becomes tight with vehemence, the patient appears to be in a state of stupor.
And it is not an aggregated abscess in the groin area of the body, and therefore the chain (likely referring to lymph nodes or muscles) is left behind, and it spreads throughout without moving forward or backward.
Therefore, of those that are in the joints, it is not necessary to wrap them with iron, for fear that they will cause contraction.
But those that are on the head or forehead should be treated with a spatum (likely a type of medical instrument). But if it is a small abscess, then take hold of it with forceps and remove it completely.
And if it is large, then suspend it with an incision, and drain it, and then clean the area; sew up the wound, and care for it until it heals.
Chapter II.
Of the incision of an abscess that occurs from the groin to the abdomen.
Here is the translation of the given text line by line into English:







































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































