O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre, le qual es le derier de la sciencia de medicina,
For the operation with hands is deprived in our region and in our time of all its practice, except that a little trace of its knowledge remains, and the signs of it are still there; but nothing of it remained except some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which changed mostly into errors and superstitions, to such an extent that the meanings of them were closed off and the force and art of it were weakened.
And it seems to me that I revitalize that according to the order of this treatise in such a way through exposition and explanation and abbreviation; and for the forms of cauterization tools and other instruments of the work to be added to the explanation, and for the preparation of them, which is necessary.
And the reason why no good artisan can be found with their hand in this our time is that the art of medicine is long, and it requires its practitioner to be exercised in the science of anatomy, which Galen recounts within what he knew about the joints of the members and their forms, and the conjunction and separation of them; and had knowledge of the bones, the nerves, and the arteries, and their number, and their location; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and the places of their origin.
And for this reason Hippocrates says that in the name it is much, but in the deed little, and especially in the art of the hand.
But we have already said about this in the introduction of this book; for one who is not knowledgeable about what we have said regarding anatomy will not be free from error, which can lead to the death of people, as I have seen many such cases, for some are formed in this science and fall into error due to their lack of knowledge and experience.
Here is the translation line by line:
And I saw another doctor who took out a stone from a man who had suffered in his state, and the stone was large, and he came to him and extracted that stone with a piece of the bladder, because that man died on the third day.
And I have already called for extracting it, and I saw that because of the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, he would die from it.
And you saw another doctor who was taking a salary from a duke of our land for surgery, and came upon a black castrated man who had fractured his thigh; and the doctor prepared ignorantly, extracted the fracture, over the wound, with pillows and splints with strong binding, and did not leave the wound room to breathe.
And then untie the bandage according to his desires, and then dress the wound, and then keep it dry for several days and command that we loosen the binding; and this should be done until the thigh and foot become free of inflammation and recover.
And I was called to him, and prepared to loosen the binding, and it was achieved that his tranquility returned and his pains lessened.
But corruption had already set in the limb, so it could not be stopped, and the corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until the patient was in peril.
And I saw another doctor who punctured a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated over the course of several days, until the malignancy greatly increased under the care of the doctor.
The cause is that the cancerous growth is pure of melancholic humor, so it is not necessary to treat it with iron entirely, but rather the limb should be treated in such a way that it suffers the treatment completely.
And for this reason, sons, it is necessary for you to divide the operation into two parts with my guidance: one part of the operation that is associated with health, and one part where there is danger in the most critical conditions.
And I have already mentioned this throughout this book in which I find operations that contain errors and fears; therefore, it is necessary for you to keep some things and leave others, so that the pages do not lead you to speak improperly and dishonor you.
And therefore take up your weapons with diligence and protection of God, and face your illnesses with happiness and firmness.
And use the best way by the grace of God to achieve health and praiseworthy success, and leave behind terrible illnesses that are difficult to heal, and keep your weapons against what makes you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and in your name does not escape you: for it is more beneficial to your glory, and even more so in this world and later for your sanctity.
Gualia already discussed in some of his monographs: Do not treat bad illnesses, so that you are not called a bad doctor.
And I have already divided this book into three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter ordered within the context of foot treatment, on the forms of instruments and the tools of cauteries, and on what is necessary for the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, on drying and puncturing, and on cupping, and on plasters, and on the extraction of arrows and similar objects, all chaptered and ordered according to the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the treatment of twists and similar conditions; a chapter ordered within the context of foot treatment, and on the forms of the instruments.
It is necessary for me to speak of the benefits of that cautery and its harms, and in what conditions the use of a cautery is prohibited.
Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the benefit and harm of cauterization is long and prolix, subtle by science, and secret hidden; and many wise people have spoken about it, and they disagree on it, and for me, a little of their discourses suffices, fearing lengthiness.
And therefore, I say that cautery is beneficial to all complexions universally, whether they are with matter or without matter, except for two complexions, which are cold complexions without matter.
In a cold and dry complexion with matter, there is disagreement; for some would say that cautery is beneficial for that, and others would say the opposite, that cautery is not appropriate for a disease that is by quality and dryness, because the nature of fire is heat and dryness, and it is inappropriate for a cold and dry disease to be treated with something that is burnt and dry.
And those who say the opposite argue that cautery is beneficial in all cold and dry diseases that occur in human bodies, because when you compare the body of a person and its humidity to the composition of fire, you find that the human body is moist.
And I say by the word of that person, who has experienced this to me several times openly.
But nonetheless, it is not necessary for those who are already experienced and skilled in the chapter of cauterization from prior practice to follow this, provided they understand the diversity of human composition and the disposition of diseases within themselves, and their causes, as well as the accidents related to them, and the duration of these conditions.
But in other compositions, there is no need for fear, especially in cold and humid diseases, because all doctors agree on these, and they do not disagree about treating them with cauterization.
And know, sons, that the secret of healing through cauterization with fire and its effectiveness comes from cauterization with burning medicine, because fire is simple, and its action only reaches the member being cauterized and does not affect the adjacent member except with slight harm.
But the action of burning medicine extends to those members that are adjacent, and it can cause a difficult-to-heal disease in the affected member and severely exacerbate it.
But fire, because of its subtlety and the goodness of its substance, does not do this; rather, it removes excesses. We already know this through experience and long study of the art concerning the truth of causes; and for that reason, I am excused from a lengthy explanation. And if it were not that my book is not read in this brief pause, where the secret is hidden with fire, and the quality of its operation on bodies and its expulsion by which diseases are expelled, demonstrated with philosophical reasoning, which would sharpen your understanding.
And know, sons, that they forget the time in which it is appropriate to perform cautery and consider the best time of spring.
And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, in order that the harm caused by accidental time is submerged in the healing brought about by the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for necessary pains or severe pains, strong and urgent, which do not tolerate delay for fear that their malevolence might grow, which is worse than a small harm entering over time.
And this does not concern your feet, or, sons, it is valued only by the common people and foolish doctors; thus, to that disease which is healed by cautery it is not recommended at all times, and its consequence should be paused.
And the cause is not as they think it to be because of this, for a cautery is only in place of medicine which alters the composition and dries out the humidity which are the cause of the pains.
But although cauteries are excessive in medicine due to the quickness of its healing and the power of its operation and the greatness of its master.
And it is possible that his illness may return at some time in the future, according to the complexity of the patient and the location of their illness, as well as their strength, and what has been accumulated within their body due to the excesses in them, and what they have acquired through food and similar causes; however, if the illness for which cauterization is administered is a subtle one with little excess and moisture, like tooth cauterization for pain and similar cases, it is possible that such pain may not return, but this applies only to minor conditions.
And the common saying is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this saying is true, not in the way some people understand it, for I believe there is no cure that truly benefits without medicine or another cause before resorting to cautery.
And the cause is contrary to that; the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine is only when we administer methods of cure in some illnesses and those medicines do not provide relief, and then at the end of treatment options, cautery is administered, and it proves beneficial for that. And here, it is said that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding which the common people and many foolish doctors have.
And the ancients said that a cautery with gold is better than one with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the nobility of its substance.
And they said that the place of cautery does not burn, as if this were absolutely true, but I have already experienced this and found that it is not so for all bodies; cautery with that method is good and better than with iron as they say; however, when you do cautery with fire and gold, it is not declared to you, because it ignites according to the quantity of gold by its heat, which prepares to receive cold; and if you apply it over the ignition, the gold melts from the fire, and some plates fall into the fire so that the craftsman cuts due to the occupation of that.
And by this method, cautery is performed with an iron applied lightly and more precisely in the right manner of operation.
And I have already arranged this chapter on cautery according to sections, and I have ordered those of the head among the feet, so that I can quickly provide the inquirer with what they want from it.
The first chapter.
This cautery is applied to humidity and coldness on the affected area, which are the causes of a plethora and various rheumatic fluxes, called running, from the head to parts of the eyes and ears, as well as excessive sleep, toothache, and throat pain, and universally for all diseases that come from coldness, such as paralysis, dropsy, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is as follows: first, order the patient to be purged with laxative medicine for three or four nights, according to the strength of the patient, their age, and their usual habits.
Then command that they shave their head with a razor. Next, have the patient sit between your hands on a low bench and place their hands on their feet.
Then place the tip of your palm near the root of the nose between their eyes. But however, when the middle part of the area has been reached, mark that place with a probe, and then ignite the olive-shaped cautery, which is made in this form:
And then place that over the marked area with a bandage, in such a way that it descends gradually, with which your hand should compress little by little, and you turn that.
And then lift your hand lightly and look at the area, and if you see any part of the bone exposed, about the size of a grain of barley, then raise your hand, and if it does not return with that tool, use another one, if it is cooled down, until the bone is seen as I have told you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the area and leave it for three days.
And then place over it a cloth soaked in oil and leave it on until the heat of the burn is destroyed. And then treat the area with a tetrafarmacon ointment until it is healed.
And they also say that when the wound remains open, it is better to wash it with honey, because it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them say that the area around the bone should be cauterized, and the cautery should be held until some part of the substance of the bone adheres.
And then remove what is adhered to the bone, and then treat it.
And others said that with the cautery reach the hip, pressing strongly on the bone until it yields, and this is the method of performing a small alveolation. And they believe that from that place, vapors emanate from the head.
And if the wound is kept open for a long time, then it should be treated before it solidifies.
But I have not seen these two types of cauterization used altogether, except in some cases out of fear; and leave that aside, you must tell me, it is better for health when it is; for the head is affected by a disruption of continuity as we have testified in other members, and more so when the patient's head is of a delicate nature.
And the first type of cautery is safer and better, you must tell me; and with that method and by working in this way, it is more healthful.
Second chapter.
About the cautery of the head.
When chronic and long-lasting pain occurs throughout the head and is prolonged in the patient, and remedies such as scrapings, cupping, head cleansings, plasters, washes, fumigations, and similar treatments have been used, especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that does not help and brings no benefit from those causes, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong constitution by nature; and if it is not delicate and you find much coldness, then cauterize it with another type of cautery instead of the one previously used. And then apply cautery to that area above the horn of his head with an internal cautery until the swelling is reduced. Cut the tendon and expose the amount of bone that we have counted, and cauterize it with a cautery on the back part of the head in the area called vas – which is the spot where a suction cup is placed. And move your hand in this manner, and do not expose the bone, for the patient will find much greater pain from this than from all other cautery procedures on the head.
And I say this cautery should be placed in its position, for the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is a finer cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is its form.
Chapter three.
On the cautery of non-traditional migraine.
When pain settles in any part of the head or spreads within the brain, the head should be cleansed with medicines and other treatments should be administered as I have described in the sections on diseases; and if this does not help, then cautery can be applied in two ways: either with an acute burning medicine or with iron.
And with a burning cautery using medicine, you should take a piece of wool, and soak it in that [medicine] and bind the ends of it from both sides. And then incise the painful area on the temple with a slanted lancet so that it is done at the exact spot where the pain lies, hidden as it may be.
And then apply over it with a tight bandage by constant pressure, and leave that for the space of three hours; then remove the bandage and bring it out, and let the wound be open for two or three days, and then place over it cloth dipped in ointment until the area becomes warm.
And then treat that with ointment until it is healed.
And if you want, do this with some cauterizing medicines which I have written about in the two treatises on cauterizing medicines.
But the cautery should be done with an iron according to this method: make it in the shape of this cautery tool:
It is called "claus clavilhs" because the head of it is shaped like a clove with some curvature, and in the middle part of it there is a small protrusion.
And then place it over the painful area, and keep your hand steady — so that the vessel beneath does not adhere to it — and rotate the iron little by little with speed.
And if the quantity that is adhered by the pressure of the chain is such as half of it, lift your hand so that the artery below is not compressed, so that blood flow does not occur.
And then soak some cloth in salt water and place it over the area, and leave it there for three days; then apply some ointment with bandages, and continue to treat it with an unguent until it is healed.
And if you do so, cauterize with the tip of the cautery knife as a cautery method, and be careful not to cut an artery in this specific non-traditional area.
Chapter four.
On the cautery of traditional areas.
When you treat traditional areas with the methods of treatment we have mentioned previously and in the sections on diseases, and if the treatment does not improve, and sometimes due to the severity of the disease, what we previously suggested for the first cautery with medicine or fire is insufficient, then you must heat the cautery knife until it becomes white-hot; mark the area of pain with a line as long as half a finger's width or similar; then place your hand firmly and press that spot before incising the artery to reach the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to be cautious about the movement of the jaw, which is damaged due to chewing, and that the muscle does not adhere and the nerve which moves it does not spasm.
And if it is about the care and caution of blood flow from an artery that is to be cut, for in cutting it there is fear, especially for one who does not know what they are doing and is inexperienced and rash; and leaves the operation at its beginning.
And I come with a reminder of the regimen for blood flow accidents from arteries according to its method, in its place in this book.
And if you see that this disease does not respond to this cautery and the body of the patient is tolerable, apply a cautery at the middle part of the head as we have described, and treat the plague until it is healed.
And if you want to, administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on arrow wounds with a cautery having two blades, and this is a better cauterization and more appropriate.
Capitol .v.
Regarding the cautery of ear pains.
When in the ear comes pain due to cold and is treated with purgatives and with the other cure which I have mentioned in the division, and if the pain is not relieved, then use the cautery, and this is what has the name puncta, of which this is the form:
And then apply the point near the ignition, and lead it around the entire ear as if a wheel is rotated, or in the circle of each segment if the pain is in each one. Stretch out with the cautery along the edge of the earlobe little by little until you have felt the area with your hand.
And if the cautery of these points is done throughout the ear, and clean that area, then treat the places in between until they are healed.
Capitol .vi.
Of the cautery of torture.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.
Avoid cautery of the type that causes drying out or spasm of the nerve.
When you treat that type of tumor with poultices and purges and diuretics, and if your treatment does not improve the condition, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first should be at the earlobe, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the diseased part, for moistening does not occur except in the area that appears healthy.
And the method of cautery is to apply the cautery directly at the uppermost extremity of the earlobe slightly above the horn of the head, and on another temple, the length of which should be according to the length of the little finger, and then place your hand with the cautery until half the thickness of the skin is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, which is a type of surgical knife, the shape of which is described above. However, it is more subtle than what you see just a little bit like this; and it requires that such excess thickness be reduced a bit.
And then treat the area with what has been previously processed until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
Of the cautery for old apoplexy.
When apoplexy is long-standing and has been treated with the methods we have mentioned but your treatment does not agree and the patient does not have a fever, then apply four cauteries: on all corners of their head; and one in the middle of the head as we have said; and another on the nape. And the method of the cautery is done according to what has been said above.
And it has already been cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more towards the back; then it should be treated with what you proceed to use.
Chapter VIII.
On cautery for forgetfulness caused by flame.
At the beginning, the patient should be given large seeds and pills that cleanse the kidneys.
Then shave the entire head of the patient and place a plaster made of cerate, as described in the treatise on plasters, on their nape.
And apply that several times, for that is the method of cautery. And do this according to that doctor's order which I have already mentioned.
And thus if that healing method is good; and if not, then apply three cauteries to the lower part of his head, which should be descending from the highest part of the head towards the part closest to the neck. And leave the width of a thick finger between each cautery, and then treat the cautery as has been described.
But if you add too much and the patient can tolerate it, then apply the cautery to the center; and if you need even more, now cauterize above both sides [likely referring to the two sides or corners of a specific area].
Then treat the area that needs healing; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form previously given.
Chapter IX.
On the cautery of the parotid [likely meant to be "parotid gland"] and the relaxation of the entire body.
Proceed with the relaxation of the head using jars and as we have said; then shave the head of the patient, and then apply a cautery to the center of the head, and also apply cauteries over all sides of the head, and a cautery on the lower part of it, and three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the illness of excessive softening of the body and the patients tolerate it and the disease is severe, then cauterize that with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and finally with a cautery inside which touches the spine of the patient, and lift your hand. And then treat that which needs to be healed, and this should be done with an olive cautery.
It seems like you've indicated a section or chapter titled ".x.", but there doesn't appear to be any text that follows it for translation or discussion. If you have specific content from this section that you would like translated or explained, please provide the text, and I'll be happy to help!
About the cautery for epilepsy.
The epileptic is not cauterized unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And thus, it is necessary to purge the brain of the patient at the beginning with herbs and with the other treatment that we have mentioned in the division when the patient is strong and can tolerate the exception of the medicines.
And if it is a child who cannot tolerate the medicines, then administer small doses and mix them with foods that are easy to chew, for several days beforehand, improving the quality of the foods.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and with another cautery on the back of the head, and on each temple of the head it should also be cauterized. And if the patient is strong and tolerates it, then cauterize that with the cauteries I have mentioned, having paralysis and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And let it be an olive cautery according to what is preceded.
But if the patient is a child, then use a gentle cautery according to this method.
Chapter XI.
On the cauterization for melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize that with the cauteries we have mentioned to induce paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess that turns to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give them something to drink that purifies their brain according to what has been mentioned previously in the section.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then make a proper circle on the scalp, and then place that in the middle of the head.
And the patient should be made to sit, and be held from all sides.
Then apply an ointment; and it is better to use the grease from old sheep. And warm that over the fire with moderate heat, which should be endured when it is applied to him. Then place that on the top of his head in the circle, and let it be rubbed in so that it is warmed.
And do this with the patient once a week for a whole week, along with other good treatments until he is healed; or if you want, cauterize that area by making small points according to what is best for him, but ensure your hand holds a cautery as so ordered: this is a special kind of cautery which moistens the brain evenly.
Then place that piece soaked in grease or in the ashes of charcoal.
Chapter XII.
On the cautery of water descending into the eye.
When it is declared that the beginning of water in the brain has appeared through the signs which I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient something that purifies his head, and protect it from all moisture.
And have him sweat in a bath for several days.
And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that with a cautery at the middle of the head; and then cauterize that with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of water discharge from both eyes, or on one side if it is the beginning of water discharge from one eye.
And with a cautery, cut into all the veins and arteries that are below the chain; and place the cauteries at that length along the width of the temples.
And be careful of blood flow when it is being cauterized; and if you see the blood flow, stop it with some medicine, which is within your capability.
And I will come with the wisdom of extracting veins and cutting those, and being cautious of blood flow.
And sometimes it is cauterized on the head between two bones with two backward-facing cauteries.
Chapter XIII.
On the cauterization of old tears (or chronic tear duct issues).
When tears from the eyes are chronic and persistent, and it is evident through the veins and arteries that are visible on the outer part of the head that this is due to cold and phlegmatic excess, then cauterize that area using a cautery as described in the chapter on the beginning of water flowing into the eyes. Additionally, use a cautery at the middle of the head and two cauteries between the temples, and two more cauteries between the bones of the forehead. And if you need to apply additional treatment, then cauterize that entire side of the thigh on top of the extremity of the eyebrow using a small cautery.
Capitol .xiiii.
Of the cauterization of nasal odor.
When you treat that pain with what we have said in the division and your treatment does not improve, then prepare and give to drink to the patient coctions for three nights; then shave his head, and cauterize the area with a medium-sized cautery using olive oil. And then cauterize that area with a clover-shaped cautery using two cauteries on both eyebrows, leaving the hair slightly intact.
And be careful of the artery so that you do not burn it.
And this is the form of the claw-shaped cautery.
Chapter XV.
On the cautery for softening the eyelids of wounds.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened due to illness or humidity, then cauterize that eyelid with this lunar cautery; and this is the form of it:
And if you do cauterize it, apply two small cauteries on both eyebrows, and extend them towards the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity (length) of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand using the cautery, but rather to the extent that one-third of the eyelid is attached.
Chapter XVI.
On the cautery of the eyelid of the eye when the hairs turn inward and poke the eye.
When the hairs of the stomach are converted into parts inside so that they sting the stomach, cautery is applied in those places in two ways, for cautery can be done with iron or with burning medicine.
If you are going to cauterize with fire, command the patient beforehand that he shave his own hairs just as those which they remove, before they are long and curled; and if you pluck them, do so from their root, then tie the skin tightly with a bandage until the hairs grow back.
When the hairs have grown back and curled, then place the head of the patient in your lap, and next apply something over the eyelids of his eyes with a probe, shaped like the leaf of a mulberry, and let the beginning of the probe be near the hair.
And then apply something dipped in egg white or in a poultice of flour on the eye.
And then heat the cautery, which has this shape.
And then cauterize over the area you have marked, little by little, in small spots, until the surface of the diseased area, which is shaped like a myrtle leaf, is thoroughly burned.
And a sign of the healthiness of your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hairs around it lifted from the puncture of the eye.
And therefore lift your hand and leave it for three days, and then place a bandage on the wound until the scab is completely formed. And then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
But if some cause returns near the hair roots and the eyelid becomes softened, then apply the cautery again over that area just as you did initially.
But if the hairs are on the eyelid and hanging down, then cauterize that area until it is raised to its natural position and smoothed out so that the hairs do not irritate the eye.
But the cautery with burning medicine commands the patient to pluck the hairs until they are extended and smoothed out, and then make a form like a miter leaf from linen cloth.
And then take soap known and live ash, an ounce or so of each, and thoroughly mix those ingredients quickly so that they are not cooled; then spread this mixture over the cloth which is made like a miter leaf, and place it on one or both eyes; and place the eye wound immersed in egg white, and the patient's head should be kept still.
And place the finger on the medicine and press it slightly and do not insert your hand until the patient feels the bite of the medicine, for the bite is in him as if from fire.
And therefore, when you perceive that the swelling is caused by a bite, then apply the medicine and use that with your finger; once the biting stops, remove the medicine and wash the wound with water; and now consider if the eyelid has already been lifted as washed, you should remove the constriction with fire or incision, because it's well done at this point; and if not, return to applying the medicine on the spot where it hasn't taken effect yet and doesn’t darken until your operation is completed and the skin contracts.
Then place a bandage over the area with padding until the chain of the adhesion is removed, and then treat it with an ointment or another remedy until it is healed.
And it is necessary for you to carefully guard your operation so that no part of the medicine falls into the wound. If the eyelid becomes softened near some days and any hairs start to irritate the wound, then reapply your medicine to the area where the eyelid has softened, just as you did at the beginning, and continue treating it until it is healed.
And this is the form of mithra leaf.
And you should know that the wounds of men are diverse according to their magnitude and smallness, and therefore your treatment should be adjusted accordingly.
And do not hide the path to treatment from one who is studying this art.
Chapter XVII.
On the cauterization of a fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the eye.
When you treat a fistula as we have described in the sections on diseases and your treatment does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize it according to this method: instruct the patient to place their head on your lap, and have another assistant hold the patient's head between your hands so that it is neither moved nor agitated.
Then place a cloth soaked in egg white or in a poultice of lint over the eye.
And then heat the cautery, which has the following form:
which should be curved, like the shape of a reed or a vulture's feather, at one end where the cautery is made.
And if you want, proceed penetrating into the other extremity. And if you want it to be done in this manner, proceed as follows.
But rather, the one that is concave is better for this work.
Then press the fistula if it is open, and draw out the pus and dry that area. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
Then place the well-ignited cautery over it, and hold that cautery with your hand a little away from the nostril so that your hand does not tremble or the patient becomes disturbed, and then place the cautery in the flesh of the nostril and burn that area.
And if at the beginning of your cautery you penetrate into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, as necessary; and leave it thus for three days, and then place a bandage over that wound and surround it with a drying ointment until it heals.
But if ten days have passed and it is not healed, then apply an sharp corrosive medicine over it until the bone is exposed and is scraped as needed according to its condition.
And here is the translation of the given text:
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, that is good; but if not, it is then necessary to administer a probe into the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to how it will come to its proper place.
It seems like you've provided a chapter or section heading from an old text, specifically "Capitol .xviii.", which translates to "Chapter Eighteen." If you have more content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to provide it, and I'll be happy to help!
This phrase appears to be in an old form of a Romance language, likely related to Latin or Old French. Here is the translation into English:
Motives observed cause fissures in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Therefore, when you treat those cracks using what we have said in the sections and your treatment does not work, then use a small knife-shaped cautery according to this form that is shown:
And let the cavity be adjusted according to the delicacy of that area.
Then place that heated instrument carefully into those cracks so that the cautery reaches the depth of the cracks.
And then treat that with suppositories so it may be healed.
It seems like you've provided a chapter or section marker, specifically ".xix.", which in Roman numerals translates to "19" in Arabic numerals. This indicates the start of Chapter 19 or Section 19 in a text. If you need further assistance with translating or understanding content from this chapter, feel free to provide more details or text!
On the cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the region of the uvula or on the palate or at the root of the teeth there is an abscess that then becomes inflamed, and then bursts, and then becomes old, and pus flows out and a fistula forms, and if you treat it this way but it does not improve its healing, then you must apply a cautery according to the amount received in the fistula, and then place that ignited material into the tract of the fistula, with your hand inside so that the hot iron reaches the throat, and at the back of it do this once or twice; and then treat it as we have said for internal healing until it is healed.
And thus, if the wound is separated and healed, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to expose the area and remove the corrupted bone as will be detailed in its chapter.
Chapter .20.
About the cauterization of teeth and the softening of veins.
When the veins are softened by humidity and the teeth are decayed, and you treat them with medicines but it does not help, then place the head of the patient on your knee, and then ignite the cautery which will have a specific form to be described shortly. Place the quill over the tooth and quickly insert the ignited cautery into it, holding your hand slightly so that the patient can feel the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth.
And then lift your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
And then the patient should rinse their mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and afterwards spit it out, for the decayed tooth is stopped, the softened gum is strengthened, and the corrupted moisture is dried.
Chapter XXI.
On the cautery of tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to cold, or if it is cold or inflamed, or if you do not find relief with medical treatment, then cautery can be applied in two ways: either by using the horn of a cow, or by using fire.
Cautery with horn is when you take the horn of a cow and boil it in iron ashes, then take a piece and wrap it in linen, and then apply that boiled horn to the painful tooth until it cools down.
And then repeat this several times until the heat penetrates to the root of the tooth.
And if you wish, soak wool or cotton in the described solution, and place that on the painful tooth, and place a heated iron over it until the heat reaches the core of the tooth's cavity.
But however the cauterization with fire is that you attend to the thickness of the vein or artery, and if there is any roughness in the core and the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then heat the cautery to the shape it will take, and place that on the tooth while you keep your hand inside until the cautery is cooled; and do this several times whether the pain remains stubborn or not, either on that day or the next day.
And it is necessary that by the application of that cautery, the patient fills their mouth with good food and holds it for an hour, and then rinses out; and this is the form of the cautery.
And cauterize whichever extremity according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the cannula:
Chapter XXII.
On the cauterization of exstrophy.
When the hernias are of phlegm and cold humors and do not obey digestion through medicines and you wish to digest those lightly, then you ignite the cautery in the shape which follows, having two hooked ends so that smoke comes out from one end while you hold the cautery by the other end, and place that ignited part over the swelling once, and again if necessary until it reaches the core of the swelling.
And if the swelling is small, then apply the cautery according to the size of the swelling, and afterwards leave it for three days and place a warm poultice over it until what the fire has burned is removed.
Then treat that with ointment and bandages until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On the cautery for hoarseness of voice and constriction of the windpipe.
When the humidities come upon the bronchus of the lung, especially when this is due to cold composition, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize the area by shaving the skin on the affected spot.
And be careful not to reach the navel with the cautery nor burn more of the skin than necessary.
And cauterize that area with another cautery at the joint of the neck at the last vertebra. And the cautery should be applied to his hand following the previous method.
Then treat that area with the methods described until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
On the cauterization for lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are caused by infiltrating humors and the patient does not have a fever or tuberculosis and the illness is chronic, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the collarbone at the locations near the lungs; and with another cautery in the middle of the chest between the two nipples; and let the cautery be applied according to the previous form.
And if you wish, perform your cauterization with points using the cautery that is called "puncta," the form of which you follow in the puncture for ear pain.
And make points between the toes for them; then treat that area with the method you use which is followed until it is healed.
And here is the translation of the given line:
The text provided appears to be an excerpt from a medieval medical treatise written in a language that resembles Old French or a similar Romance language. Let's translate the given line:
Of the cauterization of the eyelid, which is the cover of the eye.
When the eyelid is dislocated due to lubricating moisture and not fixed at its usual time of return, you should place its dislocation back where it normally returns, and then with a slight movement it will realign itself as we have witnessed. Therefore, first reduce the dislocation, and then lay the patient on their back or on their side; then lift the tendon which is inside the eyelid to the upper parts using the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated towards the inner part.
And then ignite the cautery which has two heads; and this is its form:
And then cauterize the tendon so that it penetrates from one side to the other; and the result will be a figure formed by four-headed cauteries.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this method, and that is why the cauteries are eight.
And then place salt on the cautery points, and subsequently settle the patient in tranquility, and do not move the limb for some time until it is healed.
And if the dislocation is above and this has occurred, then cauterize over the muscle with a claw cautery or with multiple pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed, the humidity is reduced, and the patient is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On the cauterization of the stomach.
When cold and motes of humidity enter the stomach, causing an excess beyond its composition and multiplying rheum to him, and if you continue the methods of cure without confirming it, then the patient must lie on their back with their arms and legs extended. Then cauterize that area with three cauteries: place one cautery under the feet for a length of one finger with a claw cautery, and with two other cauteries placed on both sides of this cautery so that the shape of a triangular cautery is formed; space them out so they are not too close together to cause excessive burning.
And if the depth of the cautery is two-thirds the thickness of the chain.
And the shape of the cautery is according to this form with addition, And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this shall be a cautery according to the circular form as follows:
And let the stomach be cauterized punctually to those who are frightened by this cautery: it is that you place on the stomach points according to the quantity you wish with a probe, and then cauterize those points with a cautery; and then treat it with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Chapter XXVII.
On the cauterization of cold spleen.
When pain in the spleen occurs due to cold or moisture or excessive wind that deviates from its normal composition through excessive excretion, and if the patient is treated with what we have said but does not improve, then the patient should be placed on their back, and you should place three cauteries with a probe according to this form and in this quantity directly over the spleen below the hypochondria, taking into account the lying position of the person.
And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of the finger, and let the cautery be according to the length of the body straight.
And do not move the cautery with your hand.
And if the quantity that is added equals half the specific weight of the chain, and it should not be adjusted further; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them lie down, with their limbs already extended, and raise their arms.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these areas with a knife-shaped cautery, when you do so with subtlety and prudence in the art.
And be careful not to overprocess in the cauterization, and let the specific weight of the entire chain be added so that the whole body is affected and penetrates into the intestines, for the chain here is subtle; and you should know this.
The text appears to be in an archaic form of a Romance language, likely influenced by medieval Latin or old Italian/Spanish/French. The given instruction does not contain any substantive content for translation; it simply states:
From the puncturing of an abscess in the liver with a cautery.
When there is an excrescence or abscess in the liver and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the liver or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the liver, the patient will experience heaviness and sharp pain.
And if it is in the membrane of the liver, then the pain is very sharp and often even exhausts the doctors treating it.
Therefore, the patient should be turned over on their back; then apply pressure to the site of the abscess with your hand; then heat the cautery, which resembles a rod, the form of which was described on the previous page. And cauterize with that type of cautery until all the pus is drained, until it reaches the core, until scab forms.
Then treat it in the same way as other abscesses until it is healed.
And this form of cautery should only be used by those whose study in the art of medicine is extensive, and who have knowledge of many illnesses; however, one must sometimes be cautious with this procedure, but still, leave it to those who are skilled, as they are better suited.
Capitol .xxix.
Of the cauterization of pleurisy.
Diyssero les antics cauteri de las razitz de aristologia a plauresi frega segon aquesta manieyra esser fazedor,
And then submerge it in oil and bring it to the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery at that location which is between the continuation of the clavicle and the neck; and with two small cauterizations guide them, slightly declining towards the area below the beard, and with two cauterizations in that which declines between the fifth rib and the spine, slightly inclining towards the areas behind; and with another cautery at the middle part of the foot; and with another on the stomach, and with three cauterizations at the areas behind; and with one cautery at that location which is between both shoulders, and with two cauterizations from both sides of the foot, leaving the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
And you do not need to touch your hand with the cautery, but rather on the surface of the chain in operation.
And the ancients have already said that some men use an iron cautery shaped like a ray and heat it up, then place it in the area between the ribs, until they reach the abscess with it and clear out the pus, just as we have mentioned regarding the abscess of the liver.
And in this puncture with a cautery there is no need for fear, because one should apply it immediately to the location of the fistula that has not healed.
Chapter XXX.
On the cautery of the molar.
When you treat the disease of the molar with what we have said about treatment in the division and your treatment does not achieve results, then apply cautery in three ways, all of which are correct. One way is to make three or four linear cauteries along the length of the molar, similar to the shape of the liver cauteries that were previously described.
And there should be the width of one finger or a little more between each cautery, and the method of the cautery should be the same method we have described for the liver cautery.
And do not touch the cautery with your hand; and the patient should be lying on his back.
And there is another method of cauterization, which involves igniting the cautery with two flames, a technique we have discussed in the chapter on muscle dislocation, and lifting the chain that is along the length of the thigh so as to align it properly for the left-side lying patient.
And let your elevation be such that you lift the chain according to the length of the body, so that cauteries can be made according to the width of the body.
Then insert the two burning flames into that instrument with which you penetrate the chain from the other side.
Then remove the cautery; and thus four cauteries have been made.
And if you wish, cauterize using a cautery with three flames.
Then you treat the cautery after it has rested and stopped burning for several days, because it is more conducive to healing than other preceding causes.
Capitol .xxxi.
Of the cauterization of dropsy.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 propriament.
When you treat the dropsy with the methods of cure that we have mentioned in the division and do not achieve your treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with four cauteries around the navel and one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the liver, and another cautery on the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and one cautery in the middle of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach. And the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the severity of the condition.
Then leave the cautery open so that it continues to burn for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient from treatment by simply applying cautery, because it is necessary for two intentions to be added to it, and thus it will quickly aid in their recovery.
The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be in the form of a claw, as previously described, and the shape of the cautery with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped, as previously described.
The given text appears to be written in an archaic or constructed language that draws from medieval languages similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. However, the line you've provided is just a chapter title:
Of cautery of feet and of the thighs.
When the feet are swollen with dropsy and filled with watery fluid, one must cauterize the feet on the sole of the foot between the toe next to the little finger and the ring finger, lift your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; then raise your hand, but do not completely return it, for the watery fluid will ooze out.
The cautery is made in this form: Then make two cauteries on both thighs, and let each thigh be cauterized with the pointed end of a knife-cautery. And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh: place one at the top and the other at the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauteries.
And leave the wound open for a long time so that any fluid may ooze out of it.
Then treat it with those causes which we have mentioned.
Chapter XXXIII.
Of the cauterization of the abdominal area.
When the abdominal area is weakened by cold and humidity inside, which affects its digestive and retentive functions located in the stomach and intestines, it should be treated with curative methods and not through confusion. Sometimes patients have suffered from a cautery that exhibits this weakness; therefore, cauterize it with a large cautery on their stomach according to the method used for stomach cauterization, using a circular cautery and four cauterizations around the delicate umbilical region, with a subtle nail-shaped cautery; or apply a cautery on the alcatin (a term that may refer to a specific area or structure in medieval anatomy) over large alozis (another possible anatomical or medicinal reference), or use two cauterizations.
And if there are excessive humidities and the patient tolerates this, then cauterize that area on the pentenilh (possibly referring to a specific anatomical location) and on the intestines, strengthening it by applying two cauterizations on the stomach and near the inguinal regions, for this is a perfect cure that does not fail.
Chapter XXXIV.
Of the cautery of ancient hemorrhoids.
When such is the nature of ancient hemorrhoids or one caused by thick humors or corrupted moisture, and they are treated with what we have said in the division but your treatment does not work, then cauterize using three cauteries over the pus on the small vertebrae that are slightly triangular, and with a cautery above the navel at two fingers' distance.
And if you suspect that the stomach of the patient is chilled and their food is not digested, and their face often becomes inflamed, then cauterize over the stomach with a large cautery as previously mentioned; and with one cautery over the spleen, and another cautery over the liver using a claw-shaped cautery, and leave the cautery open for some time, and then treat internally to ensure healing.
Chapter XXXV.
On the cautery of the throat near its separation.
When you cut the throat, then ignite the cautery that resembles a ray. And insert that ignited object into the severed artery, and finally place your hand inside so that the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood comes.
And do this once or twice, for if there are too many, then cauterize each of them as we have described, and finally treat them with ointments until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on any area, it is more harmful to healing.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the cauterization of fistulas that are naturally harmful in those areas.
When nature does not obey the treatment we have recommended for it, and the patient is frightened by this, they should be treated with a cautery.
Therefore, when there is a fistula in a naturally harmful area that is old and discharges pus and corrupted humidity, the most appropriate thing to do is to probe it with a fine needle, and then determine the depth of it using the previously mentioned needle.
And then ignite the cautery which resembles a ray. And then place that ignited cautery into this fistula, and according to the amount by which you insert the probe.
And repeat the cautery inside until those corrupted parts are burned thoroughly once or twice or three times, according to your need.
And be careful not to burn the nerves and veins; or if the fistula leads to the bladder or the intestine, then be cautious of all those areas; and do not perform this unless the fistula is in a fleshy area and you believe it is not penetrating further.
And then treat the area until it is healed.
And if the area is sealed and the materials are separated from it, and remain that way for a long time, then you know that it is fully cured.
And if the materials are not removed from it, then you know that it is penetrating or into the marrow of the corrupted bone, or this results from those causes which will lead to a recurrence in its place.
Chapter XXXVII.
Of the cautery of hemorrhoids.
When hemorrhoids cause pain due to cold or excessive wind (gas), and because of this the patient's rectum is inflamed, then it is necessary to apply cautery over the hemorrhoids with a pointed cautery on each hemorrhoid, for which the precise memory (method) should be recalled.
And strongly cauterize them with a slight space between each, so that three linear cauteries will result, and thus they will be more effective in healing.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the cautery of the bladder.
When the bladder becomes weakened and softened due to cold and humidity so that the patient cannot retain urine, then apply cautery slightly above the bladder, at the spot where the pubic hair begins. Cauterize with one cautery on the right side and another on the left side of it.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the number of grains of a pulse; and apply the cautery at the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And let the cautery be like a clamp as it is processed.
Capitol .xxxix.
From the cautery of the boil.
When cold and humidity enter the womb, and because of this conception is prohibited, and menstruation is corrupted in them, and provocation is delayed, and you feel pain due to their retention, then it is necessary that the area be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cauterization for the bladder; and with a cautery over the pubic region below, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be made in the shape of a clavicle.
It seems like you've provided a section header that indicates ".xl.", which in Roman numerals stands for 40. If this is meant to be the start of a new section or chapter in a text, and if there are subsequent lines or content under this header that need translation or explanation, please provide them so I can assist further. As it stands, without additional context or text, there isn't more to translate or explain from just the header "Capitul .xl." alone.
On the cauterization for the dislocation of the ankle.
When mucous humidities are poured into the area of the ankle, and they become causes for swelling in their location, and a sign of it is that one thigh appears elongated when compared to the other. And the location of the dislocation is found where there is swelling.
Then it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the part of their knee with a circular cautery, since you will have felt around the circumference of the area as it is swollen, and so that the affected area falls in the center of the circle.
And this is the cautery with which the shape is preceded in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize that area with three large olive wood cauteries.
And the cautery should be performed according to the extent of the inflammation of the entire chain; then heal that which needs to be healed.
The text appears to be in an archaic form of Romance language that draws from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here is the translation for the given line:
From the cautery of the sciatic vein.
When pain comes to the upper part, and it is caused by cold and moisture, the patient is treated with what we have said and not with confinement, which is outdated. Now you must purge the patient of thick humors with stinky pills or artificial pills or similar ones; then cauterize that area.
And the method of cautery in this case is according to two methods: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
It follows according to two scientific methods, of which one is to cautery that area on the wide part with three triangular cauteries in this manner; and make with those a good depth. And the space between each cautery should be the quantity of the thickness of a finger, and the cautery should be olive or grain-sized.
At times, the cautery should be placed on the middle point at the head of the ankle, making four cauteries.
And if you wish, use a circular cautery, which precedes the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, such that the circle encompasses and burns the entirety of the area around it.
And this is the method of cautery for gout when pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.
But if the pain extends into the thigh, then apply two cauteries on the thigh at the spot where you ask the patient if the pain is; and with one cautery on the calf, about four fingers away from the outer part.
And if the cautery is knife-like, and the depth of the cautery should be according to the extent of the protrusion of the chain.
And if the patient indicates that the pain is spread around the area near the toes of the foot, then cauterize that area where they indicate with a cautery using three points or four or more if needed from there.
And if the patient indicates that the pain extends from the ankle to the thigh, then cauterize that area using a knife-shaped cautery.
And be careful in any cauterization that you do not use the cautery so much that you burn nerves or large arteries, and by this, you do not harm the patient badly or cause contraction.
And I have seen some of those who cauterized around the ankle and overdid the cauterization, and the burning heat swelled up until it reached the foot, and the heat penetrated and corrupted the entire foot. And then a strong discharge from the stomach occurs, and subsequently, death may follow.
And if the pain is in two separate areas, cauterize each one according to this method.
And the wise ones said some things about the cauterization with this type of cautery, which is made in the following manner: make a circle of iron whose circumference is half a palm; and let its hole be as wide as a date bone or slightly less.
And within that circle there is another third; and the space between them should be the size of a nut from a pine tree; and those circles should be opened on two sides; and the length of those rods should be one or two nuts, and make in those margins of iron decently fitted into the circles; and this is the form thereof:
And it should be ignited in the fire until it glows and sparks, and then it should be placed on the affected part of the ankle, with the patient lying on their side. And then cauterize that area with three circular cauteries at once.
And then leave it for three days; then apply a plaster to it and keep the wound open for several days; then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Says Albucasis: oh, sons, of this kind of cautery we have rarely used it due to the fear of its appearance, and because few have found it worthy of studying it.
But for those who have suffered from good cauteries and found relief through them, it is worth applying to the affected area.
But for cauteries with adhering medicines, you should make two circles using a perforated armor plate similar to the shape of an iron gate; the length of the sides should be about two nuts or however large they need to be.
And if the space which is between each quantity of the thickness of a finger; and they are opened below and above, and they contain each other in this way:
And then place your hand over the area of the ankle where the patient is lying on their side, and press your hand firmly on the area of the ankle; and then take warm water and pour it between two circles, and gradually heat that water little by little near the fire, and keep it for about an hour, and let the patient endure the burning and adjustment — for this method causes a burning similar to that of fire — until the burning subsides.
And then lift your hand with the instrument and clean the warm water off the entire ankle with cool water.
And then let it rest for three days and place your hand over the area until the blackness from the burning is removed, and continue this for several more days, and the pus will run out; this is ultimately beneficial for healing.
And then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
And if the pain extends to the thigh or the abdomen, apply the same method as used for the ankle by placing the patient in a bath of water.
And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about that in the treatise on the rectification of medicines. Take an equal part of alkali and unextinguished ash (potash), mix them together, and place them in a new vessel, one part of which should be pierced by a small tube, according to the amount that can fit inside.
And place the bottom of the vessel on another jar inverted over it, then pour soft water over the alkali and live ash until it covers them by a finger's depth. Then compress them well with your hand and allow the sharp water that descends to collect in the pierced part of the vessel under the inverted jar.
And then concentrate all that water and pour it over more live ash and new alkali because this will result in a strongly acidic solution, which is used in many medical procedures and for cauterizing other body parts, as this operation involves fire.
And for some medications with which a broad cauterization is performed, such as teztic (possibly a typo or archaic term), mel anacrat (honey from the anacra plant), and ash mixed with soap.
And Gualia recounts an operation and cure used by an ancient person to treat pain in the ankle and sciatic vein, and he greatly praises this method, saying that no other cure is needed, and that one is healed after doing it once as he recommends, for soaking in a bath alleviates that ailment entirely.
And it is that rue should be gathered, and if rue cannot be found, a fresh fig should be taken; and the fig should be crushed with a little salt and placed on the ankle where there is pain, or on the thigh, or on the chest, and then bandaged.
And it should be left for a quantity of three hours or for the amount of time that the patient feels a reduction in the inflammation.
Then place that in a bath and when the body is warmed up, put it in the sun, for the pain ceases and healing occurs.
And know that it is not necessary for anyone to use a cautery with these medicines, only near the evacuation of the body.
But Escorides says that when the venous wound is cauterized with goat's milk, it greatly benefits; and the cautery should be applied in this second manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and the stone.
And then take dried goat's flesh and inflame that with fire until it becomes charcoal; then place it on the wool and spread it out until it is extended. And then repeat this, and do not stop doing this until the sensation of the bite reaches the water and relieves the pain.
And this method of cautery is called cow cautery.
It seems like you've provided a section or chapter heading from an older text, specifically "Capitol .xlii.". This translates to "Chapter XLII" in English, indicating it's the forty-second chapter of whatever work this is from. If you have any specific content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to share!
This phrase appears to be in an archaic form of a Romance language, likely related to Latin or Old French. Here is the translation into English:
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And cautery is only used in this specific case which is caused by an effusion of cold matter.
Therefore, after evacuating the patient with fitting pills and similar ones, which are made on the back where the pain is, draw three lines according to the width of it, and mark ten signs in each line, then cauterize five or more times, depending on the tolerance of the patient and their strength.
And the cautery should be done with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three or four cauteries using a medial claw-shaped cautery in the following manner:
Chapter XLIII.
On cautery at the onset of gout.
This ailment can also affect small children; a sign of its onset in children is that it affects their structure, causing swelling and movement difficulties.
And you will find that the lower vertebrae of the back and the knots begin to protrude over the other vertebrae.
And so when you see this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery according to this form: And take the cautery over all parts of the vertebra equally.
And if you wish, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery, two or three lines. And let the points be close to each other.
Then treat the area until it heals using what we have said.
But be careful not to apply the cautery to swelling caused by nerve spasms.
Chapter XLIV.
On the Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and pain occurs in the feet, it is customarily called gout by doctors.
And thus when gout caused by cold is treated with a method of cure and the pains are not alleviated, then they should be treated with cautery.
And it is that you cauterize that area near the evacuation in the circle of the foot joint with multiple cauteries.
And it is an olive-shaped cautery, of which this is the form:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pain rises into the joints or other junctions, and this often happens, then apply cautery to each joint with three or four applications all around using this olive-shaped cautery.
And if more cautery points are necessary than these you have made, then apply the cautery but do not press your hand too hard with the cautery beforehand; only around the size of a chain link is sufficient.
And if the pain rises into the joint and beyond, then apply the cautery that we have described in its chapter.
And if the pain is in the muscles only, and it is called sweat (suagra), then puncture around the spine as it curves, puncturing along those two lines.
And if the pain remains in the shoulders, then puncture around the spine on each shoulder and on the wrist of the hand.
And if the pains can approach over several days towards the joints or muscles, then apply cauterization to those areas all around with the help of instruments.
And do not deprive the patient of good regimen and reception of medicines, for if a good regimen is followed and phlegm is evacuated with this cautery, they will be healed, may God help.
Chapter XLV.
On the cauterization of fractures.
When there is a fracture in the ankles and the intestines are hanging before the hernia at the knee, and this condition begins to develop nearby, then you must order the patient to leave their food for that day and use laxative causes so that the contents may come out of their stomach.
And then follow the patient with your hands on their back, and command them to keep their leg inside until it is properly set or the hernia or intestines appear.
And then return it to the said ties and signal by testing the rupture over the bone of the thigh with a sign at the end which is similar to half a circle in the upper parts of the body.
And then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
Until it becomes red-hot and gives off sparks. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and then place your hand over the area so that the intestine does not come out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion underneath. Another servant should be on the patient’s chest, and another on their feet, holding their hands.
And then place the cautery on that mark with your hand holding the cautery straight, and do so until you reach the bone of the finger within the middle joint; repeat with the other side if you did not succeed in reaching the bone in the first attempt.
And carefully observe the condition of the intestine during your cautery, so that you do not burn it and cause death or another serious harm to the patient.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your operation is ineffective.
And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size and measure.
Then treat the area of the cautery for three days with ointment until the scar from the fire is healed.
Then treat it with other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient should lie on their back for forty days until the area and the wound are fully sealed.
And it is necessary to regulate the patient's nutrition according to the length of their treatment, so that their stomach is not weakened, and the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.
Then, when it is time to remove [the treatment] after forty days, administer a properly prepared medicine, and let the patient take it for another forty days.
And let them be reduced in labor and the consumption of food and drink, and loud voices, for when they follow this regimen of complete healing, they will be healed.
And I will speak of the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if they do not want to heal, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and let what is protruding from the hernia be as much as one-third of it; then treat that part as we have said, and it should not be tight.
And some of the earlier ones have already said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, because it is marked with a probe.
And a line is placed horizontally across the highest part of the rupture on the side, and another line above it; then place your hand with a claw cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better.
Chapter XLVI.
On the cauterization of twists (or sprains).
When pain occurs in the limbs due to a fall or percussion and that pain persists for a long time and does not improve with medical treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And let the cautery be of each member according to its magnitude and smallness, and its strength and weakness, and the location of the twist and pain in it.
So if it is healed by the first cautery, that's good; and if not, then apply the cautery again to it; for it is customary with those pains to puncture the member near the area affected, because you must achieve that with a cautery before the patient is healed.
Chapter XLVII.
On the cautery of leprosy.
Some lepers are greatly benefited by cautery, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of blood and melancholy.
And therefore when you want to cauterize the patient, consider if the leprosy is common and can be cured with what we have said in the division and should not be left untreated, and if you fear that the corruption will spread throughout the entire body and all its composition, then cauterize on the head with five cauteries: one at the center of the head, another slightly below it towards the forehead at the end of the hairline; two on both temples; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
And place your hand with the cautery slightly inside to press on the bone a little, causing the scales to be displaced from it, so that the expulsion of large vapors may be alleviated for him; and cauterize over the swelling as needed.
And if leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then you must cauterize that area with those cauteries which we have mentioned in the chapter; and with a cautery on the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on both cheeks, and with two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, and with six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and with one large cautery on the vertebrae near the hip, and one on the hip itself, and with two on the knees, and with one on each knee, and with two on the elbows, and one on each elbow joint, and with two on the ankles, and with one on each ankle; and cauterize that over all the joints of his fingers and toes, and on each heel of his feet, and on the sockets of his shoulders.
And be careful of the nerves that are on the heel so as not to burn those.
And sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the groin and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the spleen.
And know that the more you apply cauteries, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery, just as they do not from others, because their body is already numbed.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or few according to the limbs and joints, as it is preceded by the specifics of the tools.
And then treat the cautery with flour of burnt ash mixed with honey and another treatment until it is healed.
Chapter XLVIII.
From the cautery of stupor.
When any limb is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it does not heal, then you should cauterize that numbed limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
And let your cautery enter the incision of the cord a little. Then treat that area with ointment until it heals.
And sometimes a numbness that affects the hands and feet, and the vertebrae of the back, is cauterized to address the weakening of the nerves which control that limb, and the numbness is reduced.
But do not presume on this unless one is knowledgeable in the anatomy of the limbs and the distribution of the nerves that move throughout the body.
Chapter XLIX.
On the cauterization of ulcers that are malignant.
When an ulcer is old and does not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you should cauterize it with a cautery slightly according to the amount of secretion from the wound until the whiteness and color of it are reduced, and its color changes.
And then treat it with flour of bran and lentils mixed with rubbed oil and leaves of mallows, and with pigeon's blood or rooster's blood, each in equal parts and all mixed together, and then apply a cloth soaked in this mixture to the area until it is healed.
It seems like you've provided a section header, "Capitul .l." which likely means "Chapter I" or "Chapter 1". This could be the beginning of a new chapter in a text, possibly continuing from where we left off with the medical treatise. If you have more content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to share!
This line appears to be the title or heading of a section in the medieval medical treatise you provided. It translates to:
When cancer begins and you want to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around it just as it appears.
And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the latter cautery in the middle of the location; but I have not seen this, for I fear that it may become ulcerated, and I have indeed seen this happen several times.
And it is better that it be cauterized around it in a circle as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Chapter II.
On the cauterization of hernias.
When some hernia is delayed in maturation, and this is due to excess moisture or the condition of the patient, who is old and frail, with little blood, or because of time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the hernia; then cauterize around it with small pointed cauteries; and after that, leave it so that it will mature quickly.
And if you wish to perform the piercing with a cautery, then ignite the cautery which has this shape: and place it in the most suitable location for penetration so that it enters the vein.
And if the cautery in that place is left behind, so that the arm's body be relieved; and then treat that internal part which needs to be healed.
Capitol .lii.
From the cautery of corrosive [substance].
Corrosive is corruption walking in the limb, which corrupts it just as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you find that corrosion is present in an area where a cautery with fire has been suffered, then you should apply nail-shaped cauteries, few and large according to what is appropriate for the place where the corrosion is.
Then you should cauterize that area thoroughly until you eliminate all the corrosion and leave no cause for it to remain.
Then leave that for three days, and place over the cauterized areas a dressing made with oil mixed until all the scars are removed and all the corruption is eliminated.
Then treat that area with poultices that promote flesh growth.
However, if after three days you find that the flesh is growing healthy with no corruption, that is good; but if not, then reapply the cautery to the areas that are still corrupted.
And corrosion is sometimes treated with sharp medicine, for that serves as a substitute for cautery. However, cauterization with fire is a more reliable remedy.
And I have already described the treatment of acute medicine in the division, and thus take that which you will need for the urgency.
Capitol .liii.
From the cautery of claws and of the others similar.
Motaz veguadas endeve a las partidas dejos del pe malautia que s’apela clau, e es causa grossa, fentrada, la qual ladeys le pe; e cauteri en aquels es segon dos manieyras, so es cauteri am foc e cauteri am aygua cauda.
And using heat for the cautery is to burn the concave cautery similar to a small basin, which should be made of iron according to the amount that fits all around the nail, and it should have fine edges.
And then place that ignited cautery on the nail, and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the nail until the cautery reaches the depth of the nail. And leave that for three days until it begins to sweat (or exude) pus. And then apply a poultice made with crushed wild mallows mixed with salt, and leave the poultice on that area for one night, because this will help root out the cause.
And then treat the area with an ointment made from generative flesh until it is healed.
And if it does not respond [to other treatments], and frequently occurs on the surface of the body, particularly in the hands and feet, then you must administer these cauterizations with water. You should take a syringe made of iron or bronze or an arrow shaft, and place that over the claw; and then pour into the syringe a small amount of hot water, and hold it, and you rotate that with the compression of your hand all around, pressing the edge of the tube against the root of the claw; and the hot water will find its way through the pores at the root of the claw; and wait for the patient to feel the bite of the hot water for an hour, and then remove it, because the claw with its roots will be eradicated.
And do this with those that are close to one another until you have covered all of them on the body.
Then treat those pus pockets that form where the roots of the claws have been eradicated with ointments that promote flesh regeneration.
Chapter XLIV.
On the cauterization for tremors.
When there is trembling due to cold in the nerves or from a cold fever, or for some similar reason, then it is necessary that you apply cautery with four or five cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, placing one cautery between each vertebra; and also use a cautery on their feet, and another on their stomach, using olive oil with the cautery.
And the trembling of the patient is calmed and hastens the healing of the cold disease.
Chapter V.
On the cautery of various accidents to the body.
When on the body there are eruptions and fissured pustules which are formed from thick corrupted matter; therefore, at the beginning when they appear, it is necessary that cautery be applied over each head of the ulcer with a fine cautery using myrtle twigs, the end of which is extended by fire; or with long ash splinters; or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
And sometimes the cautery is also applied at the beginning of its eruption in this manner; and it is not believed to be harmful, and the excess is dispersed by doing this, and it heals because of this.
But however it is necessary that this be done close to evacuation with phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.
Of cautery for accidental blood flow due to artery incision.
Tropas veguadas endeve fluex de arceria que es inciza deves la plagua la qual endeve deforo, o deves la incizio de apostemas o cauteri del membre, e alor semblantz, e es dificil remaura aquel.
Therefore, when this happens to someone, then you should press with your hand on the artery's opening, and place your finger tightly there repeatedly until the flow of blood stops, keeping your finger in place so that it does not escape.
Then place the small and large olive-shaped cauteries in the fire several times, and blow on them until they are well heated.
Then take one of those, small or large, depending on the location and the severity of the wound where the artery is broken, place the cautery over that vein quickly after you have removed your finger, and hold the cautery until it burns and constricts the bleeding.
And if blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove your finger and apply the cautery, then take another heated cautery from those that are prepared in the fire, and continue to do this one after the other until the bleeding is stopped.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, and ensure that no other harm comes to the patient.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding in those cases except by one of four methods: either with a cautery as we have said, or by extraction when it cannot be extracted, for when it is extracted the ends of the veins are burnt and the blood is restrained, or it should be tied with a thread or with a ligature by strong constriction, or that medicines which have the power to constrict the blood should be placed on it; and they should be pressed with a cushion by appropriate compression.
And may he who administers appropriate compression with a ligature and by constriction with bandages or by the position of cauterizing and similar methods, not confer pressure too quickly.
And if this happens to someone and neither the doctor is present nor medicine, then press with the index finger over the opening of that vein as we have said, and apply great constriction inside so that the blood is stopped from the main part of the wound, and do not remove the finger from the artery; and sprinkle cold water mixed with a lot of intense coldness on top of the artery until the blood is congealed and thickened; and still consider whether there is a need for cautery or medicine.
About incision and puncture and cupping and bloodletting and plagues and their similarities.
We have already said in the first chapter about all diseases in which cautery with fire is appropriate and with combustible medicine, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for them along with the forms of the cauterizations; and I have ordered the chapters from the head down to the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter in the same manner, so that it may be easier for those who seek this information, regarding what they have asked about.
And before I begin this, son, it is necessary that you understand that in this chapter, what is described here is similar to what is in the first chapter on cautery.
And because great caution is required, for in the operations described in this chapter, there are often cases where bloodletting occurs, which can be dangerous as it involves the sprinkling of a vein or an incision on an abscess, or the appearance of exudate or purification of the plague, or the extraction of an arrowhead or the removal of a stone and their similar procedures. And along with all of these accompanies fear and trembling, and in most cases, death.
And I warn you that this should not happen to you in which there is danger, for sometimes your ways as a person can turn into ways of illness. And of them there are some who will die from their illness and it is light that they should die, because of the intensity of what they find in their illness, and due to the length of their sickness, and with the illness comes fear which signifies death.
And among those is the one who gives you their belongings and says that by waiting with them for health, and their illness is pernicious.
And therefore you should not consent to those who come to you in this manner; and your caution must be greater than covetousness and greed; and do not presume any cause about this unless it is based on certain knowledge that confirms what you owe, and for which praiseworthy success follows.
And it is used in the treatment of all your diseases for prognosis and indication to which health is restored, for in that you find assistance in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, children, may God inspire His understanding in you and not remove direction and protection from you, for this is in His hands.
And I have arranged this chapter distinctly by sections following the chapter on cautery, and the treatment from head to foot, so that it may alleviate what you seek from this and of which you have need.
First chapter.
On the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Know that this disease often affects children during childbirth and when the wet nurse tightens the child's head with violence.
And sometimes for hidden causes which are not known.
And I have only seen this disease in children; and for all those whom I saw it affected, death followed, and thus to me it appears as a work of abandonment in them.
And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of the child was so enlarged that he could not bear it due to the size of his head, and the humidity increased until it caused death.
And this humidity is either added between the membrane and the bone, or it settles on top of the bone beneath the skin.
For the operation in such cases where the humidity is between the membrane and the bone and the abscess is small, you must split open at the middle of the head with a cut横向的长度应该是两指甲的距离以便让液体流出，这种操作被称为"spatum"。
And therefore, if the humidity is increased more and the abscess becomes larger, then there are here two incisions according to this method:
And if the humidity is near the bone, the sign of it is that you see the seams of the head open on all sides and water is squeezed out when you press that area with your hand from inside, and this was not expected by you. You must make three incisions in the middle of the head according to this method:
and then extract all the humidity through the incision; and then secure the incisions with bandages and poultices; and then cover it with wine and oil until the fifth day, and then remove the dressing and treat the wound with lint and ointments, and bind the head evenly; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
And there is another method of incision, where you consider the size of the abscess and the collection of water, for sometimes it is more in the occiput, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left side; and therefore pay attention with the incision to where the abscess and the accumulation of water appear, and do this according to what is best possible for you.
And observe that you do not cut the artery, so as to avoid blood flowing out and causing the patient's death due to that flow of blood with evacuation of humidity.
Chapter second.
When catarrh or rheum affects the eyes or foot, and this is old, and you do not see improvement from medical treatments, then the final treatment for this involves the beginning of those two arteries.
And therefore when you wish to incise those whose patient shaves their head, and then rub the area with a coarse cloth so that the veins appear, and then tighten the neck of the patient with some cloth; and then consider where the vein pulses; and the places of each over the locations which are pressed near the ears, and thus they are hidden in some men.
And then mark on the artery with a thread, and then cut each one with a sharp spatula through an incision penetrating into the bone, and this is done for the width of the head.
And if you wish, insert the spatula below the artery and break it at the points above.
And the length of the incision should be about two fingers wide, because when any vein is cut, blood comes out with a pulsating flow, which sprays out repeatedly.
And if the artery does not appear at the incision site, then you must measure from the earlobe a distance of three fingers' width, and then mark it with a probe, and go into the bone.
And what needs to be let out of the blood is a quantity of wine uncii (ounces), and strongly it does not flow more or less from him, and all of this depends on the amount that appears from the strength of the patient and the fullness of his artery.
And then examine the wound, and if any splinter or foreign object remains in the bone, then remove it so that it does not cause an abscess to form.
And then strengthen the wound with poultices and linen bandages, and then treat it with ointments until it heals.
Chapter III.
On the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
When an ancient migraine or sharp pains occur due to moisture and qualities in the lacrimal glands of the temples, or if these are severe and similar to such conditions, and if they do not respond to medical treatment methods, then in these diseases we resort to the extraction of the arteries in the temples, or cauterization of those areas as we have shown.
And the method of the operation and extraction is that the patient should shave the hairs that are in the temples; and locate the visible artery in the temple where it is shown to you by its pulse, as it is hidden in only a few people due to strong coldness.
And if it is hidden from you, then the patient's neck should be tightened with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or vaporize the area with hot water until the artery becomes clearly visible to you. And now you take the spatula which has this form: And then you incise the vein with ease until you reach the artery; and then puncture it where you extract that which is in the upper regions until you remove that from the vein and reveal those of the tunics which are left there, on all sides.
And if the artery is delicate, then wrap that with the tip of an ounce, and then divide that part according to the amount by which the extremities are stretched or contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, for if they are not divided, the blood will not rise properly.
And then evacuate one uncia of blood within three [days].
And if the artery is large, then you must tie it in two places with strong double-threaded silk or with long cords, and do not worry about putrefaction before the wound heals and bleeding stops.
And then cut away the excess that is between two ligaments; and do this at that time or another suitable time.
And if you want, cauterize that area with a cautery between the bone using a knife-shaped cautery before the ends of it are cut, and it will remain in place for the same procedure.
And it is better to perform the procedure when the patient does not have a fever or a heated constitution; for cautery is one of those causes that helps expel harmful moisture, and thus it is more beneficial.
And when extracting the arteries, you should fill the area with an old plug, and place it over the wound properly made, then treat it with dry medicines that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
And if while you are working another instance of blood flow occurs from the artery, then you must take care to stop that bleeding, either by using a cautery or by filling the area with a plug, and hold your hand until the bleeding is stopped. And if none of those causes are present for you, then place your finger on the spot where the blood is coagulating, and apply a place with water of intense coldness until the sharp pain subsides, and be strong according to what is needed.
And what is lighter in the extraction of arteries is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two knives, since you have marked the two spots with a probe, and then, after some time, when they are ignited, bring them to the bone so as to divide the vein into two places, so that what is between the ends of it is elongated, because they are not entirely solidified with this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And let the sharpness of both knives be tested. But however if there is less sharpness than two knives are better, for if they are as sharp as two knives close to each joint, and do not cut the flesh too quickly.
Therefore, since there is some swelling in those areas, the heat of the fire is applied to them and the flesh is cut slightly.
And this work is better than all other works and lighter.
And let the space that is between two ribs be equal to the thickness of a finger.
Chapter four.
On the treatment of acute and acidic tears in the eyes.
When the tears are acidic, and it is due to the vessels that lie above the head being inflamed, and you do not find any other cause for medical treatment, and often the face of the patient turns red and feels a crawling sensation in their forehead as if ants were crawling, and their eyes become exhausted, so much so that their eyelashes seem known (affected), and the eyelids are irritated by the sharpness of the tears, ancient bitter remedies were used in the treatment of such conditions, and they called this treatment spassa.
And it is that you command the patient to raise the hairs which are on their forehead, and then make three incisions in the forehead equally spaced according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is two fingers: the first incision should be equally distant to the length of the nose at the middle of the forehead, and the second according to the length a little beyond the movement of the tear ducts which are in the lacrimal area, and the third on the other side.
And be careful of the start of the arteries which are on both sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws. And if the space between each incision is the quantity of three fingers apart.
And if you have a piece of sponge or dry cloths with which you can absorb the blood.
And then insert a spatula with two sharp ends, which is the shape to be used for the incision: which extends from the temple area into the second incision. Here's the translation of the given sentence: And then stretch this spatula and insert it into the first incision again using another instrument which is called a knife, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And place the sharp side of that instrument against the adjacent flesh and away from the tendon, and the other side against the bone, and push that inside until it reaches the middle fissure, and cut with that all the vessels descending from the head to the toes.
And continue the incision to this part of the tendon, and then do this in the middle fissure between the other fissures.
And when an equal amount of blood flows out, press the areas where clotted blood is present.
And then place in each fissure some old cataplasm (a type of poultice), and put on those powders mixed with wine and oil and vinegar, and ensure that it does not lead to a harmful inflammation.
And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of warm or tepid water, and then treat it with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil and other things until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.
For the given line:
When there is an acute and continuous purging in someone, and sometimes the strength of the patient becomes weak little by little, and their vision is already weakened, and their eyelids are ulcerated and fall out with the hair, and at the nape of the head there is sharp pain leading to sneezing as a consequence, then you know from these symptoms that the materials and purgings do not come but from small veins within those parts.
And the best cure for this is as follows: command the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in that area at the middle of the forehead, a small one in width (and start with the fissure from the left temple towards the right temple; and the incision should be through the bone; and extend your hand beyond the swollen parts of the temples which are affected by mastication), until the bone is exposed.
And dry all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth, and then fill between the two edges of the fissure with old wool or cloths. And then apply powdered ingredients soaked in wine and oil on top to prevent an inflammatory swelling from forming.
And when you remove that and see that the swelling has diminished, then it is necessary to scrape the bone until new flesh begins to grow, and then treat it with a drying regimen which promotes flesh growth, such as taking two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony (rosin), mixing them together, and making a plaster out of them to be applied to these areas to promote the growth of new flesh.
Capitol .vi.
For the given sentence:
Every cause that occurs in the ears is of four types, for it can be mineral stone or something similar to stone, such as iron and glass, or plant-based like sesame or bean, or due to fluxes like water and sour wine and things similar to them, or some animal.
And therefore, when stone or another similar cause enters the ear and does not fit or grow in the ear, expose the ear to sunlight, and if you can remove the stone, then let it be distilled with some means of violet oil or hyssop, and then administer its extract, and induce sneezing with conditions, and plug the nostrils before the event of sneezing. And then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear's rim, and stretch the ear upwards to its parts, for it is often effective with these causes.
And if it is not effective, then administer its extract using an instrument called the gesti epicicarios subtiles, of which this is the form:
And if it is effectively treated with the gesti, that is good; and if not, then administer its extract using a fine needle of double duplication.
And if it is not caused by that, then make a tube out of wire and insert one end of the tube into the ear canal, and seal around the tube with wax and softened oil so that only the tube remains open. And then extract with your strength using a strong suction, because swollen veins as we have recounted.
And if it is not treated in this manner, then take some quicklime or an apparatus with which birds are caught by a small amount, and place that at the end of the ray, and then wrap over that properly placed piece. And then insert that into the ear canal easily, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
And thus, if it is not cured by all the causes we have mentioned, then you should consider cutting it before it becomes an abscess or spasm.
And the method of cutting it is that you first bleed the patient from the hepatic vein and extract blood according to the strength of the individual, then make a cut between your fingers and turn the ear upwards, and finally make a small incision at the base of the ear and remove the pus from the deeply pressed area. And let the incision be of a crescent shape until you reach the stone; once the stone is found, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments; then quickly close the incision, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the cause in the ear is one of the growths that have grown and become inflamed, then administer its treatment and extraction; but if it does not respond to you by coming out, then take a thin, delicate spatula according to this form: And administer with that the removal of the wax which has fallen into the ear.
And do not do this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor of the ear, and place that in several small pieces, and then extract those with tweezers or with subtle movements, or with incision as we have said, for the extraction is thus made easier.
Here is the translation of the given text line by line: Therefore, do not stop until all the water has been thoroughly drained away.
Therefore, do not stop until all the water has been thoroughly drained away. And once the water has been thoroughly drained, take a piece of paper or reed, and insert one end into the ear, then extend the other end towards fire until the middle part of it is burned.
Then insert another reed and do this as many times until all the water has been thoroughly drained away, and suction it out using a tube as described above with the stone extractor.
However, in the extraction of a small foreign object that has entered the ear, if it is small and similar in appearance, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is large enough to cause swelling of the eardrum, then administer its removal with gentle motions and pressure, for the cause of this is lighter than all other causes that occur in the ear.
However, in the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it as we have said in the division and in the treatise on distillations but your treatment does not take effect, then you must examine the ear in the sunlight.
And therefore if any sign of worms appears here, then extract them with gestures or with fine needles; but if no cause appears, then take a tube that is narrow at one end and wide at the other, which has this form: And insert the thin extremity into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; and then suck with that through strong suction, and do this several times until all the worms are expelled.
And if you do not obey this advice, then plug and seal the cannula circuit with wax as we have said; then administer distillations that have already proven effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the chapter on distillations.
And let your effusion be with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, which has the following form: And make it of silver or bronze, leaving it straight, with a small tube in it, and a plate on top.
And thus it should be designed so that it fits into the cavity of the cannula container where it will be necessary. And if you wish, take the rod and wrap the end of it properly with a cloth, then pour oil into the cavity of the ear or the juice of some herb, or any of these medicines into the cannula — which is in the ear — and then insert the rod with the cloth on top and press gently with your hand to force the oil into the cavity of the ear so that the patient feels the oil inside.
And that which is inserted into the ear should already be warmed slightly with fire. And be careful that the substance you will distill into the ear is not too cold, for medicines for the ear do not tolerate that.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of ear obstruction.
Sometimes, some children are born with unperforated ear canals from their mothers, and this can also happen in adults, where obstruction occurs in the ear canal due to a growth or flesh that develops there. This obstruction sometimes occurs at the entrance of the ear canal without being noticeable, and at other times it is located on the outer parts.
And that which occurs at the entrance of the ear canal, which is not noticeable, is often in a condition that makes healing more difficult.
And in cases where it is noticeable, you should expose the patient's ear to the sun and examine it closely. And therefore, if an obstruction appears, open it with a fine scalpel of which this is the form:
If the extremity of it in which the width is small, of which one part is sharp and the other is not; and the spatula should be of two sides lean so that it does not hurt the ear.
And therefore, if the obstruction is due to flesh grown in the ear or on it, then take that with subtle needles and cut out that flesh with great ease so that all of the flesh may be removed.
And if there is an obstruction in the ear canal, then take fine wool and warm it slightly over fire, and then place it inside the ear.
And thus, if you find that the patient breathes easily with this method, then the pressure on their breathing is alleviated easily; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
And then place in the ear a piece of cloth according to the size of the opening which you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take some wax, soften it in rosewater, powder over it finely crushed and use it; and if you find that the ear is already inflamed, then you must remove the wax and replace it with another piece of wax which you will wrap in cerote made with olive oil until the inflammation begins to subside; and take care of it until it heals.
And if bleeding occurs, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use another treatment that stops the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
The text appears to be in an old Romance language, likely medieval Latin or a closely related vernacular. Given your instructions, here is the translation of the provided line:
For the care of athelisz (or some ailment), which affects the eyelids.
When these [humors] sometimes reach the eyelids of the eyes moistly, at other times they are dry.
Therefore, you must hold those with forceps or by the ounce, and divide them with a knife from their roots, then place your hand over the incised areas.
And if pain with a flow of blood occurs, then you should cauterize those areas with a subtle lens-shaped cautery.
And the best cauterization is performed near the incisions and observed swellings when there remains any cause of those growths; and when they are cauterized with fire, those growths are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for swelling that occurs in the eyelids of the eyes.
Swollen spots appearing in the eyelids of the eyes, which have a cause similar to swelling in their strength and hardness, and thus the swelling is called by this name.
And it is an accumulation of thick moisture on the eyelid underneath and above.
Therefore, the operation for this is to consider whether the swelling is occurring in such a way that it appears from the eyelid and is swollen on all sides; and the cause of it is slight.
Therefore, make an incision over it along its width, and then drain it completely from all sides until it dries out, and then sew it up with a thread and close it.
And if the wound is large, then you adjust it with a suture; and take care of what is inside so that it heals.
And if it is small, you will not suffer harm from it, for the heat of it restores and reattaches that which is damaged.
And if the swelling is decreasing inside the eyelid, making its inner surface expand, then pull the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a thread, so that you can press it from all sides. If the eyelid at the beginning is elongated, this should not cause any concern.
And at the beginning, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area in such a way that it promotes healing until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the treatment around the upper eyelid of the eye.
Grays (a type of growth) are generated in the membranes of the upper eyelid, and this occurs more frequently in children. It aggravates their eyes and often leads to blindness; they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears accumulate due to this condition.
And for this reason you find them lying on their faces all the time, and they sleep on their faces; and so at the eyelids of their eyes the eyebrows are wet, which have already been covered by swelling, and an appearance of cataract is evident in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel the cataract within them.
And in another method of operation, the patient places their head on your lap, and then you cover them with a cloth and make them sweat. Then, according to the amount needed for arthernach (which could be a typo or a specific term), you create a circle from all sides. After that, place one thing over the other and press with your thumbs all around so that arthernach is gathered in the middle of the circle. Finally, introduce humidity into the center with a spatula, making an incision along its length, but ensure the cut is not larger than what would be made in flaubotomy (which might refer to a specific surgical procedure).
And in the first step, you must cut through the entire chain until you reach arthernach, because in most positions, you process arthernach by incision according to its white greasy form.
Therefore, extract that with cloths which you have wrapped around your thumbs at the outer parts and rotate between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
And be careful not to place the spatula into the incision too deeply so that it does not reach the bone and damage it.
And if the artery does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, but rather that you adjust in the fissure a small amount until an artery emerges; then extract it as we have said; and then apply soaked cloths in warm water and sweet wine over the area and bind them with powder.
And thus, they use salt which they place in the cavity of the fissure so that it draws out that humidity.
And then treat that inside so that it is healed.
And if you encounter an abscess in that area, then treat it with soft plasters until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
On methods of applying treatment to the stomach.
When in the eyelids of the eyes, natural hairs grow in clusters and become old, these hairs cause irritation to the eye and lead to various diseases such as continuous tearing and softening of the eyelids and conjunctiva, which can result in the destruction of the eye, a condition called entropion of the eye. This is treated in four ways: by cauterization with fire; by using sharp medicines as mentioned before in the chapter on cautery; by surgical correction and suturing; or by using cannulas as I will explain.
And therefore, you should hold the head of the patient in your hand; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand. If it turns easily, that is good; if not, insert a needle where there is pus under the eyelid, and let the needle penetrate with a thread above it, near the margin of the eyelid where the hairs grow, close to the hairs. Pull the thread towards the upper part with the eyelid, and turn it back in place.
And then introduce into the area inside the eyelid with the hairs adjusted using a spatum (spatula) inserted from the larger lacrimal duct into the smaller one; and then extract the bile and place on it small particles of cotton or cloth, and then sew over the eyelid with thread, and thus it should be as shown in the figure of the myrtle leaf.
But nevertheless, it is necessary that the figure be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, for this already varies among people, for some require a large incision in the eyelid depending on the degree to which the eyelid is loosened.
Then use the spatula over the two lines you have marked, and begin from the larger tear duct towards the smaller one. And if your incision is near the natural hairs just as it is usually done for the king.
And then place the needle in one of the two angles of the chain, and then scrape that entire area, and then join with stitches the two lips with a thread or woolen fiber, and clean the blood, and make adhere what is superfluous of the ointments on both eyebrows with some viscous causes, if you want to do this, and if not, don't worry about it.
And then remove the suture of the ointments within three or four days, and then take care of it.
And if you wish, leave the wound without stitches, and cure it with things that dry and constrict, for the eyelid being raised requires the sealing of the wound and the addition thereof; however, stitching is better. Therefore, this is what the ancients taught regarding treatment.
However, one must be careful with the patient, and it is of good practice, and not out of fear.
And there is another method in surgery, which involves shaping the eyelid like a myrtle leaf, and then elevate the eyelid with three separated needles arranged in this form:
Here is the translation line by line:
And then bring together the two edges of the wound with suture, and care for that inside so it may heal.
And if an abscess occurs in your incision or your wound, treat that abscess with wax and the like, and with ointments.
And sometimes you may encounter an eyelid where the hairs are inverted, then you must use what we have mentioned about incision; however, in some cases, suturing is more appropriate.
To anesthetize with reeds follows this method: And it is that you turn the eyelid inside out and split the structure within as I have described; then, by skill, make two reeds or two thin splints whose length should be according to the length of the eyelid and their width should be a third of the width of the spatula. And you have already made incisions at the ends of each part where you have the threads.
Then carefully place each one above what is excessive on the eyelid of the eye, and constrain the reeds of each part with strong pressure, and leave it for several days, because the chain will die due to the pressure, become detached, and dissolve inside so that it falls out by itself.
And if it is delayed, then break it with the saws, and then treat the wound until it heals.
Therefore, when it is secured, the eyelid is lifted and the hairs do not sting.
And this is the form of two canes which you will make according to this design: and there should be the quantity of the length and the width neither more nor less.
Chapter XII.
On the removal of stubborn hairs that sting in the eye using a needle when the hair is hard.
When there are unnatural, hard, rough, and stinging hairs in the eyes, then the operation is that you take a fine needle and place it into a thread of fine linen or silk, and then adjust the ends of the needle and hold each end delicately. And let the length of the threads be the quantity of one palm.
And then you place another fine thread under it in the same manner, and hold the ends of that thread if you wish.
And then place the patient's head on your lap, and do so near sunlight so that your work may be illuminated, for it is a delicate and minute operation.
And then insert the needle into the root of the eyelash that requires treatment, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid before removing it from the natural hair.
And then pull the hair out and insert it into a twist, and let the hairs be one or two or three, but no more.
And then pull your hand with it until the hair is removed by twisting in the eyelid along with the natural hair.
But if it is twisted and the hair is not removed, twist it further at the points with the solution that you have prepared, until it is completely removed by twisting.
And do this with the aid of a magnifying glass, for when you twist and apply the solution, groan aloud and cleanse the eye, and leave it covered for two or three days until the hair adheres to its place and grows on healthy flesh.
And if the hair is shorter, then you attach a long natural hair to it, and lift with that, or let it remain inside so that it stretches slightly over some space, and then you lift it.
The text you provided appears to be written in an old Romance language that shares characteristics with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The line given is:
For the given line:
When the eye experiences spasms, and there is a contraction of the eyelid when it contracts inward, either to the right or left side, due to improper healing of wounds or burns or cautery, and this is called "leporina," and this spasm can be natural or accidental, and is caused by improper healing of wounds, burns, or cautery, or resembles such maladies.
The method of the operation on him is that you split that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place in there a piece of linen cloth, and tie those until they are healed.
And it is not necessary for you to treat him with methods that dry out the causes; constrain (or restrain) yourself from doing so; because if you do this, it will produce pus worse than ever before.
Use in that of causes which mollify thus as fenugreek is, and anoint with the water in which their ashes and seed are mixed or unguent of dahlia, which is liquefied with some of the oils, and submerge in that the cloth, and cure with that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you should puncture with any instrument that is not solidified according to the form at the beginning.
And this operation that we have mentioned is nothing but a certain correction of displacement that does not return the area to its original form.
Chapter XIV.
Of the treatment for a hemorrhage that occurs in the eyelid.
This hemorrhage that occurs in the eyelid, which is properly called a hemorrhage; it can be either natural to the individual or accidental.
The accidental hemorrhage is caused by trauma, or by a cut, or by a cautery, or by other similar causes.
And the method of the operation is that you take a needle with double-thread, and insert it into the flesh, passing it from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh apart with the needle and secure it with the needle, and incise with a broad spatula. And then return the eyelid to its proper shape if possible; otherwise, take a reed and place it in the cut section, and use it to reshape the eyelid, creating two incisions on the sides of the eyelid.
And let the ends of the two fissures from two angles of the incision that you have made come together, and an angle is formed between them when they converge to create a figure from them.
And this figure is a Greek letter: lambda.
And then remove the flesh in such quantity that it is the length of the sharp instrument left behind, which is the eyelid.
And then bring together the separated parts and sew them with wool thread; and then treat them with what we have said about mollifying medicines and warm compresses until it is healed.
And if you need to make an incision through a fissure or suture or cautery, then you must make a flat incision on the skin of the eyelid as described. And then separate with a warm compress between the two lips as we have said.
In summary, for the treatment of an incision that is above or below, as it occurs in the operation, according to the form of the incision prepared, and that is in the shape of various spots.
And the wise craftsmen always prepare every possible method to return the figure to its natural form or close to it, and they adjust the patient according to what is suitable for the operation and the instruments in their best conditions.
Capitol .xv.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in many men, you will find that the upper eyelid is adhered to the white part of the eye, and it is restricted from easy movement and its natural functions; therefore, you must insert the tip of a probe under the eyelid, lift it up or extend it with an uncinus (a small surgical hook).
Then you cut the adhesion with a fine spatula, which should not be sharp for the incisions, keeping it slightly blunt so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and use the spatula in such a way that its sharpness does not harm the eye.
And your incision should be such that it easily removes the adhesion, allowing the eyelid to return to its natural form and for the entire adhesion to heal.
Then you put salty water in the eye with which you wash it; or distilled water containing dissolved zedoary (a type of herb).
Then separate the eyelid from the eye with fat of sheep, and place on the eye wool infused in egg white; and on the third day, use consolidating treatments until it is healed.
The given text appears to be in an archaic or constructed language that resembles medieval Latin mixed with Romance languages. However, "Capitol .xvi." seems like a section or chapter heading rather than a full sentence meant for translation. It likely means:
From the inflammation of the eyelid and the swelling of flesh around the tear ducts.
Know that the eyelid is considered in two ways: either it is nervous, and resembles a hard but subtle membrane; or it is non-nervous, resembling white frozen moisture, which when touched with an iron, or forced to take an ounce [of medicine], breaks off and the ounce does not penetrate it.
And both of these conditions do not begin except from the major tear duct, gradually covering the sight and preventing light and smell.
Here is the translation of the provided text line by line into English: And then take a needle and insert into it a horsehair or ox hair or cow hair, or similar, or strong thread, or double the small end of the needle gradually and place that in the middle of the nail, and penetrate that with the needle, and bind the nail with thread; and stretch that to the parts above, and scrape away with the hair the side of the nail which is the matrix. And in this way you should proceed with the procedure by inserting the pellet into the patient's rear end.
And then you incise the remaining tissue at the root of the lacrimal duct with a fine spatula or small scissors, and clear the flesh around the natural lacrimal duct so that continuous tearing does not result from the incision.
And sometimes the nail should be extended with oil or wax, as we have said, and then it should be extracted with a spatula that has this form:
And be careful not to touch the corneal layer with the spatula so as not to cause a rupture and to avoid piercing the pupil.
Then the incision should release a little finely ground salt or ashes made from charcoal into the eye, and leave it there until the next day; then treat it with what is appropriate until it heals.
And if the nail is not loose and you cannot insert the needle, nor can it be fixed with oil alone, then this type of nail issue is treated with medicines, and it is healed in this manner as I have described and recommended in the section.
And if you wish to incise that area, then open the wound of the patient and take a fine spatula-like instrument with an acute edge according to this form: And with subtlety. And if you find that it is rarefied and confused and enters into those parts, then distill from your own urine using a sieve made of linen or with roasted ash or finely ground salt, and apply the concoction inside until the next day.
And then repeat the operation until all that is inside has been removed, except for the opposing abscess which should be cauterized in the wound, because when you leave it like that, treat the initial abscess until it heals.
And then repeat your operation on that area until it is healed.
The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if noted in the nose for great harm, should be suspended with an ounce; and incise that part from there, but do not complete the incision so that you do not cut into the tear ducts.
And then apply a warm distillation to the lacrimal area and do this treatment until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the incision of alleviating nasal issues and what is born from tight flesh in the nose.
Sometimes in the eyes of some individuals, tough flesh grows and covers the pupil, or approaches and tightens around the eyelids, forcing them to adhere to the outer parts and join together like a barrier.
Here is the translation of the provided text line by line into English:
And make your incision either with the scalpel that we have recommended in the section on the nail, or with small scissors with which the tissue is collected according to how it will come together at the end of this chapter.
Therefore, when your incision is complete and all that flesh is sutured, then fill the wound with finely ground salt, or sprinkle on it red powder similar to corrosive medicines, and place over the wound externally a piece of egg white until it is ensured free from abscess formation.
And if any cause for watching remains and there is an inflamed wound, and you fear an abscess may form, then leave the wound open and treat that abscess with what alleviates that abscess, and afterwards repeat on it during the operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the flesh attached where such a wound occurs.
However, you must take care to remove all treatment of the wound either by natural means or accidentally, using iron, and do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that the member can sufficiently endure such an operation.
Chapter XVIII.
On the collection of pus in the wound.
Pus comes from hardened veins which are swollen over the wound and prevent proper healing of the tissue, and it contaminates the wound over a long period of days.
Therefore, at the beginning, it is necessary that you consider whether the wound in which there is pus is strong and there is no other disease present besides the pus; then you should collect that pus.
And it is that you command the patient to place their head on your lap, and then suspend those veins with an ounce or two according to your judgment; and let that ounce be of fine duplication in this manner:
Or do two ounces gradually into a cup according to this method:
And then those veins should be tied off with fine threads, carefully, and clean the blood little by little until you see those veins emptied of blood and turned pale.
And be careful that you do not lead the blood with the ends of the spatula; and let your operation be in the morning when the sun is up, and be firm in your operation so that you only incise those veins.
And when you have completed the procedure, then distill into the blood some wormwood or rue so that its acidity may corrode what remains of the sap.
But if it is not possible for you to complete everything in that hour, then apply a plaster with something that alleviates the pain, and leave it for several days until the pain is subdued and to ensure there is no risk of an abscess forming.
And then treat the second one in the same manner until it is healed.
And this is the form of the scissors:
Chapter XIX.
On the reduction of nasal fractures.
When you treat fractures with cauterization or sharp, burning medicines as previously mentioned in the narration and it is not healed, then do not hesitate but make an incision over the abscess to allow its maturity, and extract all the moisture within it until the bone is uncovered.
And then, when the bone is uncovered and there is corruption or blackening on it, you should scrape it with an instrument that has the following form:
And it is called a rough head, and it is made of Indian iron, with the head being round like an asir, which is made pointed by filing or finely punctured (as shown in the following form).
And place it on the corrupted part of the bone, then rotate it between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that the corruption is scraped off.
And this should be done several times, and then restore the area with drying and styptic causes.
Therefore, if the area is stabilized and good flesh has grown in it, and the body is separated from the pus and remains like this for forty days, and does not renew [the condition], and does not become inflamed again, and no accident happens to it, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then it is not in its proper nature to reduce the fracture to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: you must expose the bone with fire or with sharp medicine, and once the bone is exposed, then you take a splint according to this form:
The end of the iron should be triangular, and the shaft of it should first be narrowed towards the end in such a way as described.
Then place that [triangular end] on the bone, near the lacrimal area; extend your hand a little away from the nose, and then rotate your hand with the splint until it fully penetrates the bone. The patient will feel this because air will be forced to exit when you do this.
Therefore, now restore the area with styptic and drying medicines as has been described.
Therefore, when the flesh and the area become hardened, then the material that was released to the outer parts returns inward, thus it becomes a lighter pus for the patient.
The line "Capitul .xx." appears to denote the start of chapter or section number twenty in the text. Here is a translation:
Of the reduction of the hernia bulge.
When the swelling appears in its entirety and does not cause any damage or decrease to the vein, then you must give the patient a laxative, and afterwards follow up with it, and also place bleeding cups on the neck for scarification and suction by good suction; and afterwards apply over the swelling an ointment made of acacia, aloe, ensēs (probably a type of resin), and sarcocola (likely a kind of plaster), and then apply the poultice to the swelling with powdered mot (possibly a herb or plant).
And the method of the powders is that you take strips of lion's moss, and each strip should be folded into four pieces; and make powder out of those pieces.
And then place those one over the other according to the amount that the wound needs. And then press on those with a hard cloth with a strong binding; and repeat the cupping after bloodletting; and then remove the cups and leave the wound exposed day and night.
But if the binding becomes loose, then it must be tightened.
And then remove the binding day and night as we have said.
And if the wound has already been reduced, it is good; and if not, then repeat the plaster with the powders and the binding and the cupping until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the inflammation of the uvea (uveitis).
When there is disruption in the uvea, and it swells and protrudes from the eyelids like a grain of raisin, and takes on the shape of a human due to this, if you wish to incise this, then the operation is as we have recounted: you insert a needle at the base of the uvea from below to above, and then insert another needle with double thread on the side near the lacrimal part, and make that penetrate while leaving the first needle in its position; then incise the area of the double thread and lift the part of the uvea around the needle with it, and tighten that more.
And then remove the needle and place on the wound wool soaked in egg white and leave until the thread comes out with the grape.
And then treat the wound with something that strengthens the inside so that the plague may be healed.
And sometimes, gather from all sides with a circle of cloth around the wound to hold a large swelling tight, and then pierce it with a fine spatula to reach the core of the wound, allowing the whitish fluid to flow out, and lower the wound so that it subsides immediately.
And then strengthen the inside so that it may heal.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of dislocations.
This illness, which is called dislocation, is nothing but a swelling that is fixed in the joint, resembling descending water, but it is not that.
The method of treating it is to have the patient sit on an adjusted and straight seat. Then take his head in both hands and move it inside so that you see the swelling come to the respective parts, and then dry it so that it does not descend. Leave the light on, and the patient will see the causes just as they appear.
And if it does not go down below, know that it is water.
And if the descent of the pus is not prepared as we have said, then place the patient between your hands and take a fine spatula and use it to separate the panniculus from the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tunic at the limbus (inside the black part), until the pus is completely drained.
Once it is completely drained, then you instill warm water into the nostril in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then it should be treated with other methods until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of water (discharge) descending from the nose.
We have already mentioned the types of discharge in the division and which ones require puncturing, explaining it clearly according to health.
Now you must place the patient between your hands on a chair and tie their nose tightly with a binding agent.
And then place your left hand near the eyelid of their eye if the affected eye is the left one; or use your right hand if the affected eye is the right one.
And then use your right hand to take an almond if the eye is the left one; or use your left hand if the eye is the right one.
And then place the end of the almond near the cornea according to the thickness of the ray in the eye's white part near the smaller泪腺（假设原文中的“mendre lacrimal”指的是较小的泪腺），然后用力推 almonds，同时转动你的手。
And then penetrate into the soft part of the belly and feel that the swelling has already reached its extent due to it.
And it is necessary that the measurement of the path from almond to preon be the measure of the space which is from the pupil to the end of the darkness, and it is the crown of the eye; for you will see with that pupil through the vision of the eye by the clarity of the corneal tunic.
And then place a cloth in the area where the water is, and then you draw it down once and then again, and if the water descends quickly, now show the patient what he should focus his sight on immediately, and put it right before his eyes.
And then rest for a moment; if the water has descended, now you draw it down again before it is poured out completely.
And then when it is cut and does not descend, now you extract it easily, and rotate it slowly with your hand little by little, and then dissolve a small amount of clear gem salt in the water and wash the inside of the eye with it; and then place outside the eye a piece of cloth or plug or wool soaked in oiled resin and egg white and licorice mixed with this for the eye.
But we and those of our time place on it a crushed mass mixed with egg white.
And if you cannot insert the instrument into the eye due to its hardness—because there are some people whose eyes are very hard—then it is necessary that you take the spatula named alberid, which has the following form:
And then pierce that joint with it, and do not withdraw your hand during the action, and it is nothing more than making a subtle path to an almond-sized area.
Then insert something to the size of an almond as we have said.
And you should complete your work by preparing the patient's sleeping area properly, in which they sleep on their back in a dark room, and all movements are prohibited.
And pause to understand its nature so that you align its natural state, and do not turn their head to the right or left at all.
And change the dressing according to its condition within the third day.
Then remove that in that dark place and expose it to fresh air, show them some causes [of the ailment], and then change the dressing within the seventh day.
And it is not necessary for you to do this during the time of treatments or right before the infusion. It is necessary that you prepare this so that the water can flow lightly and with great care and attention.
And if an abscess forms suddenly, then you must drain the pus before the seventh day, and treat it with something that reduces the abscess.
When you are finished examining the patient and place your hand over their face through which you guide their breathing for several days, keeping them in the darkest room.
And then it is gently laid down from that position and turned over onto its back.
And know that in surgery it is not excused for the disciple to see certain times, and then you must be bold during the operation.
And it has come to us from some of those who are in the art, and some said that fire is made in a clay pot pierced with holes through which water is sucked.
But however I have not seen anyone in our land who has perfected this, nor have I read this in any of the ancient books; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of maggots by which one can recognize those that someone who is ignorant would not know:
And they are made of wax or of proper iron, and their extremities should be shaped in this subtlety triangulated, the sharp end thus as that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.
Of the treatment of flesh hanging from the nose.
When flesh grows in the nose, different growths can appear, some of which are caused by moist mucus similar to that of a scorpion or like small polyps; and this disease is called polypus because it resembles those small polyps represented. And of it is cancerous flesh, which appears pale and of a dark color; and there is also flesh that is not cancerous, which is not of a dark color.
Therefore, for those growths that are not fraudulent nor cancerous, you should have the patient sit between your hands and expose them to the sun, clean their nostrils, and apply a certain ointment to those growths. Then extract that which extends outward, and then divide what you have grasped of those growths with a sharp and fine spatula from one side until you know that all the flesh has been removed; for if any part remains that could cause reoccurrence making further removal possible, then use one of the fine instruments to scrape it off easily until no such cause remains. If the swelling is accompanied by blood or an abscess, then you apply what is necessary; if it is a malignant swelling, then you cut and cauterize the area where the blood has clotted and remove all the pus.
And then let it be poured into the nose near the opening, wine or water. And if the nose is opened and you process humidity into the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
But if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside there is flesh swollen with pus between the bones of the nose to which incision has not been effective.
Therefore, now it is necessary to introduce a thread into which some thickness is added, and tie knots on the thread, placing between each knot the width of a finger or thumb, and prepare the patient and insert one end of the thread into the nose using a needle or another means that is possible.
And once this has been done, draw the odorant inside so that it reaches the channels of the nose, and sit on your heels, as children often do in schools when mimicking this action, and it is an easy method for those who want to perform it.
And then hold the two ends of the thread, one end coming out of the nose and the other remaining inside the nose, and then apply a tightening of flesh with the knots on the thread, and do this until you know that the flesh is tight against the knots of the thread.
And then extract the bile, and apply near the nostril during bloodletting a leech, and do this for three days or more until the plaster corrodes everything that is rotten in the flesh.
And at the end of the treatment, place a lead tube in the nose for several days until it is healed.
And if you finish the treatment and it dries out, use that method.
And this is the form of the instrument used for purging that with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
And make this of silver or brass, which should resemble a small open lamp, like a little shell, and the meat similarly.
And if you wish, make a closed tube like a cane, and the tube of the instrument used for purging should be flat and open; to which you attach a handle at the back, with which you hold it when you heat it in oil or whatever liquid from the juices and suctionable causes.
Chapter XXV.
From the growths in the extremities of the nose.
Motived by the somewhat Latin-like structure and vocabulary similar to Romance languages, here is an attempt at translating the given sentence:
And for this reason, you must incise at the beginning of its appearance and remove all of it. And then place over the area where the cautery or burning medicine is applied.
And if the onset of its formation is delayed until it has become enlarged, then consider whether it has hardened, turned dark in color, and lost sensation; at that point, do not touch it with iron as it is a chronic abscess; for many have fallen victim to those who incise such an abscess, bringing great harm upon the patient due to their malice.
And if the abscess is somewhat recent and not dark in color, and incision is possible at any time, then treat the patient and incise it without fear, and care for the area with something that dries and constricts until it is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On the suturing of the nose and lips and ear when continuity is disrupted by trauma or a similar injury.
Know that when you encounter a disruption of continuity in one of these cartilages, there is little confidence in this operation unless it is performed on certain individuals.
Therefore, when you encounter any of those causes, you should consider whether it is fresh wound with its own blood, and then you align the two edges of the wound with stitches, and then treat what's inside so that it may heal.
And if the edges of the discontinuity are already separated and each has become healed, then you must irritate each part of its apparent scar until blood comes out. Then align the two edges with stitches and strengthen them, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder that has been crushed over them. Place a piece of diafinition plaster or some other consolidating plaster over the powder, and leave it there for two or three days. Then remove it and replace the plaster until the scabs fall off by themselves, and then treat with ointment until it is healed.
The method of stitching is that you close the discontinuity either with needles as we have mentioned in the stitching of the abdomen, or close the discontinuity with a suture as you know how to do.
Capitol .xxvii.
From the extraction of those causes that come in the two lips inside the parts.
Motaz veguadas endeve a motz homes en las partidas dedintz de las suas labias alcus apostemas durs semblantz a gras de errs, e alscunas de lors son mendres e alcunas son majors.
Therefore it is necessary that you turn the lips and fissures of each of those wounds all around, and then fill the place with crushed sage while the blood is still flowing, and then wash it with sweet wine and treat the area with something astringent until it is healed.
Chapter XXVIII.
From the incision of the flesh fitted into the gums.
A great many times there are growths on the tight flesh of the gum which the ancients called alveoli. Then it is necessary that you suspend that with a hook or hold that with forceps and cut off its root, and let the pus or blood flow.
And then apply over the area some astringent powder or other styptic or cicatrizant powders.
And if that flesh returns, then cut it again and cauterize it, because the cautery will prevent it from returning.
Chapter XXIX.
On the extraction of teeth with forceps.
When on the surface of the teeth, both those inside and outside, and between the gums, there are rough and sharp scars, stains, and sometimes they are blackened or take on yellow or green tints, through which corruption reaches the gum and causes the teeth to become stained.
And thus it is necessary that you seat the patient between your hands and hold their head against your chest, and scrape the teeth on which these scars appear until they are smooth like sand, so that no cause of corruption remains, and do this to remove the blackness, yellowness, and other stains until they are cleansed.
Thus, if what is described at the beginning of the procedure has been accomplished, that is good; and if not, then repeat the procedure on those teeth the next day and the second and third days until you achieve the final desired state.
And you should know that teeth require various types and shapes of forceps according to what is prepared for your operation. And therefore, the razor with which the tooth is cut from inside is different from the razor with which it is cut between the teeth in other forms, and these forms of razors you should prepare, which you will see shortly:
Chapter .xxx.
For the eradication of teeth.
Here is the translation line by line:
And when the patient is forced to extract that tooth, you must be firmly certain which is the painful tooth, because often the pain deceives the patient and leads them to think it's in a healthy tooth, and if you eradicate that one, the pain won't cease until the diseased and painful tooth is extracted, for we have already seen this through the operation of dentists.
Therefore, you must be certain which is the painful tooth, and once you know well, then you should scarify around the tooth with a spatula that has some efficacy, until it is separated from the gum completely, and then extract it with your fingers or with fine scissors, little by little, until it comes out.
And then use large forceps for good leverage or strong grip, and hold the patient's head between your hands firmly so that it does not move, and then pull the tooth straight out in such a manner that you do not break it, nor cause greater pain to the patient.
And if it is not easily removed, then take one of those instruments, and place it around the tooth on all sides with ease, and exert the extraction in the same manner as was done at the beginning.
And if the tooth is loose or decayed, then you must wrap that area with cloth and tie it tightly at the end of a thin thread so that it does not break during your constriction on it while holding it.
And it is necessary that you operate carefully with incision around the entire area of the gum and be mindful of your strength so as not to cut through and leave a part broken, and return to the patient for the harm may be worse than the original pain.
And be careful not to do what some ignorant barbers do in their stubbornness and audacity regarding the extraction of them; for they often bring upon men great illnesses which are more difficult to treat, and the roots of which remain hidden entirely or partly, or that you must extract it along with some bones of the jaw as we have testified on many occasions.
And then for the removal of it, wash the mouth with hot wine or sour wine with salt.
And if there is bleeding due to this, as sometimes happens unexpectedly, then sprinkle some amount of sage over the wound, and if that sage does not help, apply a cautery.
The form of the forceps and delicate tweezers with which the tooth is extracted at the beginning should be long at the outer end, short in handling, and thick, so that they do not bend when you use them.
And they should be such that the thick handles ensure that when you grasp them, they do not bend, and their outer ends are short.
And they should be made of Indian iron, properly formed with straight ends, and at the ends of these, there should be teeth that fit into each other and grip through strong constriction. Sometimes, the ends of these are in the shape of the beak of a bird called a ciconia, which is a stork, and it has a powerful constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.
For the removal of teeth and extraction of the bones of the jaw that are trapped.
When you need to extract a broken tooth where some part remains, then it is necessary that you place something soft over the area for one or two days until it becomes softened; and then use tweezers or forceps with ends shaped like the beak of a bird called stork or vulture, which is the form of the forceps:
The limbs should be treated in this way like a file or a rasp.
And if you do not obey this instruction with these forceps or tongs, then it is necessary that you cut into the root and remove all the flesh and insert the tool which is called an atalis, which is a small lever of this form:
And let it be a thick small extremity, and do not insert it deeply so that it does not break.
Therefore, if by this the wound is well-probed, it is good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular at the end in which there should be some thickness:
The form of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a finer tip.
And already with this instrument, which has two prongs, the form of which is as follows: And with other instruments, which precede in the scraping of teeth; for it is also done with this instrument, which resembles a large onion, and this is its form:
The twisted or short triangular tip should have some thickness and not be too brittle so that it does not break.
And you should know that the instruments for moving teeth are made and similar to other instruments.
More so, the skilled and subtle artisan in the art finds by themselves according to what the operation and various diseases indicate; for there are diseases for which the ancients did not describe or leave a specific instrument, due to the diverse forms of different kinds.
But if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are fractured, or if you need to, then set it right in its place using what is appropriate from the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots, and assist with gestures, the form of which is as follows:
And if there is any small swelling in it, let it be compressed or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or flee before the bone is fully extracted; and then restore the area with appropriate medicines.
And if there is a small ulcer on the bone, then scrape away that ulcer and its darkness, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of prominent teeth over the others.
When the prominent teeth do not follow their natural course and are out of place, especially in women, and more so in those who are particularly venerable; therefore, you must consider: if a tooth is close to another tooth and cannot be extracted or moved, then root it out; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then incise it with this instrument, which has the following form; it resembles a pig's snout and is made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp point.
And let your incision be such that you cut it over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and ensure that no other tooth is damaged in the process.
And if a tooth is prominently exposed to filing, then file it with an Indian iron file, which has the following form:
And it is all made of Indian iron and the file very fine; and it is with small particles sharpened just like a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth should be filed little by little over several days easily, so that no other tooth becomes damaged or decayed. And then tie that part at the end, and shave that area with small razors.
And if it is a tooth of which a part is broken and it hurts the tongue, then you must file that inside so that the sharpness of that fragment is removed and smoothed out, and fill it so that the tongue is not hurt and speech is not impaired.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver filings.
When you encounter front teeth that have been displaced or knocked out by impact or fall, and the patient cannot chew on what they eat, and you have treated it with astringent medicines but your treatment has not worked, then in order to prevent them from falling out again, they should be fixed with gold filings and not silver, because silver can corrode and will fall out within a few days, whereas gold never changes.
And the filing should be of such subtlety and thickness that it can fit between the teeth; the method is to take the filing and place double its amount between two healthy teeth, then increase it with two twists of the filing between two damaged teeth, or if there is one or more, until the filling reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And then repeat the incision within the area where you began, and hold your hand with ease and skill so that it is not clumsy.
And let your ligature be with which you tie the thread should not slip from the roots of the teeth.
And then separate the excess bile from the extremities using forceps or tongs, and apply those in each area with care, and place them between the healthy tooth and the decayed one, so that they do not cause injury to the tongue. And then loosen that tightly bound area as if it were a band.
And if it is loosened or broken, strengthen that or those with other thread in such a manner throughout its entirety.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the reaction of two healthy teeth and two diseased ones, thus as you see these bound together:
And when it is done that you return a tooth or two to their respective places in the mouth, and they have grown back as we have recounted, and that they are restored.
And this is done only by skilled artisans and wise [individuals].
And sometimes a piece of the bone of a cow is prepared, and it is shaped like a tooth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is fastened as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the condition of the ligament that affects the tongue and prevents speech.
This ligament that affects the tongue sometimes is natural, with which a person is born, or it is accidental and occurs due to an injury that has already healed.
And the operation on him is that you open the mouth of the patient, his head existing in your hands; and lift his tongue, and then cut that nerve ligament according to the width within which the tongue is separated from its root.
And if in that area there is any hardness or knotting, and this has happened due to the consolidation of an injury, then you cut into it and divide that area horizontally between where you have not yet divided the ligament and where the knotting has dissolved.
And be careful not to make a cut in the skin of the flesh and that you do not tear the artery and cause blood to flow.
Then wash the remnants of the incision with wine or vinegar or with clean water; then place a smooth tongue beneath it; this is the method by which the patient should keep their tongue underneath every night so that it does not become consolidated again.
If bleeding occurs, place vitriol powder over the area; but if the bleeding continues, then cauterize the area with a red-hot cautery which is suitable for this purpose. And then treat it with other methods until it is healed.
Chapter .xxxv.
From the extraction of a ranula beneath the tongue.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And the operation on him is that you open the mouth of the patient sixty times in front of the sun and consider the abscess.
And if you see it of dark or black color, hard, in which the patient feels no sensation, then do not touch that which is cancerous.
And if it has turned white, which is due to moisture, then you insert your finger into it and cut it with a fine spatula; and slice it entirely. And if blood starts flowing during the operation, then cover it with linen cloth soaked in vitriol until the bleeding stops.
Then return to your work until you have removed it completely, washing it with sweet wine and salt; and treat it with the other cure appropriate until it is healed.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the extraction of abscesses from the ears and those that occur in the throat, as well as other abscesses.
When they occur in the throat area, these are glands that resemble cotton and are called the tonsils. When you treat them with the methods we have described in the division and they do not heal, then consider whether the abscess is hard, dark in color, and has little sensation; at this time, do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch it with iron due to the flow of blood; first allow that to mature within, and then either you will remove it, or it will break off by itself.
And if it is of white color, like a root, and the tip of it is delicate, then that is what needs to be cut.
And the operation on it is such that you should consider, before your operation, whether the swelling has rested from the cautery with complete rest or if it has decreased by some reduction; and then have the patient sit in front of the sunlight, with his head towards your side, open his mouth, and the servant taking between his hands pulls out his tongue using a noble instrument of which this is the form:
And it should be made of silver or steel, and it should be sharp like a knife.
So when you press with that instrument on the tongue and the swelling is shown to you, place your thumb over it, then take an ounce and insert it into the swelling, and pull it outwards as much as you can. And here is the translation of the provided line:
And here is the translation of the provided line: And it resembles forceps, however the ends of it are curved, so that the opening of each one is aligned straight with the other, sharp, which is made entirely of iron.
But if this instrument is not at hand, then incise it with a spatula of which this is the form: And let it be sharp on one side, blunt on the other side.
And since you have incised one side, incise the other in the same manner of incision, and then the patient will be washed with cold water.
But if bleeding occurs, the patient should be washed with water decocted from pomegranate peel or myrtle leaves and similar styptics until the blood flow is stopped, and then treat it until it is healed.
And sometimes other abscesses may form on the cheek or around the ears, and incise those in the same manner as I have described for the incision of two sides equally.
And I have already treated a woman with an abscess that had formed on her cheek, which abscess tended to a dark color, was barely sensitive, and had already closed her cheek, causing the woman to breathe through a narrow passage. She had been deprived of food and water, and she was near death, having lasted only one or two more days if left untreated.
And the abscess had risen so much that it was halfway between two channels, ready to burst through two paths.
Therefore I carefully treated it surgically and inserted one of the instruments into one of its areas, and pulled that out, and a large portion was removed from it. Then I incised that part where I understood there to be another wound, and then I closed the mouth of it, and held its tongue, and then I placed the instrument in that swelling.
And then I cut away a large part of it, and not much blood flowed from it. Thus, the swelling of that woman is absolute, and she should start drinking water immediately, then eat food. So I did not stop incising that abscess many times for a long time, and another abscess would form in place of that one, which I would continue to incise as it prolonged.
Thus, I took some material and cauterized the swelling, which provided additional treatment; then I left, and did not know what God would do with that person afterwards.
Chapter XXXVII.
On the incision of a boil when it is abscessed.
When a catarrh affects the boil, and it becomes abscessed and elongated, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in a part that is thick and round, then it is called a buba.
However, when it is treated with what we have mentioned in the division and you do not approve of your treatment, and afterwards you find that the abscess has already hardened and become thin, then you must incise those parts that are round and added; and if it extends to that length and is bloody, of dark or black color, and is not in the center, then you should attempt to incise it, for there is fear for the patient in that.
And when you see it according to the manner that I have said about its whiteness and length, make the patient sit and press their tongue with an instrument of which the shape protrudes, then insert the ounce into the new area, pull that down, and cut it with one of two instruments which are called in the incision of two almonds.
And it is necessary that you do not incise beyond what is adjusted to the natural boundary of its addition, for if you incise further, you will damage their speech.
And then for the incision, use what we have recommended in the section of two melons, and care for it so that it may heal.
But if the patient was frightened by the incision made on him, it is necessary to use skill in the cauterization of his fear, and the method of cautery for this is with sharp water. You should place the head of the patient on your lap, then press his tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, and then take the water we referred to in the chapter on cauterization, and warm it over a live fire, and apply that which is not too thick nor too thin, and fill the concavity of the instrument of which this is the form:
The extremity of it should be concave as the cavity of a spoon, and place the instrument with the medicine on the ulcer. The patient lies on his side so that no saliva or mucus from the mouth of that person can flow down due to this internal medication, so that it does not descend by any such cause onto the throat of him and harm him.
Then take your hand with the medicine and apply it to the uvula for a short period of time until you see it become darkened and soothed by the action of the medicine.
And if you wish, take some cotton and wrap it around the end of the reed, and submerge the cotton in the medicine, and insert the reed with the cotton into a tube so that the cotton adheres to that tube, and do this several times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the grape, and then let it dry out until it falls off after three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and then for the cauterization, clean around the grape with cotton soaked in vinegar, and modify that which is around it from the medicine, and wash it with cold water, and treat it externally with an embrocation, and internally with decoctions until it is healed.
And this type of treatment is safer than incision and lasts longer in terms of prevention.
Sometimes the uvula is cured with something more subtle than cauterization and incision, for it is treated by sublimation in this manner: take cinnamon, hyssop, origanum, rue, saffron, chamomile, fennel, and similar herbs; combine all of these ingredients or some of them in a pot, and let them be submerged in sour wine, and boil them. The pot should be well sealed with appropriate wax, and place a tube in the middle of the pot on which is placed a concave instrument made in this manner; it can be made of silver or iron.
And insert the extremity into the mouth of the patient before the steam reaches the uvula and obscures it.
And then sprinkle on those dry ashes found within which are dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the development of abscesses, for it would overly aggravate the abscess, and you should not do that, but rather declare the abscess through cauterization.
And if this instrument is not available to you, then take a reed and attach a hen's eggshell to the end of it so that the patient’s mouth can be cleaned, for the eggshell prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the extraction of thorns and other foreign objects that adhere in the throat and of other causes.
Dry particles adhering in the throat or fish bones or some other cause.
Then you must extract what is visible of those objects, on which you focus your sight, by pressing the tongue with an instrument in front of light, so that what is in the throat becomes clear to you.
And that which does not appear and is hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because by doing so the cause attached to the throat will be forcefully expelled through vomiting; or have the patient swallow a piece of raw radish or lettuce root or a bit of dry bread; or take a piece of dried sea sponge, and soak it strongly with honey, then have the patient swallow that, because as it reaches the place where thorns are located and extracted, they will be forcefully expelled. And also take an eel and wrap it in honey, and place it inside, and gently extract it; or take a leek and gently put it in and gently pull it out.
And if they are not forcefully expelled by those methods we have mentioned, then use an instrument made of lead according to this form:
And it should be thicker than a small tube, and at the end of it, there should be a cavity that you can easily insert into its throat.
And raise its head up, and be careful not to touch the bones of its throat, so that you do not harm it or cause any bone or spine to break, or that the doctor might injure it with their hand.
But however, the patient himself should intervene more, by his knowledge of the place of the attached cause and press upon it, and pull his hand with the instrument on it, all of this according to the quantity that is prepared for him inside before it is poulticed.
Capitol .xxxix.
From the extraction of the bloodsucker attached to the navel.
When bloodletting is treated with what we have said in the section on treatment with medicines and not by application, consider now the exposure of the patient to the sun, since you have examined the tongue of the patient with an instrument that we have recommended.
Therefore, if you use bloodletting, extract it with a small needle or with subtle movements appropriately.
And if it is not possible for you to extract [the object] with that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the wound of the patient, and then place an ignited iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this as many times (until the bloodsucker is dead and removed from the wound) and let the patient abstain from water for the whole day.
Then take a vessel full of cold water, open the mouth of it in that [wound], and wash the area with it; do not spill any of it for any reason and let the patient hold the water for about an hour with their hand, because the bloodsucker will immediately contract upon feeling the water.
But if it is not cured by what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with camphor or asafoetida using the instrument we have described for the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, as it may help [or: Do this, so that it may fall out].
And here is the translation of the given text line by line into English:
And if it does not work, then you repeat the fumigation several times, and the patient must abstain from drinking, eating salty and spicy foods, and not drink water; thus, it is necessary that this regimen be strictly followed.
And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodsucking from the navel is treated when it is seen; and it resembles forceps in this way, except that there is some curvature to it: Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
The text you provided appears to be in an archaic form of Romance language that shares characteristics with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The fragment "Capitol .xl." indicates a chapter or section number, likely meaning "Chapter 40" since ".xl." corresponds to the Roman numeral for forty.
In which is the sum of the discourse concerning abscesses and their incision.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.
And in diverse ways there is piercing and drying of them by two methods, one of which is through the type of abscesses that you introduce; and by this, you remove the humors.
And the second method is for the areas where bodily accidents occur, because an abscess that happens on the head is different from an abscess that occurs on the buttocks; and an abscess in a fleshy area is different from an abscess happening at a joint; and each of them has its own treatment by operation.
And regarding abscesses, there are some that should not be pierced until the pus is close to maturation or full development.
And there are other abscesses that should be treated when they are still immature and not fully developed, such as those near joints. For an abscess near a joint, its nature is prolonged until you can drain what is inside it; otherwise, the ligaments or nerves of that joint may be corrupted, causing contraction of the member. Or if the abscess is close to a major limb and you delay piercing it until it's fully matured, it could affect the main limb; or if it’s near the buttocks, pierce it even if it’s not yet fully matured; do not pierce one that is still in the process of forming but rather one that is near the buttocks so that its pus does not spread and extend within the buttocks, causing a fistula, or prevent proper healing. But you must know the time for the puncturing of the abscess, and this is when it has matured.
And you must know that it has matured when there is the reduction of pain and the cessation of fever, and also the decrease in heat and pulse, and the sharpness at the head of the abscess, and the other signs.
And you must know that the puncturing should be done at the lowest point of the abscess where the pus is, so that the pus comes out from the prominence.
And the puncturing should always be done along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in areas of muscles or feet, and near veins, tendons, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all similar places where there is no reflection; for in those that do reflect, use puncturing according to that member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy area, it is better to delay the puncturing until its digestion and maturation are confirmed, as we have said; for if you puncture it before that, the pain of it and much foulness will be prolonged, and the lips of it will harden and deepen.
And some swellings are pierced according to the latitude of the flesh or body where it is necessary, or according to what the limb requires.
And you must administer small punctures, and in large abscesses make large punctures or wide cuts according to the diversity of the size of the abscesses.
And there are other types of abscesses in which the skin must be indented and cut. When it is done this way, like cutting bread, and once it is done, it remains thus, much like incising into areas of tuberculosis and buboes.
And there are those that are incised with a cut having three angles; and there are those in which it is incised in the shape of a miter leaf, such as the abscesses of the armpits.
And there are those in which a round incision and a crescent-shaped incision are administered, similar to the aforementioned methods.
But for those that are not like superficial lion abscesses, you must pierce them with a superficial or flat puncture only.
And when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, you should puncture it without fear of extracting all the poison at once; first extract part of it, then plug the abscess again until the next day, then extract a larger portion, and continue doing this several times according to gradual progression until it is fully drained.
And especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old person in decline, because the animal spirit often dissolves with the discharge of pus, and the patient may die quickly, so you must operate carefully.
Take great care with this chapter and then your puncturing where you pierce these abscesses; you must clean the wounds and consider whether the wound of the abscess is small, or if it is a flat section. Then apply ointments made from lead or old bacon; and if the abscess is large, and the cracks in the puncture are many, then you must place lint in each track until they come together.
And if in the abscess a part of the chain has been severed or you have concaved that around the circumference, then you must compress it with old bacon or a thread made from lead cloth, just as when you extract pus or roots, keeping its moisture; bind that until the third day; and then treat it and cure it with whatever ointments are necessary until it is healed.
But if blood flow occurs during the time of your operation, then you should apply cold water and sweet wine in which you soak a lead cloth, and place that over the site of the bleeding multiple times.
But if the bleeding persists, then you must administer treatment and cure it using powders which I have recommended in various places of this our book and division.
And if it is during the winter season, and the place of the abscess is where many nerves are located, then you must infuse pillows with wine and hot oil, and place those on the affected areas.
And if it is summer and the areas are fleshy, then you must place poultices soaked with water and oil or with wine and oil, and all of this should be rubbed in until the third day, as we have said, and then you must lance the abscess, clean it, and administer to its treatment what is appropriate for healing until it is cured.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses universally, but according to the method of distinction, I have already said about each abscess in what manner its cure is carried out individually by chapters.
Chapter XLII.
Of the section of abscesses which appear in the nape of the neck.
In the nape of the neck, small abscesses appear, and they are similar to nodes that contain tunics which are in their formation; and the type of these is spots.
And from them come pus, and those contain a moisture similar to lime water. And from those come the ones that contain moisture similar to flour, and they resemble each other; and from those come the stony ones, which are hard.
And in the section of all and in the extraction of those there is no fear, because the extraction of those does not cause adverse archery [likely meant to be 'artery'].
And the operation in the section of those is that you express them with an instrument whose form is appropriate for this, which is called a probe, until you know what it contains.
For if what it contains is moisture, then you should divide it by making a longitudinal section according to this superficial cut in the following manner:
And it begins at the section of line B within line G. Thus, as the humidity is evacuated, then you scrape that skin which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause behind, for if some cause remains, the swellings will return repeatedly.
And then immerse a cloth in Egyptian unguent, if it is available, and if not, in water and salt; and fill the wound with that and leave it inside for another day, because with this you corrode all that is rotten from that membrane.
And then apply to that area Egyptian ointment a second and third time if you need it, until you are confident there is no cause of rupture in that layer; now treat the wound with an ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains fatty knots, then you should incise it in the following manner: using a section in the shape of a cross, and once between the two lips of the incision, scrape it all around, and exert your strength in extracting the membrane that contains it.
But if your treatment encounters opposition, then do what I tell you first.
And similarly, perform the incision and treatment of a calcified abscess as I have instructed you; an incision on a calcified abscess is easier, for it involves little blood and minimal moisture.
And sometimes some of these abscesses that are on the head in certain people contain no moisture at all; the cause is that I once incised an abscess on the head of an old woman and found the abscess to be like a deaf stone, rough, white, which could not be broken, and if anyone were to hit it, it would hurt them.
But in other swellings and accidents on the head apart from this case, such as the swellings that come to children's heads and around the roots of the ears, the section of these all is a superficial section.
And stop the perforation of those in the lower part of their body so that the body is relieved from the flux to the lower parts.
And then treat those with whatever is appropriate for healing.
Chapter XLII.
On the surgery of scrofula, which occurs in the neck.
Moisture and cold often cause these swellings in the neck and armpits; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck are caused by moisture that is generated between them, and all of these scrofula are within their own proper layer, just as in the knots and swellings of the head, as we have mentioned.
And the types of these scrofula are diverse, for some are stone-like, some contain moisture, and some are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, in the case where you find one of good disposition upon touching it, which is such that the color that appears is close to the color of the swelling and is soft throughout, and is not attached to the nerves of the neck, nor to the veins, nor to the arteries, and is not hard, you should incise it with a sharp superficial cut from the upper part to the lower part of the body along a line about 6 units inside another line about 2 units, and scrape it thoroughly, and extend the two lips of the swelling with tweezers, or with several pairs if needed, just as we have said for swellings on the head, and extract it bit by bit.
And it is more cautious that neither the vein nor the nerve be cut.
And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that you do not injure your hand during incision, or disturb the patient, and cut what does not need to be cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and prevent yourself from continuing the operation, then apply powdered vitriol or other powders that stop blood flow, bind up the wound, and leave within it something that reduces the sharpness of the abscess and softens the wound so that it begins to rot. When the blood is constricted or blocked.
Then return to your operation before you have completed it.
And then examine with your index finger if there is any cause of the other small swellings, therefore incise those and clean them.
And if it is near the large vein of the swelling, you must not incise that swelling at its base. Before that, you should wrap it with a strong double bandage and leave it in such a way that it falls by itself without harm.
And then fill the wound with old cataplasm that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then care for it.
And if you incise that swelling entirely, then you must bring the two edges of the wound together and suture them immediately so that there is no remaining excess material.
But if you see that there is excess material due to the size of the swelling, you must understand how to incise the base of it, remove it, and administer stitches as mentioned.
And for those swellings that contain moisture, pierce it with a superficial puncture where you see the site of maturation, and make an incision to drain the pus from the base of the swelling, as we have said.
And then administer punctures, with cauterization and similar actions to those, in order to corrode what remains of the corruption. And then when you see the wound already cleaned, now you treat it with an ointment made from generative flesh until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.
From the incision of the pus pocket resulting from an abscess in the groin.
The ancients described this incision in the abscess, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has performed it.
And this is the inscription of the speech of those [individuals].
And in men who have hemorrhoids, the extraction of the stone must be avoided, because by doing this no benefit is achieved since all the veins and the larger ones of the patient are here.
More in those who have swellings caused in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the illness is not in the bone, it is necessary to incise from the section of the swelling to avoid the damage which is caused by perforation.
Therefore, when we want to do this, we must cut the epiglottis leaving three rings of the epiglottis, or four with small sections along its width in the part that is between two rings by quantity, so that the section is in the soft tissue, not in the cartilage, and this location is suitable for cutting because it is devoid of flesh and the blood vessels there are few.
And if the doctor is inexperienced, it is necessary to stretch the membrane of the throat with forceps, and then cut the membrane until it reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any reason to do so.
Then cut the soft tissue as we have recommended; it is indicated by the section of the canal through the flame-like appearance which is caused by the disruption and by the change in the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
Therefore, when the hour is favorable for the feared perforation, bring together the edges of the wound's membrane, and suture them together, leaving only the cartilage exposed.
And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow where it needs to be healed.
And Albucasis says that the essence of the sermon we have recounted is not just to see that some of these abscesses have blocked the windpipe of the patient, and the patient has come close to death, and their breath is cut off, so some will incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe through the wound site with some respiration and be saved from death.
And by this, one should leave the wound open until the harmful nature of the disease is consumed; and this harmful nature lasts for three days; and then after that, one should stitch the wound closed and care for it until it heals.
And what I have seen in my practice is that a servant took a knife and inserted it into her throat and cut a part of the windpipe, and I was called for her treatment, and I found the sound as if it were the moaning of someone dying, and upon examining the wound, I found blood that had seeped from the small wound.
Therefore, I must confess that she had not cut any vein or artery, and air came out of the wound, and she continued until it was healed.
And it does not harm the servant if there is no hoarseness in their voice, and after some days they return to the improvement of their conditions.
And now I say that in the sectioning of the hernia there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.
Of a surgery on an abscess that occurs outside of the throat area, and it is called a hernia of the throat.
This swelling called a groin hernia is a significant swelling according to the body's color, and it occurs in women.
And it is of two manners, for it can be either natural or accidental.
And in the natural case, there is no need to treat it.
And the accidental is of two kinds, one similar to fatty nodes, and the other kind resembles an abscess which is formed by arterial obstruction, and in that case, there is danger. And it is not necessary to apply pressure with iron except in the case where it is small. And you should probe that area and investigate it with your finger. If you find it similar to fatty nodes and it is not suspended by any veins, then incise it as you would with nodes and extract it using what contains the flesh and bursa; otherwise, thoroughly examine its entire nature, and then treat the area with whatever treatment is necessary until it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
On the section of various types of nodes.
About the different types of nodes; I have already described all their types in the division [section or chapter].
And it is necessary that I recount thus the difference between a knot and a hernia as if there were doubt.
So I say that with a hernia there is heat and fever and intense pain within until the boiling of the excess subsides; and it is complete putrefaction when then the fever, the pain, and the heat cease.
However, with a knot, there is no heat, nor fever, nor pain, and it contains a solid mass which is like a lion's paw in shape.
And it depends on the color of the body, and its beginning is like a seed and is formed thus, whether larger or smaller, and they are of two types: dry or fatty and contain humidity, and the colors of the humidity are spots, as I have said in the division.
So when you arrive at the treatment of a knot, you must expel it and seek to address it at its origin using a method called "intromes," which will be described in the chapter that follows this one.
This is the method for investigating abscesses and all kinds of knots: you take this instrument and insert it into the most humid part that you find in the abscess, and you will stir the area little by little with this instrument until you know that the instrument has penetrated the core.
And then place your hand according to the size of the swelling, and then extract the foreign matter and examine what has been left in the wound.
And if the current moisture, of whatever color it may be, is exuded, then you incise it with a superficial section as I have said in other swellings.
And if there is no moisture left in the wound from the foreign matter, then you know that it is pus.
And dry it with a section in the shape of a cross as follows: do as you have been taught, and suspend it with weights, and unroll the bandage from all sides easily, and cover the skin or sack, if possible, and extract that discharge with the knot.
But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that discharge, and sometimes this happens, and then you must extract it in pieces to ensure nothing remains.
For if any of it remains, whether little or much, the knot will return as before.
And if you see that some small part remains from it, then complete the wound with some sharp and caustic powders, strengthen the wound, place over that which is an abscess a cautery, and treat that with other healing methods until it is healed.
And if the knot is large, then sew the two lips of it and treat that with what promotes flesh growth.
But if the pulse is opposite, or non-pulsating, then cut and fill the area with something like triassat which is vitriol, and leave that straight for two or three days until the wound dries out and the blood's boiling subsides; then return to divide what remains of the knot.
Chapter XLVI.
On the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
Regarding those forms of the instruments used for insertion, and they come in three sizes: some are large, some are medium, and some are small.
The form of the large instrument is as follows:
The form of inserting something small is this:
Here is the translation line by line:
And these are the forms of the experts, and they are named for herbs, and one of those is called bery.
And thus of three spices, for among them are grain, wheat, and a little [of something else].
The form of great experience, in this case refers to:
The form of experienced midwife, as follows:
The form of little experience, form of it:
It seems like the text is a mixture of medieval medical language with influences from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here's an interpretation and translation based on that:
And thus make circular, thick needles, as large as big pins with which saddles are sewn, and they are made of citrus wood, or of rosewood or iron, or silver, and the best ones are those made of citrus wood.
And they make use of black feather experiments, which involve opening the fistulas in the cavity where reflections occur, to be reflected with their light using those reflections.
And of three types, for some are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the stricture.
Form of the large lead ball:
Form of the experienced midwife with lead:
Forma del experient petit de plom:
The forms of tumors are of various types, for some are simple ones, which have only one curvature, and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium.
And from these are born three types of hooks or probes.
And of those hooks having two curves, and of three types.
And since they have three curves, and are of three types.
And all of these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas: Form of an ounce having two curves: Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:
And these are the forms of the scalpels with which nodules and abscesses are cut and excised, and they come in three types: one is large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:
Form of the midwife's scalpel:
Forma de scapel pauc:
The extremities where the incision is made are sharp and the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a manner, but rather to cause bleeding during the lancing of nodes, for fear of vein or nerve incision, and by this means the patient is healed and finds some tranquility from the heat found in the lancing of the abscess.
And these are the forms of almagidas, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
They are made of clay and resemble the root from which alcohol is made.
And it is on the lateral extremity that is punctured with a hidden spatula and in that area, you go to the inner and outer parts as you wish, as you see.
The forms of spatimis, which are hidden between the fingers during the piercing of abscesses so that patients do not feel them, and they come in three types: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of cupping with which the flow of blood is interrupted, and it comes in three types; large, medium, and small; the forms of it:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut, e sian subtils.
And it is necessary that these sizes of cupping vessels be large, medium, and small, so that through them you can quickly draw off blood flow when necessary, and then when first there is no medicine.
However, do not use them to cut blood from all parts of the body, and only use them in fleshy areas, such as on the creases of the chest and thighs, and in the creases of the arms, and of the breasts and belly and knees, and similar fleshy moist creases.
And sometimes these instruments are made in other small scissor-like forms; with which the blood is cut off when performing phlebotomy or proper incision of a vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round in the following form:
Chapter XLVII.
On the treatment of men's breasts that resemble those of women.
Sometimes the breasts of some men become enlarged due to the excess of sleep as they begin to grow soft, and then the breasts swell, resembling those of women, and can become moist and prone to inflammation.
And to treat this condition, you should incise those areas with a lunar section according to this form, from line B to line G, and then extract all the swelling. After that, apply a flesh-growing medication to the wound, and then suture the two sides of the wound together, and care for it until it is healed.
Here is the translation of the provided text line by line:
And if you do not complete the incision of what needs to be cut due to the agitation of the patient and blood flow, then you must fill the wound with swine lard submerged in corrosive ointment and leave it until it corrodes the fat that causes the problem, and then treat it until it heals.
The text you've provided appears to be in an archaic form of a Romance language, likely influenced by medieval Latin with elements from Italian, Spanish, French, or possibly other Romance languages. Given that context, here is the translation for the first source sentence:
Of the puncturing of abscesses that come from the titillik (a term which seems to refer to a specific type of cause or origin, possibly related to a particular symptom or condition).
These swellings that come from a kind of scrofula, which are hard and contain a sack-like membrane.
And of those that contain humidity; and those that contain humidity must be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of .G. to the line of .B. And once all that is evacuated which is in the abscess of the pus, then you fill it with old wool and clean the inside on the other day.
And then the cut should be sutured and treated with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
And if the abscess is in the area of the lymph nodes or the scrofula, then you should incise it as we have said in the section about scrofula similarly.
And if the plague has spread to such an extent that it causes putrefaction, then apply cautery as we have previously described.
Chapter XLIX.
On the section of abscesses that may occur due to arteries or veins.
When an artery is ruptured, and the chain that is above it becomes hardened, then greenish spots may develop into an abscess. The signs by which it can be known whether inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or a vein: for when the abscess is from an artery, it extends in a long line along the front of the body; and when you press the abscess with your fingers, you feel a rustling sound within it.
And that which is due to veins appears round on the surface of the body.
And cutting into this swelling is an error, and especially so in those areas near the armpits, the knees, the neck, and many other parts of the body; it is very serious, therefore the treatment with iron must be avoided, and that which affects the extremities or the head should also be avoided.
And for that which is caused by the inflammation of the artery orifice, make an incision along its length; then enlarge the incision with hooks and expose the artery, freeing it from the surrounding tissues until it is uncovered.
Then place the needle and make it penetrate to the other side, and tie the artery with double thread at two places—this method is similar to what you have learned in the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
Then separate the area between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood is drained out, and the swelling is dissolved.
And then administer treatment in which pus is generated between where the ligaments lie; and then treat it with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
And if the abscess is due to vein constriction, then you must hold as much of the abscess as possible with your hand and tie it off, and then insert the needle into the area where your hand was holding; let it penetrate deeply until you can pull it out from the other side, and then tie off the abscess with a strong ligature as I have described to you, using a double thread on both sides with the two ends of the thread.
And if you fear that the thread might be pulled out, then insert the wire using that needle along the entire abscess from the beginning of the needle first, and secure the wires at four points.
Then dry the abscess at its midpoint until all that is inside has been extracted; then you cut away the excess of the tie, leaving only what is needed to bind it.
And then place on it a pillow that you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the treatment made with plasters and ointments until it is healed.
Capitulizing the abscess which occurs due to nerve twisting.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And the most damage is done in the areas of the helpers or the ankle, or in any place where joint pain occurs.
And it is a severe abscess, and it resembles the color of the rest of the body, and it is in the more prominent parts of the body where such conditions tend to occur, and when it becomes tight with intensity, the patient appears as if in a stupor.
And it is not an abscess that has gathered in the front of the body, and therefore the chain (likely referring to a type of medical treatment or binding) is left off, and it is treated all over without going to the parts in front or behind.
Therefore, of those that are in the joints, it is not necessary to wrap them with iron, because doing so would likely cause contraction.
But for those that are in the head or on the forehead, make the chain (likely referring to a type of binding or treatment) with spatums (a tool or material used in treatment). But if it is a small abscess, then take that with tweezers and remove it carefully.
And if it is large, then suspend it with an incision, and drain that, and then close it;缝合伤口，然后在它愈合之前护理好它。
The text you provided is not a full sentence but rather what appears to be a chapter or section heading. It reads:
From the incision of an abscess that you perform on the belly which occurs in the abdomen.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And I have seen one, and in its belly were two parts that resembled fungi more than anything else, and there was no difference between those white, tiny creatures.
And already the lips of those were turned inside out and split open, and moisture was running from them all the time.
Therefore, I incised those and found one weighing eighteen ounces and the other about six ounces.
And the operation for incision is that you consider whether the patient is moist, and if the color of the vein is white, moist, and fine-grained; then you incise it with a broad scalpel, and have cautery irons ready in the fire, because dry clots should be expelled along with some blood; and if the blood flows too much, cauterize that area.
And if you find the patient weak and fearful, guard against infection with iron; but now take fresh lead foil, and strengthen it with that material, in the manner we have described; and leave that for two days.
And then adjust in the constriction of the lead thread; therefore, do not stop pulling the large lead weight until it is severed and falls off by itself.
And if the tumor is of large size, then at its incision there is some cause for fear and terror, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
And it is possible that you can cut away half of it, and then cauterize the area so that it does not return.
And then treat the internal area so that the wound may heal.
And be careful not to assume that you should incise a tumor which is of dark color, has little sensation, and appears fixed, for that one is truly cancerous.
And bring with you a remedy for kidney issues for this purpose.
Chapter II.
On the treatment of a protrusion in the navel.
A protrusion in the navel can be caused by various reasons; it may be due to fractures in the spine above the abdomen, and you should treat the tissue or hernia accordingly as described in other ruptures; or it may be due to blood flowing from a vein or artery as previously mentioned, or due to trapped air in that area.
And if it is due to a rupture of the membrane and protrusion of the tissue, then the color of the swelling resembles that of the body; and there is great pain, and soon it appears in various positions. And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then its situation differs significantly from what we have recounted, and as you press that area with your fingers, it becomes hidden, and then returns; and strongly it appears again in its place, and there is great movement of fluid entering and forcefully working.
And if it is due to moisture, then it is swollen and does not hide when you press with your hand, nor is it rigid, nor is it hardened.
And if it is due to blood, then with these signs the abscess appears turning black.
And if it is due to undigested flesh, then the abscess is heavy, large, and hard, and it settles according to a certain amount.
And if it is due to wind (gas), then the touch of it is violent (or harsh).
And the operation on him is to consider at this time whether the prominence of the navel is due to arterial blood, or venous blood, or gas; at this time you must abstain from the treatment of him, for in that case there is fear and dread just as I have taught in the chapter where I spoke about inflammations caused by arteries and veins.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the hernia, then you must order the patient to hold their breath and lie extended; then apply a thread around the entire circumference of the navel; then command them to remain inverted with your hands on their back; then encircle with a spatula around the circumference of the navel at the place where you applied the thread; then extend half of the abscess towards the upper parts by one inch; then bandage it around the circumference with strong honey or wax and use the appropriate method to apply the bandage.
Then press the center of the extended abscess over the ligament and insert your finger, specifically the index finger, to find the intestine; and if you have found or touched it through the ligament, then you should immediately pull out and push the intestine into the abdominal cavity.
And if you have found the hernia, then take hold of it with your thumb; and cut away its excess parts.
But if it is against an artery or vein, then circle around that area, and then return to your procedure; take two needles and thread strong thread through them and insert the two needles into the circumference you have made around the abscess in a cross shape, allowing them to penetrate; then secure the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you want to, remove the needles and let the area where the stretched flesh is exposed and falls off by itself; or incise that which has become thin and can be peeled away, and then treat it with ointments appropriate for healing until it is healed.
And if the prominence of the navel is flesh that has not healed or due to moisture, then you must concave the abscess as we have said and drain the blood or moisture that you find in it, and then treat it with what is necessary so that the area consolidates.
It appears you've provided a section marker or chapter heading, "Capitul .liii.", which indicates Chapter 53 in Roman numerals. This doesn't have an exact translation but marks the beginning of a new section in a text. If you need to translate or understand the content following this header, feel free to share the subsequent text!
The phrase "De curacio de cranc" can be translated from a medieval Latin-like language as:
We have already mentioned in the division about types of hernias and in what manner they are treated with medicines, and that it is advisable to treat them with iron so that they do not become ulcerated; and we have said that a hernia can develop in the groin and precautions for its treatment.
And the ancients said that sometimes a hernia can be in a place where its removal is possible, such as a hernia in the breasts or in the thigh, and they recommended extracting it entirely, especially when it starts small.
However, when it is old and large, one should not approach it, because I have not been able to cure any of those, nor have I seen others who have succeeded in this.
And the operation on it is when it should be done as we have said, which is that you precede by leaving the patient and purging them of black bile several times, and then incise it if a clear swelling is found.
And then prepare the patient with preparations in which they are placed for the operation, and then probe with hooks that are necessary for it; and then excavate from all sides with a good thread to extirpate thoroughly until no root cause remains. And let the blood flow, and do not cut it lightly, and squeeze the areas, and clean the thick blood completely with your hand or with an instrument that is available to you among the tools.
And if thick blood begins to flow from a vein or artery against your will, then cauterize it until the flow of blood stops, and then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
Chapter LIV.
Of the treatment of dropsy.
We have already discussed, in the division, of the types of water-related dropsy and the signs of each type, as well as the treatment with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is only the type of althitas alone, and it is not treated with iron in the case of the type of timpanists nor in the type of yposarcha, for that would be fatal.
And when you have already treated this type of timpanist dropsy with medicines and your treatment does not provide comfort, then consider, for if the patient has already become weak, or is afflicted with another illness such as another form of dropsy, like in his cough or abdomen and similar cases, then beware that you do not treat him with iron, for there is fear associated with this.
But if you see that the patient has abundant strength, and he is only afflicted with dropsy and no other illness, and is neither a child nor an elderly person, then the method of operating on him is as follows: you lift the patient between your hands, and another minister standing near him compresses his abdomen with their hand, pushing the water to the area below the navel, and then take a spiny spatula according to this form:
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from the intestines, because at this time you should cut away three finger widths from the navel towards the pubic area on the right side.
And if the generation of dropsy is due to disease in the liver, then your incision should be on the left side of the navel by three fingers.
And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then your incision should be on the right side.
And it is not necessary for your incision to be on the side on which the patient wishes to lie, so that the excess fluids do not flow to that place freely.
Then pierce through the entire chain with the instrument, then insert into that incision, and lift your hand with the spatula between the chain and the sinus, and you squeeze it out; and if it is the amount of a fingernail or so.
Then pierce the sinus so that the spatula reaches the empty space, which is where the fluid is located. Then extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the form: And it resembles a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or iron or bronze, at the lower end of which there is a small groove, and on the sides of it are three grooves: two on one side and one on the other side; and the tip of it is cut in the manner of a pen, as follows:
And at the upper end of it, there is a ring, so that when the instrument reaches the fluid, you can then place this ring on the instrument, thus allowing a moderate amount of fluid to be evacuated, for if you evacuate more than necessary in one go, the patient may die from the resolution of their animal spirit, or you might bring them close to death.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And then remove the instrument, and hold the water which is kept hot by the chain that holds the container which is on top of the basin and instructs you to pierce it in such a manner.
And then repeat the procedure on the next day if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small amount of water, and do this for several days in succession, and be careful to avoid mistakes until only a little water remains.
And if you are concerned about the patient and leave a large quantity of water, then cure it by burying it in hot sand, and induce sweating through bathing, and expose it to the sun for a long time; and treat it with drying medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize over the stomach, and the spleen and the liver before the extraction of the water, according to what I have recounted in the preceding text.
Chapter V.
On the treatment of children whose urinary passages have not properly formed or are not perforated.
Sometimes some of the children are born from their mother's womb with their urinary passage not perforated (or it is very narrow or not in its proper place).
Therefore, it is necessary to puncture with a subtle incision as soon as it is born using a sharp instrument according to this form:
Then place in the track a subtle lead wire and tie it down, and leave it for three days or four.
And when he wants to urinate, let him be unblocked and urinate; then block it again.
And if you do not place the lead, it is possible that the urine passing over the area will not clear this spot.
However, for those whose track is narrow, it should be treated with a lead wire as we have said, for several days until it is widened.
However, for those in whom the track is not in its proper place, as mentioned, which causes them to be born with the tract deviated at the end of the head of the penis so that they cannot urinate properly unless they lift the penis with their hand; and it does not allow generation, so the sperm cannot reach the mother correctly, causing a significant illness.
And the method of the operation on him is that the patient be placed face down on their back, and then extend the head of his penis with your left hand using a strong pulling action, and incise the head of the penis at the location of the foreskin with an acute spatula, just as if it were the cutting of a feather, or that you shave some part off, so that the middle of him comes to resemble the head of the penis and that the wound falls in the right place according to what is needed.
And be careful in your operation for blood flow, when you often encounter this; and place yourself to him so that you cut off the blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
The text provided seems to be in an old Romance language that draws from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The sentence you've asked for translation is:
From a condition that occurs on the foreskin at the head of the penis, involving corruption and blackening and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
White spots occur with this condition on the penis, and it is an elevation of soft flesh.
And of those, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
For non-malignant [condition], you must suspend it with a fine thread and cut within so that the entire area is separated; then apply to that piece submerged in Egyptian ointment; afterwards, treat it with a dilute ointment until it heals.
And if the condition is malignant and of a leathery color, then you must apply a cautery near its beginning and along its root.
If the condition occurs on the foreskin of the uncircumcised penis head, and one part of the condition is inside the foreskin while the other part is outside, then you must remove the part of the condition that is inside at its beginning until it is consolidated; afterwards, treat the external part, because when you treat it along with the foreskin, it is not guaranteed that it will not be torn.
And we have examined accidents in the genitalia and in the foreskin blackening and corruption; then you must return to its natural state all that is already darkened and what is about to corrupt or has already corrupted; then apply over this a dressing with honey, which is mixed with flour of crushed pomegranate rind and finely ground ash.
Then treat that with another treatment until it is healed.
And if there is an influx of blood, then apply a lunar cautery in the following manner:
For a beneficial cautery serves two purposes at once, that is, for an influx of blood and for a wound when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed, then you must insert a lead catheter into the foreskin so that the patient urinates through it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in those whose foreskin is tight, and circumcision is not required; and when the adhesion occurs due to a wound or an abscess), you must carefully separate it with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is fully released.
And if it is difficult to distinguish those exquisitely, then you must scrape with a spatula some of the cause from the head of the penis and from the foreskin, and this is where the foreskin, when it is thin, is lightly perforated due to its delicacy.
And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis with a sharp, thin instrument, which has already been soaked in cold water so that they do not stick together again.
And then it should be treated with astringent wine until it is healed.
Chapter LVII.
Of the cleansing of children and the treatment for what happens to those who undergo circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution that breaks continuity like other afflictions; rather, since it is of our own doing and by our own will, and those for whom it is specifically intended are children, it is necessary that we perform this operation in the best way and through the least harmful method to ensure their health.
Thus, it is said that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books, for they did not use it in their laws, and this is because we have acquired it through experience. This leads me to find that most artisans and barbers use circumcision and cleansing with a scalpel and forceps; they also apply ointment with honey and anointment with oil.
And I have already examined all these methods and did not find better cleansing with scissors and ointment with honey than cleansing with oil, because often the foreskin's double layer causes more problems. The foreskin has two layers, and the inner layer remains, which then requires another anointment and is sure to cause pain. And with cleansing which is performed by alum, and it is digital, of which barbers use, the incision at the end of the male member is not safeguarded, for they insert it forcefully.
But in an operation with a nail, if you forcefully open it, you will corrupt your operation. And the umbilical cord of the child is short by nature, and many times it is born in such a way that it does not require modification, and I have seen this.
Here is the translation of the given sentence line by line into English:
And the method of the first operation is that you should place the child mostly if it is one of those who understand a little, so that you only tie the cord on its penis just enough, and leave it until the next day.
And then make it so that he feels joy in every way possible within your means so that he receives the understanding. And then have the person between your hands positioned properly, and do not be careless; and hide the scissors in your hand or under your foot, so that the child does not see those or any other of the instruments.
And then insert your hand into the penis and blow into the urethra, pulling it inside so that the head of the penis is drawn in, and then clean it from what dirt or filth has been added to it.
The form of the scissors for modification, this is the form:
Here is the translation of the given line:
And the error in purification is that you completely or partially avoid the intrinsic chain [or bond], which you should incise.
Therefore, you must stretch that area of the skin with your fingernail before the inflammation of the site and incise it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then extract that with tweezers and incise it.
And if three days have passed, and there remains swelling of the apostematous penis, then you should wait until the abscess ripens, and easily drain it, and incise it according to what is prepared for you.
And be careful of the head of the penis, for it should not be affected by that.
And thus treat it with what consolidates the wound from the powders which we have mentioned in the treatise on powders.
And if it is incised excessively on the scrotum, and you observe parts above it, this should not harm him.
And furthermore, treat it with what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LVI.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction made by stones or frozen blood, or by pus or flesh growths, and similar to those we have mentioned regarding the methods of treatment in the section.
And if it is not dissolved by what we have said and the cause is strongly present in the patient, then you must administer extraction with an instrument called a syringe, which has this form: It should be made of silver and have a fine, hollow tube like a bird's quill, about one and a half palms long, with a thin canal at its tip.
And the method of urination extraction is as follows: take the folded cloth and tie it tightly to one end with wool or cord; insert the ends of the cloth into the part where the catheter is inserted, and cut away any excess wool with scissors if necessary, but forcefully introduce it into the tube. Then proceed by drawing out the catheter with a wad and egg white.
And lay the patient on a sheet, and irrigate their bladder and penis with moist oils, olive oil, and rose water.
And then insert the catheter easily so that it reaches the root of the penis; and then bend the penis upwards to the area of the pubic bone; and then push the catheter in there; and then continue pushing until it reaches the bladder, and this should be felt by the patient as having reached the desired location. If not done according to this order, but rather in a way that goes crookedly, it can cause injury.
And then extend the bile with the wool little by little, for the urine soaks the wool.
Then extract it and use the urine for treatment, and apply a catheter; do not stop doing this and use the catheter until the bladder is evacuated and the patient finds relief.
Chapter .59.
Of the quality of vesical irrigation with a catheter and similar instruments which are appropriate for this.
When you encounter ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood within it, or if pus is blocked there, and you wish to drip water and medicines into it, then an instrument called clamped-drill should be used, and this is its form:
And here is the translation of the given line: And in that place three wounds: two from one side, thus as if struck.
In the beginning is the concavity in which what is expelled resides, and it is according to its quantity that it obstructs that space. Without addition, when any cause pulls from the humidities, it is drawn in, and when it is expelled, along with that it is drawn out, and when it is expelled long-term, according to how it acts like clampcedra, in which naphtha is mixed into the naval battles.
Therefore, if you want to extract moisture from the bladder, insert the end of a tube into the moisture, and draw out with that what is pushed up into the upper parts, for the moisture is drawn into the cavity of the tube.
Then insert the end of the tube into the urethra as we have recommended in the circumcision; and then push the moisture with what you are pushing, for that moisture reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient feels it.
The form of the catheter that is used to catheterize the bladder is as follows:
It should be made of silver or lead, with one end resembling a small feather, and leave a hollow canal inside.
Then take the bladder of an animal, and place in it the moisture that you want to introduce into the bladder, and then tie both ends tightly with double thread, and warm that moisture over fire.
Then insert the end of the catheter into the urethra.
And then press your hand over the bladder with moisture applied firmly until the patient feels that this moisture has reached the bladder.
And if the bladder is not present, then take a piece of leather and make a circle from it; pierce that entirely around its roundness; then insert strong pitch into those holes, so that it is poured in; then add the circle as you would apply a poultice, such that you place it in the water or moisture, oils and waters that you want to use.
And then attach it to the instrument and use it in the same way as you did with the bladder, pressing with your hand until the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
On the extraction of stones.
We have already mentioned in the division the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and the signs of each.
And we have said of the stone in which the operation is done by hand, and section.
And the stone generated in the bladder properly is that which is lodged in the bladder.
And I am narrating that with clear exposition and abbreviation.
Therefore, it is said that stones generated in the bladder mostly affect children; and among the signs of this is that the urine excreted from the bladder resembles water in its subtlety, and appears sandy; and the patient rubs his penis, often feels pain, and then there is relief; and with this, you understand some of these symptoms.
And bleeding is the treatment for children under fourteen years who have this condition; and it is a difficult treatment for the elderly. However, in younger individuals, it may be treated differently because they fall between these categories.
And for the one in whom the stone is larger, the treatment is more severe; and if it is small, the treatment is contrary to that.
Therefore, when we come to the treatment of this condition, we must begin by cleansing the patient with catheters that extract all the pus present in their intestines; for this pus sometimes prevents the discovery and removal of the stone during examination.
And then the patient is lifted by their feet and shaken gently up and down so that the stone descends into the neck of the bladder, or jumps from place to place several times.
And then place that poultice between your hands and prepare it, with the patient's hands left on their sides, so that the entire bladder is made to tilt towards the lower parts.
And then wash it and clean it all outside.
Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then you should immediately treat it with surgery.
And if you cannot remove it entirely with your touch, then you must anoint your left index finger with oil, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if they are a grown youth, and insert that into their anus. And wash the stone inside while your finger remains there. And gradually turn it little by little inside toward the neck of the bladder.
And then press on that area with your finger, and expel it towards the outer parts away from the site of the incision.
And command the attendant to press the bladder with their hand; and command another attendant to extend the testicles upward with their right hand, and with their other hand support the cord that is below the testicles, at the site where the incision is made.
And then insert a spathula in an oblique manner, which should have the following form: And then split that which is between the anus and the testicles, not in the middle but towards the left side; and make the incision over that stone with your finger inside the anus, ensuring the incision is transverse so that the outer part of the incision is wide and the inner part narrow according to how much the stone protrudes as much as possible without being larger, because you will compress with your finger which is in the anus to make the stone follow the incision, and it becomes difficult due to this constraint.
And know that some stones have angles and edges, which makes the extraction of them difficult because of that.
And from that, this is similar to a grain, and it is round, and it is made from the thin secretion.
Therefore, if it is that in which angels and margins are adjusted into the fissure.
And if it is not thus superficially treated, then you must bind over that area, or press on that place appropriately with your hand, the extremity of which should be like a file pressing against stone, and do not move away from it; or insert into that area an instrument with a subtle curved end.
And if you cannot act on that area, then slightly enlarge the treatment site, and if you see blood flow, bind it tightly with powdered vitriol.
But if there is more than one stone, at the beginning you should press your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then incise it; and then slightly push towards it; and similarly do this if there are more than two stones.
And if the stone is very large, it is unwise to incise it with a large cut, for you will cause one of two outcomes to the patient: either they die or they become subject to continuous urine dripping, because the area does not fully heal.
But administer the expulsion of what is superficially embedded, or extract it from the fracture with forceps in pieces.
Therefore, once you have completed your operation, now fill the wound with slices of aloe and dragon's blood, and bind it thus. And place over it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in oiled wool and warm water, so that swelling may be prevented from forming.
Then recline the patient on their side, and do not loosen the bandage within three days.
And when you have loosened it, wash the area with warm water and ointment, then treat it with diafine ointment and diabazilik ointment until it is healed.
But if a swelling, which is hard and corrosive, occurs in the wound, resembling blood congealed in the bladder that prevents urination (and this is known by the discharge of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will cause corruption and putrefaction of the bladder.
Then wash the wound with sweet wine, water, and salt, and treat it oppositely to any specific ailment, using whatever is appropriate for its healing until it is healed.
And throughout the entire duration of the treatment, you must spread open both thighs and apply the medicines that are placed on the area.
And if the stone is small and is in the flesh of the penis, and it has embedded itself in there, and urination is obstructed, then cure that before resorting to surgery, because numerous cases of this treatment have been accused of leading to surgery; and I have already expressed this, which is that you should take an oiled iron probe, of which this is the form:
with a triangular outer end, sharp, inserted into wood.
And then take honey, and apply it with that to the penis after removing the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the tool into the penis, piercing easily until the piercer reaches the stone. And rotate the piercer with your hand on that stone little by little, and you will penetrate through it until you reach the other side; for the urine will then be released.
And then press your hand on the part of the stone that is exposed outside the penis, as it is crushed, and it is expelled with the urine, and the patient is healed.
But if this treatment is not suitable for you due to some reason that prevents you from doing it, then apply honey below the stone and more honey above the stone. And then make an incision over the stone on that penis between two bindings. And then extract it. And then untie the bandage and modify the congealed blood that is formed in the wound.
And it is not necessary to tie the thread under the stone, but so that it does not return to the bladder, and another binding above it, because when the thread near the protrusion of the stone is untied, the chain returns to its place and takes the stone with it.
And for this reason it is necessary when you apply the bile above, that you raise the chain to the upper parts, or that you return your bowing posture, and treat the ailment as we have said.
The text appears to be in an old Romance language with influences from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The given line is a chapter or section heading:
From the extraction of stone from women.
Stone in women is rarely produced.
And if a stone is found in any of those areas, then the cure for it becomes difficult, and it is prohibited by many methods.
One of them is that the woman forcefully remains virgin.
And the second is that you do not find a woman truly knowledgeable who would expose herself to the doctor when she is chaste, or is among women having husbands.
The third is that you will not find a woman well versed in this art, especially in this operation with hand.
And the fourth is that the site of the incision for the stone in women is distant from the location of the stone, so you need a deeper incision, and there lies the fear.
And if necessity forces you to do this, then you must take a female doctor who is very knowledgeable, though they are rarely found.
But if you are deprived of that, then seek someone who is very skilled and subtle, or present a female midwife well experienced in the affairs of women, or a woman who has some knowledge of this art.
Therefore, have that person present, and command them to do everything you instruct, starting with the examination of the hymen; this is done to check if the woman is a virgin, then they must insert their finger into her and touch the hymen.
Therefore, if that [the hymen] is found, press it with your finger, and then command her to sit down on it.
If she is not a virgin, then order the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's vagina and feel for the stone, placing her left hand over the bladder, and compress it with good pressure.
Therefore, when you find that, then it is necessary to gradually pull that from the opening of the bladder towards those parts with some force of its strength until it reaches the area near the thigh.
And then incise on that spot at the middle of the thigh, you should place the razor edge from any side and press the stone into that part, and the said one's pain should not be alleviated by the stone pressing it.
And the incision should be small at the beginning; then insert the probe into that incision, and if you feel the stone, now adjust the incision according to the amount by which you know the stone will be expelled from it.
And know that the types of stones are various: for among those, some are small and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and having ridges.
Therefore, you should know the varieties of it through which you can understand what you intend to address.
And if you see blood flow, apply finely ground vitriol to the area and leave it there for an hour until the bleeding stops, and then continue with your operation once the stone is expelled.
And have prepared with you the instruments which are used in the extraction of stones from men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood and know that the expulsion of the blood is from the artery that has been cut, then you place powder on the area and press it with pillows and a tight bandage, and do not repeat this; and leave the stone there and do not remove it, for by doing so the patient will likely die. And then treat the wound.
And as the sharpness of the blood diminishes over several days and the area becomes weak, then you return to your operation before the stone is completely expelled.
Capitol lxii.
Of section on hernia occurs.
Hernia ayguoza no es sino agregacio de humiditat en le ciphac blanc lo qual es dejos la codena dels genetius contenent le huou, e es nompnat ciphac.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which affects the groin area, because this material accumulates in such places, and sometimes it occurs due to blows inflicted on the groins.
And this humidity has various colors, for the color of it is inclining towards yellow or bloody, or red, or is black and feculent, or is clear white, and this is what it means.
And the signs by which it is known where this water accumulation is as follows: for if it is in the white region we have mentioned, then the swelling is round declining a little lengthwise like an egg shape, and the generative organ appears, because the moisture contains it from all sides.
And if the humidity is in the actual fatty tissue, then the abscess becomes round with parts resembling an egg, and for this reason, it is thought to be another kind of egg.
And if the moisture is between the testicles and the white membrane, then apply a poultice there.
And when you want to know the color of the humidity, then you express the color of the humidity in the abscess by inserting a probe whose form is known; and according to what is seen in the mark left by the probe, judge of what is inside it.
And when we come to the treatment with iron, then it is necessary to command the patient to be bled if that is possible for you, and turn the body of the patient completely.
And then lie them down on their back on some kind of support slightly elevated, and place a soft cloth underneath.
And then sit on the left side of him, and command the assistant to stand on his right side, who should extend their arm from one of the two sides to the groin area and to the part near the navel.
And then take a wide spatula and split the groin area from the middle along its length, close to the penis.
And the incision should be made straight and evenly distant from the line where you will cut the skin of the groin, until you reach the white substance enclosed within.
And extract that [substance], observe it, and be careful not to penetrate too deeply; the extraction you perform should be such that it hangs with the most delicate and subtle probing according to what is possible for you.
And then pierce the white substance full of fluid with a wide incision, and extract all the fluid.
And then separate the two lips of the incision with hooks, and extend the penis upward; do not touch the cord that holds the testicles, and cut the penis in such a way as is possible for you. And cut that [part] entirely or in pieces, especially its delicate side, for if you do not examine the incision meticulously, it is not ensured that the water does not return.
And if you process the wound from outside of its hernia during the time of your operation, then when you have completed the section of the incision, return it inside, and then adjust the two lips of the hernia with sutures, and then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the wound corrupted by another disease, then you must cut the vessels that are near the suspenders, extract the wound, and then treat it with what we have said.
And if the water is added in two separate parts similarly, then you know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part equally as you have done in the other one; and if it appears to you that this is an operation, then you do it.
And then you clean the blood, and insert into the incisions wool soaked in oil or oiled wool; and place on top other wool that you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread that over the two groins and the navel of the abdomen; and place above folded cloths and cushions, and bind those with a bandage according to this form:
And then two cloths are taken and filled with padded wool according to this pattern; and the ends with which it is pressed should be made of cloth or moistened wool, and they are attached with a structure in the waistband of the breeches, and one end should go from the buttocks between the two, and the second at the crotch area, and two ends over each thigh and two other ends on each knee, and all the structure is adjusted in the waistband of the breeches.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery instead of a section with iron; and you should take a fine knife-like cautery and incise the chain of the groins with it, and ignite it as we have recommended between which the white rind containing the water is exposed, and then you take a cautery according to this form: And it is similar to Greek letters.
And then pierce with that instrument, and heat it until all the moisture has been expelled.
And then extend the instrument with hooks, and squeeze with hooks, and cauterize with a finely heated cautery; and cut as much of it as you can until you remove all of it; and be careful of the area so that the fire does not touch it.
And know that this operation is safer and causes less bleeding, and is better than an operation with incision.
But if during the operation or during the cautery or bleeding you encounter complications such as swelling, then you must treat whichever complication arises for you in the appropriate manner as indicated.
But if the patient is weak and does not expect to undergo a second operation due to its horror, then administer puncture as I recommend here; and it is when you are certain, based on what we have said about the signs, that the hernia is acute.
Then you must have the patient sit on some elevated chair, then pierce the swelling at its lowest part with a blunt spatula, and keep the puncture according to the length of the body.
And let there be an ample opening through which all the water flows out.
Then place your hand over the area and press it, allowing the remaining water to flow out. Then treat that area until the plague is healed.
However, if there is an obstruction to the discharge of water at that time, you should pierce it: this is done only when the white panicle in the orifice of the plague causes an obstruction and prevents the efflux of water. At this point, you must introduce a probe or instrument into the plague with which the water from the dropsy is extracted, the form of which has been previously described; or apply a small device to the compression of the plague.
And know that the water may return and reaccumulate after about six months or around that time; and when it accumulates again, pierce it according to the same method, so that the patient may thus spend their days.
Chapter LXIII.
On the sectioning of a fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Sapias que en la seccio sobre aquesta hernia es temor perdusent a pernicia en las majors disposios;
And I am recalling the operation in that case and the specifics of the abscesses.
Therefore, I say that abscesses occur in bodies where the veins are involved, and this happens for various reasons: either due to an acute bitter excess that is poured into the veins, or by percussion.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it is not accompanied by pain, and it is a severe abscess.
And often the abscess is calcified, of which the color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
And sometimes it is caused by the constriction of the arteries and the inflammation of those, as the memory of it is already perceived, or by the inflammation of veins.
However, that which is caused by the inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it should not be touched.
However, that which is caused by the inflammation of veins does not disperse at all when pressed with the fingers.
And it is possible that on this kind of condition a section can be made and also on other flesh; and you should incise the cord of the testicles, then stretch the scrotum upwards towards its parts above, extract the white material from there, release the suspensory ligaments of the vessels, tie them off, and then incise the suspensory ligament after you have released it entirely from all parts of the scrotum.
And so, if the scrotum is already consolidated with those fleshy parts, then you must extract the scrotum and incise it.
And if there is adhesion due to any cause within the white material, or between the vessels, then you must release all of that adhesion and incise it with a circular incision.
But if there is a growth of flesh in the area of the adhesion that is behind, then you must incise all of that which belongs to it and extract the scrotum as we have said.
And so when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool infused in oiled wine; and then care for it with other treatments until it is healed.
The line "Capitul .lxiv." appears to be indicating the title or number of a chapter in the medieval medical treatise. It translates as:
For the given line:
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.
And in the treatment of this disease, it is done out of fear of that which is preceded by reminiscence.
However, it is necessary that we speak of the operation in which they perform the first actions.
And it says that you must place the patient on an elevated chair; then pull up the supporter of the testicles to their proper places; then tie the cord of the genitalia with your own hands using the bands that are prepared for the penis; and let other assistants help you, and stretch them forcefully.
Then make an incision with a sharp spatum (a type of surgical instrument) through a transverse cut in the right place of the vessels, so that the vessels are exposed.
Then squeeze from all parts as we have described in the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
Then insert a needle with double thread into those areas, and tie one end of the thread at the front part where you made the incision, and tie the other end at the back part. Then make an incision in the middle of those areas with a straight cut according to the length of the body, and extract what has accumulated from the foul and corrupted humors.
And then treat the wound with treatments for other wounds in which you want pus to be generated so that the vessels fall out of which you will blacken one of two veins, for it is not bad by this.
If it happens that all the vessels are affected, then it is necessary for the testicles to be extracted or for the testicles to coagulate because of the vessels, so they are deprived of all nourishment due to the constriction of the vessels, and that they be removed or coagulated so that they do not remain harmful.
It seems like you've provided a chapter or section heading, "Capitol .lxv.", which translates to "Chapter 65" in Arabic numerals. This likely denotes the sixty-fifth chapter or section within a larger text or document. Without additional context or content from this chapter, I can only provide this translation and interpretation of the heading itself. If you have more details or specific content from Chapter 65 that requires translation or explanation, feel free to share!
This phrase is in a language similar to medieval Latin or old Romance languages and translates to:
The appearance of this hernia is due to a section that extends from the spine over the abdomen towards the groin area of the belly, so when the intestines rupture from there, some of the intestines come out.
And this rupture is either of the abdomen or due to exertion by him, and these two types can happen for various reasons: either from a blow, or from jumping, or from crying out, or from lifting something heavy, or from similar causes.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And the sign of it is when there is obstruction in the bladder, for at the beginning it causes a sudden and intense pain; and it appears as diverse swellings different from the usual appearance of the chain (referring to veins or vessels), and this is due to the protrusion of the intestine, and the body of it extends beyond the bladder.
And sometimes the intestine pushes through the tissue, and this type of intestinal hernia is called zirbal.
And sometimes it is caused by gas, and sometimes the intestine splits open, and here it is retained, and this greatly distresses the patient, and sometimes it causes severe and intensified pain when pressed.
And in the treatment of this kind of illness with iron there is fear, for which reason it must be avoided to use cautery in that area.
And the method of the operation for that is to command the patient to push the intestine with their hand into its cavity inside if it obeys your direction, and then have them lie back on their head between your hands, and lift their chest.
And then hold the cord that is above the cord of the testicles, and cut the cord of the testicles entirely along its length; and then insert hooks into the two sides of the incision according to what is needed to open the incision with those.
And if the incision is made according to the amount that allows the semen to be expelled from it.
And then pull on the skin where the cord of the testicles was placed until the white hard part of each side is exposed.
Then insert your finger into the area where the testicle is, between the white part that was under the semen cord and the second layer, separating it from the adherence that is in the area behind the semen.
And then hold the cord of the testicles with your hand towards the outside, and with this, extend the white layer upwards with your left hand, and lift the semen sac along with the layer to the incision site; and command the assistant to lift the semen sac up while you dissolve the adherence behind it completely.
And seek with your ties that there is no cause for the intestine wrapped in the hard white membrane. And if you find any cause in him, then you apply that to his abdomen.
And then make an incision in the area below the region of the testicles, such that blood and pus flow from it, just as we have described in what we have said.
And then apply wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound; administer the dressing we have recommended (and sometimes the white of an egg is cauterized, which we mentioned near the beginning concerning blood flow issues, for such incidents occur frequently) and leave the dressing until it falls off by itself.
And if the treatment is delayed, then hot water should be poured over it, and place it on the area until it falls off as we have said.
And then treat the wound with another method of wound treatment until it is healed.
Chapter LXVI.
About gas hernia.
In this type of hernia, no one has been bold enough to attempt its treatment with iron (surgery).
And the ancients said that it should be treated as we have recommended in the hernia treatment using wine; which is to tie the vessels near the section where it can be done with ease; then dry out the center area around the swelling with something that opens it, until the vessels fall off.
And treat the plague as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII.
From the disruption that is caused in the ankles.
At certain times, there may be a rupture in the knees as we have said, and you should expose the area.
And do not attribute any cause of the hernias to the lineage; and if you do, it is rare; and return to this at all times.
And if the time is prolonged with this method, an adjusted incision is made in the sphincter through which you let the intestine descend into the sphincter; and this happens due to the stretching of the sphincter which occurs at the angle we have mentioned, which causes the sphincter to stretch, then it becomes softened, and the area becomes inflamed and protrudes.
And the treatment of it is with cautery, as was mentioned earlier in the description of it.
And sometimes it is treated with iron in this manner: the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then dry the inflamed area of the rupture by drying it lengthwise according to the quantity of three fingers.
And then strengthen the white sphincter below the cord so that it is exposed.
And then take the probe and place it over the protruding area of the sphincter, and press it against the front of the abdomen.
And then sew the two protruding areas at the end of the sphincter probe together using sutures.
And then extract the end of the rib, and do not incise the entire circumference, nor extend the wound, nor cause any other issue as I will teach you in the treatment of intestinal hernias.
And then treat that with the treatment of the wounds, and as you incise the abscesses, cleanse that area and restore the wound before it is consolidated; for the suture is contracted and does not adjust to the prominence of the rupture.
And cautery is better in this location, because it is closer to health.
Capitol .lxviii.
For the softening of the scrotum.
Motars seen the chain of the testicles in some men is softened because the flesh that is between them is softened, and it is noted the observation of it.
Then it is necessary for the one who is engaged in the patient’s cure to lay the patient according to their back, and lift up all the wound that has been softened over the natural wound; and then to join both lips with a suture.
And if you want, at the beginning, soften the excess of the loosened ligament with three or four warmings and a firm suture.
And then cut between the sutures; and then treat for the healing of other wounds until it is healed and the pus has drained.
Capitol .lxix.
From the context provided by the previous sentences and the structure of the language used, "De castracio" can be translated as:
Know that castration in our law is excommunicated, but for a reason it is lawful for me to remind you of it in this book; and the remembrance of it is not necessary except in two ways, one of which is so that it may be part of the knowledge of the doctor when asked about it, who knows the cure of him to whom it happens; and the other way is that we often need the castration of other animals for our benefits through them, such as horses, oxen, pigs, and similar beasts.
And therefore I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by attrition, or by cutting with a fissure.
But in the one that is done by attrition, the method of the operation is to have the animal immersed in hot water until its testicles are softened and become loosened and hang down. Then take them with your hand while they are still resolved and do not allow them to be apparent or protruding.
But in castration performed by incision and cutting, you must hold the animal and press the scrotum of its testicles with your left hand.
And then apply the suspension device, and make an incision on each bone with a cut between two joints.
And then incise that pus which you have squeezed out. And do not leave any cause on those with gout except the subtle gout which is on the veins.
And this method of castration is better, which is done by atrophy, because atrophy leaves no cause from the testicles for the animal to desire coitus.
And then treat the plague until it is healed.
Chapter LXX.
On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one is when it appears in the space along the scrotum, between the two testicles, where a female genitalia-like figure appears, complete with hair.
And sometimes urine flows from that area in the scrotum where the testicles are.
In women, it is a different case: the female genitalia above the pubis resembles two male testicles slightly to the right, and there is something like the foreskin of a man along with two testicles.
And the cure is of three types: two for men and one type for women. And it is necessary that you incise those tight tissues so that the swelling of that area is reduced, and then treat them with the cure for other ailments.
And in the second type for men, where you draw urine from the area around the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for it.
Chapter XXI.
On swelling and protruding flesh due to causes specific to women.
Swelling appears suddenly due to natural causes, within which it becomes compressed and requires observation; and sometimes it is enlarged in some women to such an extent that it spreads similarly as in men and can even affect intercourse.
Then it is necessary that you remove the excess swelling with your hand or with scissors and incise it.
And do not delay in making the incision, especially near the region of the vagina, so that it does not cause a flow of blood.
And then treat that with the treatment for wounds until it is healed.
New-born flesh is flesh that grows in the wounds of the mother until it fills them, and then it protrudes at the outer parts resembling a tail (and for this reason, some early doctors called it “tail disease”); therefore, we must incise it as we would lentil-like growths, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter LXXII.
On the treatment of gout.
Gout is when the neck of the female uterus is not perforated, or the passage is small. And it is either natural or accidental.
And accidental is due to illness that has preceded it, and that which is caused either by improperly adjusted flesh or by a subtle or thick foreign body.
And it is done either in the womb of the mother, or on its sides, or on its upper pus, or on its lower pus, and prohibit coitus and pregnancy and childbirth, and especially prohibit menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is obtained by examining the uterus, if the obstruction is visible, proceed accordingly; but if it is not visible, then you search for it with your fingers or with a probe.
And if the obstruction is due to subtle particles and is located near the two lips, then you should cut and disrupt that area.
And you place pillows under both labia, and then place your index fingers of both hands inside.
And the woman should be on her back, her thighs spread apart, and then spread the two lips forcefully so that that subtle barrier is broken and the obstruction is opened.
And then take wool and soak it in oil, place that on the area, and guard it for a day so that the incised area does not become sealed over.
But if the barrier is thick and dense, then you must incise it with a spatula or with a myrtle leaf.
But if the obstruction is due to flesh growth, then suspend that with tweezers and incise it.
And use the medicines that stop blood flow from bites, such as hectorite, dragon's blood, and enses, combined with egg white.
And then administer a wide lead cannula so that the affected area does not close lightly.
And keep it in place for several days and administer a dry cataplasm.
And then it should be treated with the other consolidation treatment until it is healed.
And sometimes it happens in the major growth of other tissues, and then you must incise according to this method. But if this is due to a chronic abscess, in the case of a chronic abscess that is in the major area, it should not be treated with iron in any way.
Chapter LXXIII.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids and tail and red boils that occur in the genital area of women.
Hemorrhoids are understood to be from the openings of small veins through which blood continuously flows; and when hemorrhoids become old, they harden.
And I have already said in the division the types of those and the signs of those, and to say thus those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and tumors when they are in the inner part of the rectum and do not appear to the senses, should not be treated with iron.
And those that are at the opening of the rectum, which can be felt, are the ones that can be treated.
And you must place the woman in cold water and then extend the tumor with forceps or with a rough cloth, and incise them with scissors.
Then sprinkle on them to stop the flow of blood one of the powdered styptics such as mastic and similar substances.
Then fumigate her feet for an hour, and then place them in cold water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then have her sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate rinds and walnuts and similar items.
Then take flour of bran and mix it with honey and sweet wine, and make a plaster with this and apply it to her back.
And if the blood is constricted, that's good; and if not, cause adhesion with two cupping vessels, and on the breasts perform scarification.
And then take wool and submerge it in the juice of coriander or in the juice of horehound or in the juice of germander with fermented wine and apply it to the area; then treat the area with poultices until it is healed.
And care for that which is inside so it may be healed.
It appears you've provided a section or chapter identifier, likely from an ancient text or manuscript, specifically "Capitol .lxxiv." which translates to "Chapter 74" in English. This doesn't contain any content to translate but marks the start of a new section in the text. If you have specific content under this chapter for translation, feel free to share it!
Regarding the accidental perforation of the eardrum in the ear.
Various types of swellings can occur in the ear, such as infections, stone-like swellings, ulcers, abscesses, serpent-like growths, hemorrhoids, raguarrias (a type of swelling), tumors, and other kinds of swellings. And I have already spoken of these diseases and their types and their signs, and their treatments in the section.
And I must speak in this treatise about the abscess that comes to maturity when it is one of those abscesses that collect pus, and if you want to know how the operation on it with iron is performed.
Then you must consider whether the pain of the abscess at its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and sometimes that redness appears and if you press on it, then do not treat it with perforation, and cure it with what aids maturation until the acuteness of the symptoms ceases.
And now you must place the woman on a chair that has two footrests; and have her recline on her back and adjust her feet to the part below the belly, and spread her thighs apart, and rest her arms beneath her head, and bind them with a suitable bandage.
Then the midwife should follow the right side and administer the instrument with which the opening of the mother is cut, the form of which will be described in the following sections.
And when you wish to administer this instrument, you place at the entrance of the woman's womb with care only as much of it as is equal to the neck of the womb, and leave the patient like that. If the instrument is larger than the opening of the womb, then you must place pillows on the texture of the opening of the womb so that it prevents any instrument from entering the opening of the womb.
And you must place the thread that runs through the instrument above and have the assistant hold the instrument and rotate the thread until the opening of the womb is opened.
And when the swelling appears and is touched with the hand, and it is hard and moist, then you must dry that area by cauterizing it with a spatula.
And when the pus is drained, then you must apply to the wound a cloth soaked in rose oil or another astringent oil; and place a compress on the incision at the opening of the womb.
And place outside the womb and on the perineum clean wool soaked in water in which mallows have been boiled.
And it should be treated for about two days with an ointment that you should apply until it is healed.
And at times the wound and the afflicted area are washed with water and honey which is considered to have healing properties, then with water in which there has been boiled the root of iris or of longwort, and afterwards it returns to the ointment.
And if the plague is within the major arteries, then you must abstain from curing it with iron, treating it instead with what we have mentioned in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.
To teach the midwives in what manner the unhealthy embryos are treated when it is according to an unnatural figure.
Necessaria causa es que la matrona conogua en le comensament la figura del enfantament natural per senhals de lu,
Therefore, when you see those signs, then it is necessary that the patient's abdomen be compressed so that the embryo descends easily because when they fall on their head, tell them the second thing, and cleanse them of those excesses with a good cleansing.
Here is the translation of the provided text:
When there is a necessary cause, it is essential for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those matters, and that she guard against error and deception.
And I am showing all the figures of those [diseases or conditions], and what mechanism is in them so that it may be signified by this and stand upon this.
When the semen is emitted over a man's head by natural exercise, and if it is very strong for the woman and done in a difficult part, and sometimes the strength of the man is already weakened, then one must do this treatment, or that women have it, and evaporate his seed with fenugreek juice and with humid oils.
And then insert the midwife between the small ribs and split it with that second tool, or scrape that area with her nail until you remove what is inside of moisture. And press the woman's abdomen until the fetus descends.
And if it does not descend, then the woman should be treated with a poultice of ptilli (likely a misspelling or archaic term) and a poultice of fenugreek with ointment.
Then command him, the practitioner, to be squeezed and make her sneeze with condiments; and hold his mouth and nose for about an hour, because the fetus will come out soon.
And if both sides of the foot are swollen at the beginning, then you must reduce those with ease little by little. And if she does not obey the treatment, then place the woman on a chair and lift her feet up, and then shake the chair on the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the shaking.
And if the sides are not turned inward and the foot is dead, then incise those areas and extract the bones of the foot or tie the body to his hand with cloth and extract it equally, because it will be swollen outward.
When the foot is on its sides, then you must push those up, and then turn the foot little by little, and then equalize it, and then take one side of it and stretch those little by little.
But once it is inserted between the thighs, then you command them to squeeze, and cause that to turn outward with care, because it will be swollen if God wills it.
And if it is not forgotten with what we have recommended, then you return the displaced part little by little until you place that second natural figure back in its position, because that will be remembered now with a slight emission.
And if it is prohibited by all that we have recommended, then take some muslin of alum and dissolved gum, and pound everything well in the mortar, and then line with this mixture the womb of the woman, at the very bottom of her belly. And then apply that cautery in lukewarm water, until it reaches the hypochondria.
And when you see that the affected areas of him are inflamed, then give him a smoking treatment with myrtle and keep that under his nose. And when you have the sub-fumigation for an hour, then make her sit on a stool, and then make her sneeze and open her mouth wide, and lift her up from there, and press the lowest part of her abdomen with gentle compression, for the matter will be expelled quickly.
Extract the fetus longitudinally using one of your hands. Try to reduce the swelling with your hand, but if you cannot do that, then raise the woman and help her walk.
And if she cannot walk, then make her lie down on the bed, and vigorously shake her thighs with percussion, and then administer ointments that you have prepared from mucilages.
And if the birth has occurred, then make her sit on a chair, and then focus on reducing the swelling, gently guiding the fetus according to its natural position, and make the woman sneeze and command her to strain as the delivery is completed.
Extract the fetus by spreading your hands over its neck, with its surface facing away from its mother. The midwife must hold the baby and then gently turn it little by little, making sure to do so easily.
And when it is mixed and at what quantity it should be mixed, then apply on the wound what we have recommended of oil and poultices.
And then you command him to moan little by little, and when you have done that, then apply that poultice on a plate and command her to incline towards the right side, and then command her to be compressed; and make her sneeze with condition. The phrase "Exitus foetus praeparati super latus" can be translated into English as:
When they say to remove the horrible things of the main area according to this method, consider, and then you incise the second skin with your nail until the humidity is evacuated.
And if the swelling is hanging over his face and neck, then you incise that part of the throat so that it is not constricted and he does not die.
Then push the swelling into the areas where you need to apply pressure, and instruct the woman to compress herself several times, and it will come out little by little with a light discharge, if God so wills.
The outcome of twin births or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four are born, but this is rare and seldom happens; however, the causes of this are natural and not due to living beings.
And among these, even if they are multiplied, a segment, and they are separated by a siphon, distinguish those within the ligament in the navel of each of them. And sometimes they are expelled as though it is done by a light natural excretion, and sometimes they exit due to an unpraiseworthy excretion as we have recounted.
And if there are difficult births where you must assist in the delivery and it leads to what we have said about unnatural positions, then you treat those cases as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is skilled and does this with ease and subtlety, and with caution, and is ingenious according to every figure according to how it is prepared by the ingenuity bringing health.
Recalling what is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Here is the translation of the provided text line by line into English:
And all of this must be known by the midwife who closely resembles this practice, and thus applies herself to it with what is necessary.
Capitol .lxxvi.
From the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you treat a dead fetus as we have described in the section on medication and it has not been expelled, and you must use manual operation, then you should consider whether the woman is of sound health and not subject to any of the conditions that could endanger her.
Then the woman should be placed on her back on the bed, with her head lowered slightly and her thighs raised.
And the minister should hold her at both ends or tie her to the bed so that her body does not move during the extraction of the fetus.
Then you moisten the birth canal of the mother with oily substances and with a poultice of elecampane, fenugreek, and its seeds.
Then anoint the woman's hand with those oils and poultices, and then insert her hand easily into the birth canal, and then search with her hand for a place to grasp the fetus with her fingers.
And here is the translation line by line:
And if the swelling is on his feet, then at the ankles, or in the middle of the back.
And it is necessary to hold the instrument with the right hand, and place its curvature in that spot which is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand with ease and place the instrument in one of those places we have mentioned, until it reaches the swollen cause.
And then place and keep another person in the appropriate position next to him, or a third if necessary, so that the traction is equal, and not just the extension according to its straightness alone.
And let it be massaged all over, so that the discharge from him is alleviated just as it is done in dental procedures for the extraction of a tooth.
And it is necessary to apply something between the parts so that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then it is necessary for the midwife to anoint some of her fingers with oil and skillfully insert them and rotate with them what is retained.
Therefore, if a part of the fetus is stuck, then the traction should be changed to the one that is more effective; and do this until the entire fetus is delivered.
But if one hand is extended before the other and it is not possible to reduce it due to the constriction of it, then a cloth should be wrapped around that hand; and then extract that part until all of it is delivered, and incise it either at the joint of the hand or in the wrist.
And thus you must do the same with the other hand and both feet.
And if the head of the abscess is large, or you encounter compression during the incision, or if there is water tightly packed at the top, then you must insert between the fingers and split the head and drain the water, or use an instrument named “alundat” to scoop it out. The form of this instrument will be shown with the forms of other instruments in the chapter that comes after this one.
And similarly, if the abscess has a large head by nature, then you must incise it with a scalpel, or scoop it out with an alundat as we have said; then remove the bones with forceps.
And if the head has been incised and is compressed, you should split it open so that the moisture within the feet may be drained out.
But if it is not complicated and does not require incision, then you should incise the head as soon as it seems feasible to you.
And if the lower part of the abdomen is swollen with an abscess or is dropsical, then you must perforate it to allow the moisture within to drain out.
But if the condition is on their feet, then its attraction is slight and its direction towards the mouth of the vein is also slight.
And if the abdomen and feet are constricted, then you must extract that with cloth which you will have wrapped around your hand, and you should cut open the abdomen and feet so that what is inside can flow out.
Here is the translation line by line for the given sentence:
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted by an abscess that affects the eye, then it should not be disturbed; first, you must administer an effusion of moist and fatty substances. And administer plasters; and follow by bathing the patient in waters that soften and moisturize.
And if the incision is on their side, then if possible, it should be sutured: and what we have said should be administered to the fresh wound.
And if this is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces and extracted.
And you must not leave any cause within the second layer.
And when you have completed all of your operation, then administer what we have said about the treatment to the swellings caused by the incision.
And if bleeding occurs, then bathe in astringent waters and administer the other treatment.
And I have seen a woman whose fetus in the womb had died, and then she became pregnant again, and another fetus died in her. It happened to him that after a long time, a swelling occurred in his abdomen; and it swelled inside where an incision was made, and he began to discharge pus.
And I was called for his care, and treated him for a long time, but the plague did not subside.
Then I placed on him several poultices of strong attraction, and extracted a bone from him, and after passing some days, I extracted another bone; and I was greatly amazed because there were no bones in his abdomen.
And then I thought that they were the bones of a dead fetus.
Then I treated the plague, and extracted many bones from him, the woman existing in his various conditions, and he lived in this manner for a long time, curing him of a minor arm issue.
And I do not want to seem strange, but rather that in this there is knowledge and assistance for the doctor who administers treatment with skillful hands.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of an instrument with which the womb is opened:
This is the form of a device with which the knots are tied, to which tying there are two hooks at the ends of two handles. However, this hook must be more delicate than the forceps and can be made of iron or wood.
And the width of each handle should be two fingers, and the margin of each should be about one finger, and the length of each is one and a half palms; in the middle of the two handles, there are two joints made from the same material which are already fixed, each of which has a length of about half a palm plus a little more, and the width of each is two fingers or a little more.
And these two additives should be inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it is opened with them when you turn the two prescribed instruments.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps. And however at the extremity of his two additions thus as sometimes happens, and the length of those additions is each one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to deliver the baby, then you have the woman lie down on the ground with her feet hanging off, and open up what is between her thighs. And then open your hand with the instrument just as you would with scissors, cutting according to the amount you wish of the opening of the mouth of the wound until the midwife does what she wants.
The form of dizziness which the ancients called:
Forma de impellent am le qual es empellit le fet:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran
And it is similar to forceps which have teeth at the end, just like tongs, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, just like tongs, which have teeth like saw teeth with which it is incised and contorted. Form of emesis for little ones:
Form of an ounce having a spine:
Forma de unci havent doas spinas:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:
Forma de dos espatums latz:
All those instruments are exercised, and when more of their kinds are multiplied and prepared by the artisans, it is lighter for their operation and better for humans in quantity.
And do not use those instruments at all; you should prepare yourself, for the necessity of those is not excusable.
Of the extraction of the wisdom tooth.
When the wisdom tooth is hindered from erupting, then you must command the patient to hold their breath, and then make them sneeze with some stimulus, and press your hand over their mouth and nose, and if it is expelled by this means, it will be good.
And if not, then take an owl and pierce its head with a hole and place on it herbs that burn in the mouth of the mother, such as calamus, rue, anise, chamomile, Arabian safflower, and cinnamon bark. All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the pot, and place that over the fire.
And then place a cane reed tube in the mouth of the mother, and keep it there so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the mother.
And then make that person sneeze as we have said, and the second one will be expelled quickly.
Here is the translation of the provided text line by line: Before it is necessary to move the right and left sides with ease.
And if the mouth of the mother is constricted, we have already recommended curing it with sneezing and with medication made from herbs.
However, if it is not expelled by all the causes which we have recommended, then be careful not to overexert in repeatedly attempting extraction. Instead, whatever has been emitted from the infant into the mother's mouth must be transferred to the thigh of the woman, and then anoint that area with unguent and a four-part medicine; for this will cause it to rot within a few days and become dissolved and expelled.
However, when it rots, the bad humor rises to the head and the stomach, causing harm to the sick person; therefore, it is necessary to administer fumigations and appropriate treatments for this condition.
However, some of the Ancients have expressed that fumigation with Southernwood and dried figs is useful.
Here is the form of an instrument with which a woman is fumigated for the retention of menses and the second stage [of labor]:
It seems like this text is written in an archaic or constructed language that draws from Romance languages. Based on the given translations, I will attempt to interpret and translate the provided line:
And place the narrow end over the container and the wide end over the fire, and let the smoking process be placed over the embers of the fire.
And hold it there until that sublimation is consumed and repeat another time.
For the treatment of an infant's unperforated anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat. Then it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that swelling with her finger; and if not, pierce it with a sharp spatula, being careful not to touch the fetus.
Then place over it wool soaked in wine and oil; then treat it with ointment until it heals.
But if you fear that it is blocked, then place a catheter in the tract for several days, and remove it when the child wants to digest properly.
And it may happen that the anus is blocked due to consolidation of a plague or an abscess; then it is necessary to incise that consolidation, and then treat it with what we have said about treatment and lead.
On the treatment of fistulas that occur below.
The fistulas that occur in the lower part below are narrow and thick, most of which appear near the anus externally or in the space of that part.
And it is a fistula or multiple fistulas.
And when that swelling is old and comes from white or foul-smelling moisture or subtle corruption, and sometimes these fistulas can penetrate deeply.
And those penetrating are known by what is excreted from them through evacuation and flatulence; and sometimes the patient uses evacuation, and it strongly expels those worms.
And of those fistulas some are found penetrating into the space between the bladder and into the flesh of the penis; and of those that penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the area near the hip bone.
And that which is known as a penetrating and non-penetrating fistula is when you insert your index finger into the anus, and introduce a thin probe of reed or iron into the fistula where there is no curvature.
And if there is a curvature in that area, then insert a thin probe of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or the hair with your finger.
And if you do not feel anything at all and do not find any signs of excretion, worms, or gas, as we have said, then you know that it is non-penetrating, and then proceed with the treatment.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the urethra of the penis, then its significance is that urine leaks from it and prevents the area from being consolidated with medicine.
And if it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the area, then the sign is that the probe passes through there without curvature into the bone, causing pain in the region of the affected part; and that pus continuously flows from it; and that no medicine works on it, nor does it heal with ointment.
And in all those fistulas, the cure is not complete, and the treatment of these is the work and vanity of the inexperienced doctors upon whom they rely.
And in that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing with iron is hoped for according to what I will recount to you, and this which I have already mentioned.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back and raises their legs upwards, with the thighs inclined towards their abdomen, and then insert a lead probe, or a reed if it is in the twisted fistula, until you feel where the probe reaches.
And if the patient feels pain around the neck, then you must insert your index finger into the neck.
And if you feel in your finger the attempt already by itself to penetrate openly, or what you feel between your finger and that siphac or flesh, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that area, for there is no cure there, as we have said.
However, some say that it is healthy in some men occasionally.
And of the treatment by which improvement is hoped for in him, you should make a fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as has been previously mentioned, and insert that burning piece into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those fistulized tissues resembling feather quills are properly adhered together.
Then treat it with cloths wrapped in ointment until all the adhered tissues are expelled, and then treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh. If it is healed, that is good; if not, it will never be cured by any other treatment.
And if you insert a probe inside and it does not penetrate your finger which is in the anus, and between that finger and the probe, there appears to be a layer of flesh or membrane, and twist the fistula so that it aligns with the surface of the chain, then dry the chain from the beginning of the fistula. You will dry it with the probe, and place it inside the fistula until the drying reaches the point where the tip of the probe is, and through this process, it is freed and cut.
And then clean those fistulous flesh that resembles a bird feather quill and do not damage any of them for any reason.
More if a flow of blood should come between you and your operation when you are cutting those flesh parts, then the best thing to do is use the lightest instrument to cauterize with fire or sharp medicine, for cautery with fire fixes two good purposes: it is the adjustment of those tissues being joined together, and the removal of blood through the drying of the moistures.
Then treat that area with cloths wrapped in ointment or finely ground materials placed on the wound, and then treat the wound with unguents that generate and strengthen hard flesh.
And thus medicines in which there is stypticity and drying; when it is restored, it is healed and you need not fear recurrence.
But if the fistula has already penetrated into the rectum and extends from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the rectum and examine it with that.
And thus if you feel resistance and between you and it there is only a thin layer of membrane or flesh, and penetration is blocked, then it is not an operation to be performed but rather a matter of trust and hope.
Here is the translation of the given text line by line: And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: it is when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is on the side of the buttock around the surface of the body with the chain and at the edge of the buttock, then take a perforated extremity probe, which is like a needle used for preparing the hearts according to this form:
And insert into that wound wrapped with five leaves or around it; then insert a probe with a leaf into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
More if you penetrate the margin of the anus from inside, then you extract the thread of that wound just as you insert your finger into the anus; and pull out the end of the thread and join both ends together tightly, and leave it for one or two days, and when more incision is needed in the flesh, tighten well between those pieces of flesh which are cut between the two ends of the thread and let them adhere.
And then treat the wound until it is consolidated and healed.
But if the openings of the fistula are not penetrating, then make them penetrate in whatever way you prepare, but ensure there is movement in the pus, for it is not for you to do this so that you do not cut the tendon; and then treat it until it is healed.
The form of the spiked spatula with which the fistula is split: the curvature of which is sharply pointed and the other part is not sharp, so that you do not cut what is not necessary, as is often done.
On the suturing of hemorrhoids in which blood flows from the incision of those.
Emorroydas so segon dos manieyras, quar o so entre le cul semblantz aysi que es de carbos, o quays aquelas sian cum a gras de rasim. And of those [conditions] that are both small and large, and from which blood flows constantly from them, and it is one, and [it appears] in clots, and outside the anus, and at the extremities.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And the treatment for what is inside the anus is that you command the patient to sit and to strain so that the anus opens and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you take care and suspend them with hooks or hold them with your fingernails, and then cut those veins at their roots.
And if the nails are not held in place by their moisture and softness, then take those with a rough cloth or with chamois or with a beating of wool, and extract them with your fingers as stated, and then cut into them and sprinkle upon them certain powders suitable near the incision, so that they may serve instead of cauterization; or cauterize them according to what is mentioned in the chapter on cauterizing. Then treat them with other treatments until they are healed.
And if the bowels do not obey the expulsion, then treat the patient with suppositories that have a small bite, and wash them with the water in which figs have been soaked, which gently aids expulsion when the patient is pressed.
But if the hemorrhoids protrude from the anus, then the cause is slight, and you should take hold of them with your fingernail, or grasp them with forceps, cut into them, and then treat them with what we have said until they are healed.
And for one who requires incision, you must administer suture in the following manner: take wrapped thread and insert it into a needle, then pull the hemorrhoids to the points above, and make that penetrate with the needle into the edge of the other part. Wrap both ends of the thread at the point furthest from the needle, and do this latitudinally; tighten the hemorrhoid with strong pressure, and then tie the thread and remove the needle.
And do this for all of them, and leave one untouched and uncooked, so that the excess blood may flow from it.
And then place over the buttocks a cloth soaked in oil or in wax; and place that over the wound and command the patient to rest. And then place that inside the container; and when it is cooked, treat those with ointments or other treatments until it is healed.
And when they are old and no longer respond to that medicine, then you must scrape those areas with the tip of a spatula or with your nail until they become moist and rid them of the pus on top, which prevents them from healing; and then treat those areas until they heal.
Then you remove those areas with vigorous scraping to the point that blood comes out and they are raw; and then treat those areas until they are healed.
Here is the translation of the given line:
And then it is necessary to cut what is in the area of the nail, and hold it with forceps or tweezers, and remove it from its root; and then care for it.
And if you want, cauterize the wound that is described in the previous chapter.
And a wart is a small, rough, tubular, round prominence on the surface of the body, and they often appear on the hands of children.
And the treatment of it is that you extend and incise that area, or you constrict that with a bandage or with cloth inside which hangs. And if you want, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
And a mays formica is a small, furry or fistulated bump on the surface of the body that moves slightly under the skin, and when cold reaches it, it causes pain similar to an ant bite, and it forms around the body.
And the treatment for it is that you take a quill from an eagle or a vulture, and let it be strong, and place that over the ant so that it is contained within the circle of the quill; then rotate your hand with the quill until you cut out what is in the circuit of the ant, and press that into the skin, and remove the ant from its root.
And if you want, do this with a reed or iron tube in the following manner:
Let the part above the tube be tapered and closed (that is, not perforated), wrapped in such a way that when placed on the finger, it fits snugly and allows for easy rotation.
And if you want to cauterize the vein as has been mentioned in the cautery of arteries in the chapter on cauteries.
Of the shape of the instruments that are administered to give christeri.
Alcunas veguadas es fayt cristeri de argent o de lato o de eram fondut o malleat;
The form of large and small blisters:
The head of the cannula above, which is tied to the bag, should be wide according to this manner; and it should be at a distance where the bag is tied in such a way.
And the lower end of the pus, which is inserted into the anus, is closed (so it is not open) due to inflammation; and on one side there are two tracks, and on the other side one track, and the width of the track is according to the thickness of the veins and a bit thicker.
And let the bag in which the medicines are placed be made of animal bladder or sheepskin, and its mouth should be one palm wide.
And it is pierced by thick threads in such a way that it is twisted; and if the space between the threads is as thick as a finger.
And then introduce into those passages strong honey of raw honey which should be from ten hives, or around those; and adjust with that the bag; and when the bag is placed on him, it should be tight at the head of the catheter between two distinct points with strong constriction; and then catheterize each passage: However, the quality of catheterizing with that is that you fill the bag with the medicine which should be warmed according to the quantity of the patient's tolerance; and beware lest it be too hot or too cold.
And then the patient should be placed on their back, and lift their thighs up and place them on a cushion upon which are the hands or a bolster; and then anoint the tip of the cautery with oil or with egg white or with mucilage of fenugreek or something similar; and then insert that into the rectum easily, and then the minister should take the bag and squeeze it with both hands and repeatedly with force until everything in the catheter is evacuated into the bowel; and then remove the catheter and the patient raises their thighs to the wall.
And if the medicine causes an evacuation, let it be as much as possible; and if one sleeps with that for an entire night, it is even more beneficial for healing.
And if you treat that person in the illnesses of intestinal discharge and the vomiting which bothers them, then you should repeatedly apply the cautery until it is healed.
And if hemorrhoids or abscesses are present in the anus, then use a gentle and strong catheter, of those catheters with which children are catheterized.
Of the treatment of plagues.
I have already said in the division on the treatment of plagues what was appropriate for the book, and I say thus the treatment of those with hands and medicines according to the context.
Thus, I say that plagues are diversified according to how the plagues are caused and according to the location where the plagues fall.
And the causes for which plagues are often caused are thus: by the throwing of stones, or the cutting of swords or knives, or the striking with a lance, or with clubs, or with arrows, or similar to those many causes.
However, the plagues that are in the parts of the body are thus: a plague that falls on the head, or the neck, or the foot, or the abdomen, or the thigh, and similar to those of the other limbs.
And I am recommending the treatment of some plagues so that you can apply that reasoning and rule to other plagues.
And I will begin with simple head ailments, for the recollection of compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Thus, when you encounter a simple ailment in the head and it is not a fracture, consider: if it is due to a blow from a stone or something similar, and it has already broken open with such severity that it is a serious injury and you fear an abscess may form, then you should be cautious and perform venesection of the cephalic vein immediately, do not delay this; extract blood according to the amount needed for treatment unless there are any prohibitive reasons against venesection, especially if the blood discharged from the wound is minimal.
And let the venesection be performed on the opposite side of the affected area; and protect the patient from cold and from heavy foods.
But if there is any reason that prohibits this procedure, then reduce the amount of food and avoid meat and wine.
And place on the wound, if an abscess forms, some wool soaked in olive oil or in wine that has been stypticized.
And if you are sure of a carbuncle, then place it on the wound, if it is fresh with its own blood and the air has not changed that powder which I will mention shortly.
And if the air has already changed that condition, then apply some ointments until it is healed.
And if the wound is large or caused by a sharp and similar instrument, and the edges of it cannot be brought together with pillows, then bring those edges together with stitches as I will describe about stitching them.
But if the wound has already exposed the bone and sinew, and it is not a deep retention but just a small suspension, then incise that area and subsequently treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh by suturing in place. Command the patient to be fed food rich in nourishment: soups and formed meats similar to those needed, until it is healed.
And if you find putrefaction in the wound that does not adhere to the bone, then cut away all of that rotten part and remove it, and subsequently treat the area.
But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which bleeding can occur, and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then you should probe for the artery. If you find that it has not been cut, then cut it with a spatula or tie it off. And if the necessity arises such that what we have said does not work, then cauterize until the bleeding is stopped.
And if these sores are simple and small, then the cause of them is slight; therefore, you sprinkle on those this powder, which solidifies before the air changes them.
And the method of the powder is as follows: take oil of vipers one part, dragon's blood two parts, unextincted charcoal three parts; all should be thoroughly ground and sifted, and with it fill the wound, and bind tightly within so that it adheres well, and coagulate it with blood.
Then bind it tightly with bandages and leave it like that, and do not untie it until it is no longer suppurating, because the medicine will not be extracted from it until it is healed.
And sometimes this is done with just a cautery, when you do not have vipers and dragon's blood available.
And this method of operation should be performed on large wounds when it is appropriate to place it over them and keep them tight, especially fresh wounds with their blood, which have not been altered by the air.
And if the air has altered them, especially during summer, then this powder method is not intended. Instead, treat them as we have said, by placing some ointments of different kinds over them, or by covering them with flour from barley mixed with water and honey until they become pus-free; then treat them with other healing methods until they are healed.
And if an injury with a fracture in the bone occurs, and it is small, then you extract it with gestures.
And I will describe the treatment for fractures of the skull in what is dangerous.
From the ailments of the neck.
But if the plague strikes at the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and it is the same as the plague of the head when it is simple.
But if the nerves of the neck are cut or an artery, then if it is a nerve, do not treat it with anything that causes strong astringency, such as zinc and copper sulfate which is vitriol and similar substances that bite into the nerves and constrict them. And do not apply any source of cold to the wound, for the substance of the nerves is cold and its continuation is connected to the brain, which is the most sensitive part of all the members.
And if it is treated with mild medicines, such as washing with warm water, sometimes infused in oiled or un-oiled rose, and thyme when washed with warm water, and other mineral stones according to this method, and apply moist ointments.
But if the wound is large, then administer stitches, or bring the edges of it together, and then treat it with powders until it heals.
But if the wound has depth or you encounter pus in the lower part indicating gangrene, then puncture it at the most depressed area.
And if in the wound an artery has already been cut and blood flow is obtained, then separate or dry that area, tie that area, or cauterize that area if necessity prompts you to do so.
But if the vertebrae of the neck have already been cut through entirely and the veins of the neck are saved, then you should bring together the edges of the wound with sutures over the bone of the neck without touching that area; first level that area and reduce it to its natural form, then strengthen that area with proper bandaging, and leave it like that for several days; then treat that area with ointments in which astringency and stimulation are present until it is healed.
But if the wound has caused a protrusion in the bone, then percuss that area; and if there are bone fragments in it, extract all those you can reach. Leave what you cannot remove until the wound suppurates, separates, and the protrusion is alleviated.
And if the wound is new, then sprinkle on it the powder that has been recommended to you. If in the wound a fistula has formed, then treat it with what will be recalled later in its respective chapter.
If it is a puncture from a lance or dagger, and you determine the depth of the wound, then consider more carefully if gas escapes when the patient breathes; then you know that the wound is mortal.
And if there is no deep wound and the injury is fresh with its own blood, then in the first hour you should apply powder to it; do not worry that the blood might be retained at the depth of the wound and return to the heart, thus harming the patient. Instead, apply an attractive unguent to it and reapply that twice a day.
And if the unguent is not available to you, then apply a dry cloth to the wound's opening to absorb what moisture is there; and have the patient lie on the wounded area so that what is trapped within can drain out.
But if three days or more have passed since the wound occurred and you observe no spasms, palpitations, or constriction of the heart in the patient, and other good signs are present, then know that the wound is not fatal; and then treat it with bandages and other treatments until it is healed.
If the healing of the wound is impossible and it has been open for a long time, then you should know that it has become an ulcer; treat this accordingly in its chapter.
And if the wound is from a cut by a sword or knife, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with stitches if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
But if the bone has already become exposed and the cut pieces are embedded in it, then you should probe the wound and use forceps to extract those pieces, if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then leave them inside so that the wound may become pus-filled, which will make their extraction easier.
And for other accidental wounds on the other limbs, the treatment in curing them is the same as what we have said.
Regarding wounds of the abdomen.
The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen is either severe, mild, or moderate.
And a small dislocation is made difficult by another method, and it is known that their reduction is more difficult if one does not attend to the intrusion of them into their place immediately, because they swell and thicken, making the insertion of them difficult.
And thus the best disruption is moderate, for in that case the reduction of the hernia is not difficult, just as it is difficult in both of the previously mentioned types.
And you should know that stitching of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two types of stitches are common and suitable for缝合身体其他部位的伤口。
And two other specific sutures are related to other ailments, but they are more specifically used for abdominal stitching.
And I recommend to you each with exposition and declaration.
Therefore, it says that when the hernia is small and there is some part of the intestine protruding because of this, and it is difficult to reduce it, then this can happen in one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the rupture as we have said, or when the intestine has become inflamed due to the coldness of the air.
And so when this is the case, then you must heat that area by submerging a sponge or cloth soaked in warm water alone, or boiled in sour wine, and cyperus, and spice, and apply it to the intestine until the inflammation is resolved.
And sometimes it is done in the way that has astringency, and it is better than plain water for reducing inflammation.
And so when you see the inflammation resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which mullein and mallows have been boiled, for this alleviates the interior of it with little harm.
But if the interior of it needs to be treated before this cure, then cut the rupture slightly with an instrument with which you would incise hemorrhoids.
And the first treatment is better when it is appropriate that there be no drying, and not to engage in drying nearby necessity and deficiency.
Of the instrument, here is its form:
One part of the sharp wound, and the other part not-sharp, and the extremity subtle, and not be like the subtlety of a spatula, but rather be slightly blunt.
And thus when the swelling has increased and you have brought out the intestine, now it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form, in its proper place, if possible on this account, for that is better.
And when the disruption is large and in the lower part of the belly, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and raise their legs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then raise the head and feet higher than the other parts.
And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then always keep your attention and consideration focused on this so that the part where the swelling is may be higher than the other.
And thus you should administer this in large swellings and in medium-sized swellings.
And in small swellings, apply what you have prepared, then have the minister place it between your most compassionate hands, who holds the entire disruption with their hand and aligns its edges, then expose from one side to another so that stitching can be done as closely as possible.
And this is the common method of suturing: first you take a needle, or a quill if it suits the amount of width of the wound; then leave the end of the disruption at the little finger, and hold the needle firmly, making sure not to tie the thread at both ends of the chain; use both ends of the clasp that is left inside the split parts, until you make one penetrate through the other part; and you have already added both ends of the chain and both ends of the clasp, thus creating four rows.
And then strengthen with a double thread around the circumference of the needle, and sometimes on both sides at once, and then bring together the two lips and the wound by proper approximation; and then leave the thickness of a finger and put another needle there, and then tie that one with thread just as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if it is necessary until you have completed all the stitching of the wound.
And let the needles be of moderate thickness between thick and thin, for thin needles slightly penetrate the flesh; and thick ones are difficult to insert into the wound, and thus it is necessary that they be of moderate thickness.
And it is not necessary to insert the needle at both ends of the wound too deeply, so that the flesh is not cut excessively and the wound can heal before its consolidation.
And let the sutures not be too long so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
And then sharpen the ends of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient during their sleep; and place over the sutures small pieces of cloth from all sides, which hold the ends of the needles; and leave them in place until you know that the wound is fully healed.
And these types of stitches with needles in this manner are more appropriate for small wounds, where only one or two needles suffice for the stitching.
And the second suture is communal: it is that you administer with a suture the four extremities, of the chain and two extremities of the spine, at once, with a needle on which the thread should be wrapped equally in fineness and thickness.
And then when you have penetrated these four extremities with the needle, withdraw the needle from that same part where you began, so that the thread pulls out any pus from the deepest part to the surface, so that the suture is like a cloth suture with which cloths are sewn together.
And pause between each suture the width of a little finger.
And this suture is known to men.
And with such a suture, I sewed the wound which had been inflicted on a man in his abdomen by a knife, and it was a tear of the wound more than one palm wide, and it extended around two palms from the center location of the intestine, and the disruption was in the middle of the member; and then I returned it after the intestine had protruded for 24 hours.
And the wound was consolidated within about fifteen days, and I treated it until it healed; and after that, he lived for many years, and his condition improved.
And the other doctors had judged that it could not be healed; and yet, by miracle, it was, for I did not treat it with ointment, as there was no place to find any ointment or any medicine, but instead placed on the wound a piece of old cloth twice a day and washed it frequently with honey water until it was healed.
But I will describe two types of suture specific to the narration of the Word.
And you begin with a chain suture, and insert the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
And then as the needle penetrates into the spine and in that part of the vertebrae according to the length and along the entire body, and leave the end of the thread with which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from the inside part to the outside part at the other end of the wound.
And when you have made that penetration, then penetrate again in the same extremity of the thread from the outside part to the inside part; and leave the extremity of the needle that is on this side, and pierce the needle through the other extremity from the inside part to the outside part.
And make the penetration with that needle with which you pierce through to the extremity of the thread that is on the inside part so that all of it penetrates.
And then begin from this side and thus pull that [limb] to the end which is of the hip on the other side, and extract the needle from the chain that has penetrated, and then return it into that chain and connect the end of the hip that is on the other side with this extremity of the thigh; and remove that from the chain which belongs to his [the patient's] part.
And do this once and again, and do this once then another time until you sew up everything that is outside according to that example.
And the essence of this method of suturing is that you sew with a skin suture with which you stitch the skins, ensuring that you sew the wound once from the end of the chain, and leave that other time in between until you have completed it.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
You should place the needle at the end of the thread on your own side from the outside, and make it penetrate to the inside part in that same spot, and leave both ends of the suture; then rotate the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside through both ends of the suture.
Then rotate those sutures, and make each one penetrate from the inside part to the outside part through both ends of the thread on the opposite side.
And this method of suturing is better than the common superficial suturing, and it is a suturing technique that precedes proper healing.
This is the discourse of Gaul.
And more specifically, for stitching the abdomen, it is corrected with two needles, so that you insert a thread into each of them, and begin by inserting the needle on your side, and make it penetrate to the other side according to the suturing method where the threads are interwoven equally.
And know that when the disruption is in the middle of the abdomen, then suturing it is more difficult than suturing other parts of the abdomen.
More the judgment of plague treatment is a judgment of other plagues.
The sentence provided is a blend of languages similar to medieval Latin and Romance languages. Here's the translation line by line into English:
And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply to that area unguents which you have prepared so that they do not form hard stone and release the bile, and let them be consolidated by heat and observation; and then treat it in this way as is the treatment of other wounds until it is healed.
And if you do not have the medicines at hand, then apply to that area immediately, for it begins to discharge pus, and change that [application] twice a day, as you are taught, until it is healed, because you would not need other medication in many conditions when the wounds are simple.
But if you fear that the wound may spread to the major limbs, then you must soak lion's wool in high-quality tempered oil or in anointed oil, and apply that around the area between the joints and leave it there.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestines, for this often occurs, then treat it with styptic black tea, especially if the corruption has spread to the intestine and has caused a penetration into its cavity.
And know that the one that is of the large intestine has a lighter healing than the one that is in the delicate intestines.
And it is difficult to heal when the intestine, which is called “gegunu,” does not receive healing from plagues that fall upon it entirely; and this is due to the great multitude of veins within it, and because of its significant size in those areas, and by the subtlety of its structure, and by its proximity to the nature of nerves.
And if what you process from the plague is the cloth, and you obtain that fresh, reduce it according to your recipe with which you equally treat the intestines.
And if the space has been passed and it is already green or black, then you should apply a heated instrument over the discolored area to cause bleeding, because in the skin are veins and arteries.
And then cut what is another ligament, and hold the two ends of the thread hanging from the wound, so that above it you can alleviate the traction by loosening the knot of the cloth and the emission of the arm from the wound.
Remembrance of the plagues when they occurred in the intestine.
When a rupture occurs in the intestine and it is small, then it can be restored in some people; for this reason I saw one who was wounded in his abdomen by a lance strike and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had turned into a fistula, and because of this there was pus and gas.
Then I considered the treatment of him already because he was not confident in his recovery, but ceased to trivialize that between which fire heals and the area is consolidated.
And I put that you see the area already stabilized, worry about the patient that he may suffer an unfortunate incident in his abdomen; and because of this unfortunate accident, do not let him have any improper dispositions eating and drinking, and then immerse himself in baths and exercise as he pleases.
And already some experienced ones have said that when there is a small wound on the intestine, it needs to be tied in this manner: you take ants with large heads; then adjust both sides of the wound and place an ant from those whose mouth is open over both sides of the wound; so when it grabs onto them and tightens its mouth, cut off its head because it adheres and does not dissolve.
Then place another ant next to the first one, and do not stop doing this with ants placed one next to the other according to the total length of the wound.
Then return that area to its place and close the wound; let those ant heads remain inside the intestine until it is healed; do not cause any harm to the patient.
And it is possible that the intestine can be sewn with fine thread made from the intestine of an animal attached to it, as it is finer than a needle; you take one end of this intestinal thread, ensuring it is stripped of all flesh, and then tie the end of the thread to the wound area using the thread itself, wrapped around it, and then insert that thread into needles and sew the intestine with it, bringing it back into place in the disruption.
And this method of缝合使用蚂蚁不过是基于信任和希望的次要方式。
And if the wound is large and extensive, especially if it is in one of the delicate intestines, for then there is not a remedy but puncturing, and it is not a complete cure.
Of the treatment of sciatica and fistula.
Know that any plague or abscess when it becomes corrupted and grows old, and an ulcer is formed, and if it does not heal and continuously discharges pus without being separated, then, in whatever limb it may be, it is universally called a fistula and we call that sciatica.
And a fistula, in truth, is a furry, hard, white nodule with which there is no pain and which has a concavity like the hollow of a bird's feather; and for this reason, we call that ulcer rizatz, that is, hollow.
And in some people, there is moisture that discharges pus; and quickly, this moisture is separated within a few hours. And sometimes this moisture is mixed, and it is scanty, and it is thick, and it is subtle.
Here is the translation of the given line:
And it is necessary that I make you understand the treatment of fistula, which is done through surgical means with my hand.
And know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; for among these are fistulas that affect large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the spine, or the intestines, or the bladder, or some of the ribs, or some of the vertebrae of the back, or any of the joints composed in such a way as those of the hand and foot; and among these are those that extend to the proximity of the main part of the limb and its likeness.
And thus, one of these fistulas that follows this manner is among the illnesses difficult to heal, and does not receive proper treatment, and the involvement with it is laborious and ignorant.
And if among the fistulas there is one whose depth does not reach these locations that have been mentioned, and you hope and trust in its treatment, and wish to understand it better, then take a probe of iron or steel, and if the fistula runs straight, investigate it with this probe.
But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a fine lead probe, for lead, because of the lightness of its body, is flexible and conforms to the twists.
And if the fistula has terrible worms, it is not possible for you to probe it with your hand.
Then irrigate the openings through their own openings, for the moisture with which you irrigate that area should cleanse the other openings and flow out of them.
Then carefully examine to determine whether you are dealing with bones or nerves, and assess if the fistula's cavity is deep or shallow, or if it has multiple openings and requires your utmost strength in probing; probe the patient thoroughly, and use your compression with your hand on the area to identify the source of the pain, along with recognizing signs and accidental causes related to the abscess.
And after you have stood over all those causes with true examination, now proceed to the treatment with confidence: consider whether the fistula is an apparent nearby one or in a hidden place, deep within a joint, nerve, artery, vein, or one of the locations that I have mentioned to you.
Now dry the fistula as previously described for its opening, remove what is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what has grown in the openings of the flesh, or of tissue and similar, and treat it internally so that it may heal.
If the fistula is of deep length and is straight, then you must incise that as much as possible according to your ability, and then clean it of all its corrupted flesh; and then apply poultices wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have penetrated with an iron.
And do this several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula from the corruption.
And then restore it with ointments that will generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by this method, then you must cauterize it as we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must be certain of this, then you should investigate it and dry it out as we have recommended, provided that you do not interfere with any vein or nerve or major part of the body, as we have said.
But if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackening in it, then you must scrape that area until all the corruption is removed; and then treat it with something that will cause flesh to grow until it is healed.
And if the arm is not healed and thrown out just as it should be, then you know that you have not fully reached the eradication of the corruption; and then you re-examine it carefully and thoroughly analyze it and cleanse it with your final strong effort, and then restore it.
And thus if it is healed, that is good; and if not, then you know that the corruption is in the deep part of the body, which has not been reached, and then there is nothing for you to do but to leave that alone.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible for you to extract it, then you should extract it with delicate forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
And if there are multiple bones [affected], then carefully extract all of them, and do not leave any behind for any reason with your strength.
But if any cause of moisture opposes you, and there is no fear or error in its incision, then cut those ligaments or flesh if they are present, and free the bones.
But if you are not prepared to remove the bones of your hour (if the condition requires it), then place on the wound something that can absorb the pus from that wound, and leave that within while this is around those bones with flesh and ligaments, and guard the wound so that it does not become solidified, and constrain the section which you have incised in your operation.
However, if you fear, place on the wound a cloth soaked in oil or a cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment, or in one of the green ointments, for when those ligaments will soften and the bones are separated from their abduction, and that traction is alleviated.
But if it is a large bone such as the thigh bone or the shinbone or similar ones, and only the surface of it is corrupted, then scrape that area gently only from behind so that the blackness and corruption are removed, and then restore the wound.
But if the corrupted part of it is large, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that area and entirely incise at the location where the corruption has spread, and then treat that area so that it becomes solidified.
And I recommend to you what happens to a man in his thigh so that you may use this as an example and aid for your operation.
A young man around thirty years old was affected by pain in his thigh. The pain originated from within the body where the internal matter moved towards the thigh, and this matter is pus-like with a significant swelling, and it did not have an external cause.
And then extend the time with that because of the mistake of doctors until the abscess is opened, and pus will come out from it, and its healing will be gradually stopped until the chest becomes fistulized, and many holes are made in it through which all the pus and moisture of the body flow.
And then many doctors cared for him around two years, and none of them knew more in the art until I was called.
And you see his chest and the materials flowing from those orifices through a large wound; and already the body of that man was entirely discolored and its color was yellowish.
And then I inserted the probe into one of those orifices and brought the probe up to the bone.
And then I carefully examined all the orifices and found those that lead to the chest from all parts.
And then I prepared and made an incision on one of those orifices where I discovered a part of the bone, which was corrupted; it had already turned black and rotten; and a part of the chest that had been penetrated by it had also become corrupt.
And then I treated what was discovered and prepared of the exposed bone.
And I ensured that only the corruption in the bone was cut away and treated, which I had already identified.
And then I applied the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
And then I repeated the procedure and exposed the bone again over the initial exposure, and found continued corruption with the bone.
And recognize that which appears to me as the result of that corruption, and then I was perforated in order to perform the cure and restoration, and it is not restored.
And then I uncover on the other side and do not cease to cut the bone little by little particularly and pierce its restoration, and it is not restored until I cut around about a palm of it, and that which is extracted with its marrow, and then restore it with medicines, and it is lightly consolidated and healed.
And iteration in the operation and section of it is not necessary unless due to the disposition of its weakness and the lack of tolerance and fear of death, for it is affected at all times by syncope from excess evacuation.
And thus it is healed by complete healing, and where there was bone, now there is hard flesh; and its condition is well established in its body and the strength returns to it; and it is converted in its conditions and does not suffer contradiction in movement nor harm in any cause.
However, if there is an protruding bone in a previously injured part of the body, then you must proceed with it according to this method: take a bandage and tie it tightly at the end of the protruding bone, and command someone to pull on it; use a thicker woolen bandage than the first one; then bind it over the flesh that is beneath the bone, stretching its extremity so as to pull the flesh apart from it, and you uncover the skin in the area where you wish to cut so that the saw does not touch the flesh.
And place a board or plank under the bone properly, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to use the saw without damaging the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary that the incision be made gradually over the corrupted area, because if the corruption is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear on its surface to the senses, and forces another incision to be made.
And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, before the one part is joined with the other, and the corruption is in the middle of it or in a part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all parts completely; and then place a stick under it, and then bind that first part where the corruption is so that the binding of the other part continues.
And let the binding be according to the location of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, cut into that corrupted joint, and bind the bone where it continues to the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not reasonable but rather a defect.
And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, you must investigate how the corruption appears to you, and cut into that area, and clean it according to whichever method is possible for you, and with every defect be corrected by you, unless there is a vein or nerve that would oppose this.
And know what are the cutting tools and the saws to cut these bones vary according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the thickness of those, and the fineness and the largeness and the smallness of those, and the hardness and their rarity; therefore, you must prepare every kind of operation with an instrument appropriate for that operation.
And know that this operation means for you to understand the type of instrument you will need; when you have great study and long experience and knowledge of the methods of this art, and are a witness to the ways of illnesses, since now you have applied what is appropriate from the instruments to every illness.
And I am informing you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will use simply with which you will proceed in your practice, which you will perform on others. Form of the saw:
Form of another saw:
Form of another large compress:
Forma de ray: Make the head of this needle in the shape of a star-shaped nail head, and the points on it should be like the points of an asterisk.
And it is not appropriate that only the ends of the joints be rubbed when they are corrupted, or if the large opening is wide.
Forma de razori menor:
It seems that the provided sentence "Forma de razori lat:" is incomplete or perhaps lacks context from the full text. However, based on the linguistic pattern of the previous lines and given the medical context, it might be referring to a form or method related to a razor or blade used in some medical procedure.
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt. Forma de lu:
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:
Form of razor or subtle method:
Forma de autra razori de curvada extremitat:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:
Form of incisors or smaller instrument:
Form of another incisor; this similar to a saw, and the end of it is like a scissors, and it is exhibited in several places along the ratio of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio dequel que es perforat dels osses:
And the end of it is triangular and has a sharp point.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly, all the causes we have mentioned for razors and scissors and saws must be considered.
Of the incision of extremities and the suture of bones.
Extremities can decay either due to intrinsic causes or extrinsic causes. If you have treated that corruption with medicinal cure and the cure does not work, or if the corruption spreads to the member without any apparent cause, then you must incise that limb where the corruption adheres so that the patient may escape from death or serious illness, which is a greater evil than the loss of the limb.
And the sign of the one to whom this happens is that the limb turns black before it falls off, as if fire had already burned it, or you will see the blackness spreading within that corruption which affects the limb and engulfs the entire body; therefore, beware and proceed with incision on that limb.
And similarly, if the cause of the corruption is due to some venomous causes such as from a marine scorpion or viper or rattlesnake and the like.
And if the corruption or decay is in the extremity of the finger, then you must incise the finger and do not give space for the corruption to spread into the hand.
And similarly if you access the arm, then you incise it at the base of the forearm, and do not give space for corruption to enter within the arm.
And if you need to amputate it, then cut the arm between the elbow and the joint.
And if the corruption passes further and extends around the knee, then at that point the patient's death is near; and to administer another cause for this in treatment is an excess of virtue.
And similarly do for the foot when corruption overtakes the toe of the foot, then you incise it between one of the joints.
And if you take hold of the instep of the foot, then you incise the entire foot. And if it enters into the knee, then you incise the thigh between the joint of the knee.
And if the corruption has already spread over the knee, then there is no remedy for it but dismissal, and leave the patient to death.
And the method of incising or amputating the limb is that you hold the ligature at the part below where you wish to incise, and place another ligature above the area; and have an assistant stretch one ligature on the lower parts, and have another assistant extend a ligature upwards; and you separate the flesh between the two ligatures with a spatula so that all the flesh is exposed; then it should be incised or amputated.
And it is necessary that a cloth be placed around all parts so that the area does not come into contact with anything, and that the patient receives precise and proper care to prevent inflammation.
And if you encounter blood flow while working, then cauterize the area properly, or apply some powdered substances to stop the bleeding; and then return to your treatment until it is completed.
And then bind the afflicted limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you what happened to a man in his foot, this accidental event which I and you recommend, which is that an accident caused blackening in his foot due to burning that was similar to the combustion of fire.
And that accidental corruption first occurred in his toe and then spread to the entire foot.
And then that man prepared himself for various pus to appear as part of the treatment, applying it with the intensity of the pain and burning he experienced, and he cut off that foot up to the joint, and it was healed.
Long ago, that same corruption occurred in the little finger of his hand.
And then he came to me, and I performed the procedure of removing that excess with what was applied on his hand from among the medicines, followed by cleansing his body; but the excess did not subside and began to spread to another finger until it affected the entire hand.
And the request urges me to cut off his hand, and I do not want to do so, hoping for the expulsion of that excess, and more because I fear the cutting of his dead hand, for the strength of the patient is waning.
And since he escaped from me, he returned to his land and it came to me that this man prepared and amputated his own hand, and was healed.
And I have added this narrative only to be helpful regarding what is understood about this disease and for its meaning to be conveyed and according to which it should be treated.
About the treatment of nasal conditions and the quality of enemas with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in some fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it collects pus, and then it breaks and perforates, and the pus comes out from it, leaving the place empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin that is over it is like fine cloth, and no serious corruption has reached it, nor does it affect the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and it is not named a fistula.
However, if the space is prolonged until corruption affects some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
And the treatment of it is to incise that skin entirely as it has formed, especially when it has become thin like cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
However, if you hope that the skin will adhere and that such corruption has not progressed to serious consequences, and there is a passage through the skin, then you should treat it with aclyster (enema).
And when you consider the sinus, if it is large and the discharge that comes out has a foul odor, then treat it with an Egyptian medicine made of equal parts sweet oil, vinegar, and resin, mixed together in a vessel, and heated over fire until the mixture becomes warm and reaches the consistency of honey.
And then you take what is necessary from it and dissolve it in water and honey; and cleanse the sinus with that, strengthen the orifice of it, and leave the medicine in it for a quantity of two hours.
And then extract it with care; and do this for so many days until the sinus is cleansed and the pus is completely drained.
And at times it is cleansed with lye water when this medicine is not available to you; and that you take the ashes of vines, put them in the water; then boil that and use it as an enema until you are confident that the sinus has been sufficiently treated.
And if the patient does not tolerate Egyptian medicine or water from ashes, then administer an enema with water and honey mixed together, and give another enema with wine and honey mixed, for the property of honey is to cleanse and wash, and the wine causes adhesion in the sinews, especially when the wine has an abundance of astringency and dryness.
And when you do this several times and are convinced that the wound is already healed, then cleanse it with something that promotes flesh growth.
And it is that you take some unguent of daphnicon and dissolve it with rose oil and styptic wine; or you can use aclyster (enema) with certain medicines and apply other ointments that have the properties I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the sinus orifice is narrow in which theclyster catheter cannot be received, then you gradually enlarge it with a small iron, and place on it a cloth wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
And similarly, if the opening is wide, then you add the lips of it with a suture and leave enough space for the clyster to enter additionally.
And if the opening through which the fluid flows is raised towards the upper parts, then dry it at the lowest place within it so that the fluid can flow into it, because when the fluid is constrained in the depth of a sinus, the flesh is generated within it.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus inside the area around the lower bone as you wish, then you must prepare the limb with a preparation that allows the fluid to flow lightly out of it according to what is at your disposal and ensure that no cause of blockage remains in it.
But the one that is on the sinus opening should be changed constantly so that whatever fluid that comes out of it can be removed. And so that you may know whether what flows out of it as fluid is much or little, or if it is digested, or if it is undigested.
And with this you consider the site of that sinus, if the patient feels pain there or not, and whether there is an abscess in it.
And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the material that was placed over the sinus orifice already adhering, or about to adhere, then on the second day, or the third day, you should remove it. And when you remove the dressing, then change the cloth and renew the ointment.
But if from the sinus near that space there is a subtle virus present, then do not despair of its adhesion, for its healing is approaching. For in some people, the generation of flesh on their wounds takes longer, and in others, the opposite occurs.
And if for many days the discharge from the sinus is thick and indigestible, then you know that the sinus is not adhering. If the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and this prolongs the cause, then adjust by drying out the medicines. And if the medicines are humid in their substance and virtue, make them dry like diafinicon ointment, when it is adjusted for the superfluity added to it.
And the most effective method for treatment is to take some salve of hyacinth and dissolve it in rose oil, then apply it over him like an old salve on its substance, and then massage that onto him, and use it accordingly.
And it seems like in that action, when there is no arm [support], according to the final definition, take honey when it is appropriate to thicken it and use it; or you may take myrrh and aloe and sesame, and crush all of them and sprinkle over the honey while it is on the fire, then apply this mixture onto cloth and tie that around the joint; and apply that with the honey which has been heated until thickened, sprinkle over the cloth and bind that.
And sometimes they are administered with long aristolochia, roots of celestial lilies (and it is the celestial lily), flour of hares, and centaury. Use those simples or compounds, crush them, sieve them, and sprinkle over the honey which has been heated; then use that mixture.
And if the joint is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then you should know that the corruption is in the vein of it, and now make an examination of the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then cure it with fistula treatment, as was said above.
On the treatment of felonies and infected nails, and the addition of incisions to the digit and amputation.
Panarici is an abscess that arises beneath the nail of the thumb or toe, and often appears on other fingers as well. And when it is prolonged and its treatment is less valued, or becomes an infected abscess, or corrupted, pus begins to enter which corrodes the root of the nail, and can corrupt it entirely, and from this corruption, it spreads inside leading to a foul-smelling infection, and the tip of the finger swells, turning black in color.
And therefore, when you have that abscess as we have described in the division and your treatment does not provide comfort, then it is necessary to incise with an iron all the excess that remains of the nail, and then cauterize the wound near it, for cauterization is beneficial in this matter.
However, if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, but the edges of the nail have already begun to press into the flesh, causing pain and irritation, then you should place a thin splint beneath the angle of the nail that is piercing the skin, elevate it up, and incise the flesh with ease. Then apply corrosive and burning medicines over what remains of the flesh until it is entirely removed; subsequently, treat it with ointments until it heals.
If corruption has already entered into the bone, then you must cut into the bone and extract it, for there is no healing when corrupted bone remains within.
And if corruption and decay have spread to the finger, then you must cut it at one of the joints depending on where the damage is, and then treat it until it heals.
But if the nail has suffered impact or friction, and there is severe pain in it, then at the beginning you must bloodlet the patient, and then dry the nail with a sharp spatula using a transverse section from top to bottom. Be careful that the cut does not penetrate into the flesh beneath the nail, for you will cause the patient severe pain and may lead to excessive growth of skin around the area; then treat that spot with something that alleviates pain.
However, the finger that is commonly found in many men is mostly fleshy at one part, bony at another, or nail-covered in yet another part.
And some of them are located at the root of the joint, or their growth is in certain joints of the fingers. And he who is born with nodules in the said area does not suffer, but he who is born with strong joints there is afflicted.
And of those that are born fleshy, the incision is slight, and it is such that you should incise that area from its base with a broad spatula.
But for that which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore guard against the amputation of it.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And then place between their sheets the infused oil rubbed so that they are not lightly congealed, and separate between them, or place between them a thin sheet of lead while it is being properly congealed.
And similarly, if you encounter swelling on the palm of any hand, then dry that swelling according to how it is prepared and adjust it to the shape of the member.
Regarding the beginning of vices, they are varicose veins.
Vices are varicose veins, and they are large, twisted veins full of excessive melancholic fluids that appear in the limbs of the body. They most commonly occur in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers, workers, and those who carry heavy loads.
Then it is necessary that you administer a purge of black bile several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
The treatment of them with iron is in two ways: one is to incise and draw out the black blood, and the other way is to elevate the vein and extract it entirely.
The procedure is as follows: first, bathe the leg with hot water to dissolve the thick blood, which is feculent in the leg. Then, tie the patient's leg tightly at the part just above the knee and below the calf using a bandage. Next, dry the vein at one place, or two, or three places with a wide incision. Then, draw out the black blood with your hand from the part below the calf upwards and downwards until the desired amount of blood has been extracted and what is sufficient for the patient's strength to tolerate.
And then apply water to it, and command him to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
And repeat the treatment with phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is noted in the patient.
And the elevation of them is according to this method: you shave the chest of the patient, if there are any motes of hair, and then put him in a bath and rub the chest with warm water until it reddens and the veins become prominent; or he may be exercised by strong exercise, if a bath is not available, until the member is warmed.
And then dry the chain along the vein by making an incision on the leg or at the back of it where you leave the knee, or at the lowest part where you leave the ankle.
And then grasp the chain with hooks and milk the vein from all sides until it appears to the touch, and you should observe the appearance of what comes out that black liquid.
And then when you remove the chain, you will see that white substance which is like a cord.
And then you place that under which it is raised and tilted from the chain, and suspend that with an ounce of lion's fat.
And then make another incision near that incision for three fingers, and then stretch the skin above the vein where it appears.
And then lift that area and make an incision behind the heel, and then extract it and lift it until it is fully out through the second incision, and then remove it from the incision above it.
And do this until you extract it from the incision that is the highest of all the incisions, until everything is completely out; and then make an incision there.
And if you cannot extract and lift it, then insert a strong double-threaded needle and tie and pull it out, or insert the needle and rotate your hand in all directions until it is removed. And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to lift it out, and it will harm the patient.
And once everything is completely removed, then place on the wound wool soaked in wine and rose oil and unprocessed oil, and care for it until it heals.
And if the vein is constricted having tortuosity in which it is coiled at certain points, and not straight as we have said, then you must incise along that vein throughout its entire length of tortuosity and where it is coiled up, and then suspend that with hooks until you lift it entirely.
And be careful with your incision so that you do not puncture the vein and do not press on it, for it will be difficult for you to lift it; and use your discretion in this matter.
The method of incision with which the vein is cut:
It is not sharp like hooks nor does it have a pointed end so that it does not press on the vein; and it is of thick flexibility, for if it were thin, it would cut the vein due to its thinness; however, its excessive thickness is unnecessary as we have said.
On the extraction of the vein from the leg.
This vein is generated in the thighs in cold regions, such as in al-Ategi in the land of Arabs and in the cold and dry lands of India with little moisture, where there is no grass or trees.
And often it is generated in other parts of the body besides the lungs.
And the gestation of it is putrefaction that comes from the chain, thus worms and serpents and lice and other worms are generated between the chain and the flesh.
And the sign of the susceptibility to the occurrence of it is this vein where you encounter inflammation in the chest; then the area becomes blistered; and then the vein starts to emerge from the place of that blisters which resembles plant juice.
And then when the extremity appears, you must wrap it with a piece of lead that weighs about two drachms, and hang that lead from the bed.
And as many times as you move it away from the body for parts outside, wrap that in lead and seal it. And if the wound is prolonged, then you cut away a part of it and wrap up the remainder; and do not cut that which has adhered before being exposed, for if you cut that which has contracted and entered into the flesh, it causes an abscess and putrefaction in the area and a bad ulceration.
For it is necessary that it be treated gently and extracted little by little until it is completely removed from the wound, so that no cause for it remains in the body.
And from this vein, it has emerged in some men that it is in length of about five palms and ten, and it has already come to my knowledge that one was twenty palms long.
And if it is cut during its treatment, then insert the needle into the channel of it and pierce that with a long channel through the flesh until all that is in the material is evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; then treat that according to the cure for abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has branches, and especially when it reaches the joint of the foot or in the foot, and it comes out with multiple openings, and a branch emerges from each opening.
And therefore treat it as we have said in the division and with what has been said above.
Regarding the section on worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine disease.
This disease is named in some places as bovine disease because small white spots appear on the buttocks, which is a kind of worm that exists between the skin and the flesh. It moves throughout the body, going up and down, and its presence is felt as it travels from one member to another until it breaks through the skin and comes out.
And its generation is due to the putrefaction of some humors, just as worms, serpents, earthworms, and ascarids are generated in the belly.
And it is feared for its maliciousness, because when it enters the body and rises to the head, reaching the eye, it then infests the eye and enters, destroying it, which results in white spots appearing.
And therefore, when you want to treat it and extract it, it cannot be done unless its movement and appearance are felt. Then you must tightly bind what is above it and below it with ligatures and strong compression, and then dry the area and extract it.
And if it is embedded in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a heated cautery over the area where it resides, and the greatest fear is corruption of the wound, which can corrupt the area as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.
From the text provided and the instruction given, it seems like the language is a medieval form of Romance languages mixed with Latin. Based on this context, here's an attempt at translating the given sentence:
This illness is named "nafir" in our land, and it is pain that comes to certain members, and then moves from one member to another.
And I have already seen that second thing which I will recount. I was called to see a sick woman in a village, and after uncovering her arm, I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm. After remaining there for about an hour, I observed that swelling rise up as if it were moving like a worm, but more lightly than it seemed, as if it were quicksilver moving from place to place.
And then the pain moved to that area and settled into the muscle, and remained there for about an hour.
And then it moved to the other arm before reaching the other side of the body.
And then I recalled to myself that it was moving throughout her entire body as I observed; and I was greatly amazed by its transformation and the speed from one member to another. And I had seen this before in my other patients in the same manner, but I have also seen many cases where the pain is transferred from one limb to another. But do not see this with the eyes as in the woman.
And I did not think it to be anything else but that it was because the woman was of old age, or of dry body and exposed veins, and in this condition felt this altered windiness.
And it is necessary that this reverse cure does not appear in those who are delicate and have a moist body with engorged veins.
And when you wish to treat him, and the patient feels that pain, now it is not apparent to you as we have said, now press on that area and gently move over it until that compressed air or wind has been expelled, and then cauterize the spot.
And if you do not feel it with your hands, then treat that with body percussion and by expelling wind, and cure those with foul-smelling pills and pills of senna and the like.
From the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diverse according to their types, and according to the parts of the body in which they strike, for their diversity is such that some have large points, and small ones, and concave ones, and blunt ones; and there are those with three angles, and those with tongues; and there are barbed ones.
And the signs of injury to the skull are when an arrow strikes it and passes through the bone, piercing the dura mater which is over the brain; for from this comes sudden fever, blindness, vertigo, inflammation and burning in the eyes, swelling and burning of the tongue, spasms, confusion of the mind, vomiting of bitterness, and speech is suddenly severed and the voice is destroyed. Moreover, a white moist substance like powder oozes from the wound site, and there is moisture on the face as if the flesh were wetted.
And if these signs appear to you, then you abstain from the treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
And the signs of the arrow when it strikes in the heart, so that it is near the left nipple, and you feel that it is fixed in a hard place, and not in a hollow space; and the quick movement of the arrow resembles the pulse's movement, and black blood flows from the wound, and there is coldness in the extremities, and cold sweat, and fainting; therefore, know that death descends swiftly.
And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are spitting of frothy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the neck are inflamed, and the color of the patient changes, and they exhale a large breath, and they seek a draught of fresh air.
And if the arrow strikes the membrane that is in the foot, and the pain is near the small bones, and there is a great swelling with intense pain and sighing, and not all the muscles of the limbs are affected.
And if you find the arrow in the stomach, then remove it from the wound by giving some indigestible food.
And if the arrow is shot into the belly, and it is embedded in him, make an incision at the wound site, or on the skin, or on the intestine that has been ruptured, and there is no hope for the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow hits the bladder and urine flows out, and some process from it spreads to areas outside, and severe pain occurs for the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
And as for the other members such as the face, the neck, and the jaw, and the shoulders and the arms, and the vertebrae of the back, and the clavicle, and the thigh, and the leg and their like among the members, they are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or an artery and is not a venomous arrow.
And I will recount to you what I have observed about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand its implications for your treatment.
The cause is that in a man, an arrowhead was embedded in the lacrimal of his eye at the base of his nose, and I extracted it from him through the other side, leaving only the feathers of the arrow, and he was healed, without any harm to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had struck him in the eyebrow, leaving the eyelid somewhat open. The arrow was already concealed, and only a small part of it could be retrieved, to which adhered the shaft. It was a large, sharp arrow of the Turks, with a lion-shaped iron head that had no feathers.
And it is a remedy for Jupiter, and not accidental in his sphere an evil accident.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had been shot in the throat, and it was an Arab arrow, one that has barbs; then I made an incision around it between two cartilages, as it was already submerged in his throat; then I carefully maneuvered with that, and then extracted it, and thus healed the Christian.
And extract another arrow from a man who had been shot in his abdomen, and he thought he would die because of that; and then, after thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition due to any cause related to his disposition, incise around the arrow and engage with it, and he was healed, and no harmful accident happened to him.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow had lodged in his back, and the wound had solidified around it; and after about seven years, the arrow was embedded at the root of his thigh.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had lodged in her abdomen, and the wound had solidified inside her; and there was no change in her condition because of it, and the woman did not suffer any harm in any of her natural functions.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow had lodged in his face, and the wound had solidified; he broke off the arrow, experiencing no pain from it, and similar cases have been observed.
And the arrow was extracted from the man, one of the princes of the king, who had it lodged in the middle of his nose, which had slightly shifted to the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden.
And I was called for the treatment near the arrow wound within three days.
And then I found the arrow's wound very narrow; and then I probed it with a fine needle, but did not feel anything; however, he felt a prick near his right ear, and then I suspected that this pricking was due to the tip of the arrow.
And I applied a poultice to the area with a plaster that has attractive and digestive properties, confident that the area will become inflamed so that the site of the arrow becomes apparent, causing it to emerge from there.
And no significant accident occurred in the area where the arrow had reached; and I continued with the plaster on it for many days, and no accident happened; the wound healed during this time, and the patient was free from the distress of it for many days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and reported this to me.
And then I applied an acute corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it opened up, and with a probe, I examined that area, and found the tip of the arrow adhering to the bone.
And then I adjust in the wound opening with that acute medicine until the tip of the arrowhead becomes visibly apparent to me, and I proceed at my own pace with this for a period of time between four months.
And then pour that the wound fire is amplified, and it was possible to insert the scissors into it, and remain there, and not obey to excretion, when I did not cease subtlety and ingeniously over that in ways of ingenuity, until one day with tools made for forceps, according to which will come the form of those at the end of the chapter, until I extracted that; and then restored that wound.
And some doctors judged that the cartilage of the nose cannot be restored, but I have restored it and the wound has been consolidated, and the patient is healed completely, and there was no harm to him in any way.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting certain arrows because it establishes that rule and significance on what has not been said, for the parts of this art and the definitions thereof are not understood through narration nor do they fully encompass those in the book.
And the wise artisans compare little with much; and what is present with what is absent; and they find new operations and new instruments by tracing back to the strange causes of the craft when it occurs.
And therefore I say that arrows are not removed from the limbs in which they are embedded, but according to two methods: either by attraction from the place where they entered; or by the opposite end from the other side.
And that which is removed from the place where it entered is an arrow that has penetrated a fleshy area, and is pulled out from the same entry point.
And if you do not obey the suggestion of removing it at the time of injury, then you should leave it for several days until the flesh around it rots and the attraction of it is lessened, making its removal easier.
And similarly, if it is embedded in bone and you do not follow the suggestion, then leave it for several days and repeatedly move and attract it each day until it is removed.
And if you do not follow the suggestion for several days, then you must drill around the arrow embedded in the bone from all sides with a fine tool until the area around the arrow is enlarged, and then extract it.
But if the arrow is already hidden in the part of the body and is not felt, then you should search for it by probing, and if you feel it, then pull it out using several methods that are suitable for its extraction.
And if you cannot [operate] on him because of the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow, and here there are no bones, nerves, or veins, then you should operate on the wound so that it is widened and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
And if it is attached to the ear with which it is held, then you deliver the flesh in which it is embedded from all sides with all the skill that you can muster; and devise a method for this, if you cannot on the extraction of the flesh in the fracture of the ears and in the torsion of those within which it is embedded.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in whatever location it is, then you use with forceps and your hand's strength all around until it obeys; and delicately with the greatest subtlety so that the arrow is not broken and that it makes difficult for you to pull it out and from that extraction.
And if you cannot do it at that time, then leave it for several days until the parts around it can heal, and then repeat the procedure when the area has been alleviated. But if there is an adverse flow of blood, then you should administer what we have said about treatment in the relevant chapter.
And observe the source of the vein or nerve or tendon injury, and administer any method possible to prevent the arrow's penetration; and do this with ease, calmness, slowness, and firmness as I and you recommend.
And therefore, draw the arrow out in such a way that the patient is positioned according to the figure in which you should make the incision for the arrow, as it is more beneficial. But if this is not possible for you, then administer whatever is possible according to the figures [methods or diagrams].
But for arrows that have been lodged from the opposite side, or if any part of it has already protruded outward, or if the tip of the arrow feels slippery above the chain-like structure and is raised; then you should cut on that area; and let the cutting be according to the amount taken by the forceps; then pull it out, as it will come out easily this way.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you twist the tool according to opposition between which the arrow presses into the bone, and enlarge it as you insert, and then extract that.
And if not, leave that for several days, and then repeat that until it comes out.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in there, then you push it out with it (likely meaning using a tool or similar).
And if the arrow shaft has fallen out and you wish to administer an impulse [likely meaning to push or insert something], then you introduce, if it is deafened [possibly meaning blocked or closed], a hollow instrument so that it enters into the cavity of the wound in the thigh and then you push with it.
If the arrowhead is concave, then you should forcefully push it in, for the arrowhead is lightened by that.
And if the arrowhead is embedded, then you must dig out all the flesh in which it is lodged, if that is possible for you, and then treat that area with whatever is appropriate.
And if the arrow strikes in the foot, or in the stomach, or in the bladder, or in the side, and is close enough that you can touch it with your hand, and it is possible for you to cut around it, then cut around it and be careful of veins or nerves, and extract it, and then treat the wound if needed, and care for it until it is healed.
Form of forceps with which arrows are extracted:
Let the ends of them be like a bird's beak, which are made like scissors to grasp the arrow so that they do not let it go.
And of those, various special sizes are made, large, small, and medium, according to the size of the arrow's thickness and its thinness, and the width of the wound, and the tightness of the area.
And in this way, by doing so, the internal part of the patient is relieved in the concave area and is pushed with that.
From the text provided and its structure, it seems to be in an archaic form of a Romance language that draws from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Given this context:
The veins for bloodletting of which it is customary to bleed are thirty, of which there are sixteen on the head. There are two pulse veins near the ears called alhasisain; two herbs that are in the two temples; and two veins located at the tear ducts of the two eyes called aspicientz; a vein prepared in the middle of the forehead, and a vein that is at the end of the nose; two veins on the neck; two veins on the upper lip; and two veins on the lower lip. And these are the veins called algelic; there are also two veins beneath the tongue. Here is the translation of the given text line by line:
And in the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of those is below the curvature of the heel of the wild leg; and the second is sophena, and its location is below the thigh of the tame leg; and the sciatic vein, and its location is below the thigh of the wild leg; and in the thigh there are other veins similar to those.
The cleansing of the veins near the ears is for ancient and emigrant catarrhs, and scaly and ulcerous conditions of the old head ailments.
And the method of bleeding them is as I recommend to you: shave the head of the patient, and rub the back of the patient's head at the occiput in the area where both veins are with a broad cloth using good friction; then bind the patient’s neck with a bandage so that both [veins] appear close to their positions near the ears in two points just below the hairline; feel for those spots with your finger, and if you sense the pulse of those veins with your finger, this indicates they are ready.
Then take the lancet, which is sharp, and insert it into the vein until the point reaches the bone. Then raise your hand with the vein and the lancet upwards and incise the vein with a sharp, precise cut. And the length of the incision should be about two fingers' width or around that; and let as much blood flow as you desire.
Then bind it with a cloth and leave it until it is healed.
And already at the beginning of the book, the incision and its cautery have been described.
And of the two arterial veins that are in the temples, the relief from phlebotomy is for the ancient migraine and its evil consequences, as well as frequent ophthalmia and acute superfluous effusions to the eyes.
And the quality of performing flebotomia (bloodletting) on them is according to what I recommend to you: constrain the patient's neck with motion until the two veins appear clearly visible and palpable, and place your finger on their pulse; and then you can proceed with试探.
And then you raise the chain above the vein at the points above with your index finger, and insert the flebotomi (phlebotomy instrument) carefully, and lift the vein up; and cut it just as you have done in the other two veins; and let blood flow according to the amount of your need.
And then loosen the compression of the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, and then apply a cloth and poultice over it and tightly bind it above with strong pressure, and leave it until it is healed.
And the recollection of them has already preceded, and from those the incision, and the attraction at the beginning of the book.
And thus the treatment of phlebotomy of the frontal vein is similar to the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for ancient diseases of the face and for migraine, heat, and foul ulcers.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is as I recommend to you: so that the patient holds their arm with a bandage between which the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a lancet, of which this is the form:
Place the point that protrudes at the head of the forceps over that vein and strike it with a peg or another tool in the manner shown, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you desire; then close the perforation of the patient and keep it tight until it is healed.
And sometimes it is opened with a flebotomi (bloodletting instrument) on the leg, but the flebotomi should not have an acute end like other flebotomis; instead, its end should be blunt. Use it in a transverse manner because the bone is close and strong, and it would break if the flebotomi were sharp.
However, the treatment of the two veins that are near the tear ducts of both eyes for eye ailments caused by irritation and inflammation in the eyes, and for facial illnesses.
The method of bloodletting is that the patient should hold their head with a bandage, and then perform the bloodletting; you should stand above the patient's head while doing this.
And the bloodletting should be performed transversely for a short length with a small bloodletting instrument, because there is no flesh in that area; if the instrument is too sharp, its tip might break.
And then let blood as much as is necessary for you, and apply it to those cuts, and bind them for one night, and then untie them.
And the bleeding from the nasal vein is appropriate for acute fever and violent heat, and for diseases of the face and migraine and swelling that occur in the face, especially when they are chronic.
And the quality of the bleeding is such that the patient holds their head and then you hold their nose with your left hand, and take a thin long bleeding instrument and insert it into the middle part of the nasal tip precisely, because the vein does not appear to the touch there, and blood begins to flow immediately.
You must gradually withdraw your hand with the bleeding instrument little by little and let blood according to your need; then bind it for one night, because it heals quickly.
However, the bleeding of the two gums can lead to air constriction and the beginning of leprosy and many other diseases, impetigo, and nasty corrosive ulcers, as well as herpes.
And the quality of the phlebotomy for them is that the patient stretches each one on their own chair with a ligature; and the surgeon stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a stool.
And then perform venesection on the vein with a small, wide lancet little by little; and then extract blood in a timely quantity or according to what you deem necessary for this case; and then do the same to the other vein.
And then loosen the ligature and tie the two veins with a moderate knot so that the patient is not suffocated, and leave it until the wound is healed.
And the benefit of venesection from the larger veins is that it helps with small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers and cracks, and also bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
And the procedure for venesection is that you make the patient sit in front of you, and tie a band around their neck, then part their lips and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; the indication of each is by the darkness of each of both, and this is more evident where small black veins are around them; then incise each with an oblique incision.
And if you have doubt and do not know which one it is, then proceed with the incision of the larger one, and from that, the pus clearly manifests.
And make the appearance of the two veins that are on the lips above.
But for the two veins that are below the tongue, the treatment is to perform phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for premonitory signs in the throat, diseases of the uvula, and illnesses of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those veins is to have the patient between your hands before the sunlight, lift their tongue, and look below the tongue where on one side there is a vein and on the other side another vein, and the color of each tends towards black.
And then phlebotomize each one; be careful not to linger with your hand while phlebotomizing those veins, because below them are arteries.
And the veins that are bled from in the calf are those where it is customary for all men, and their bleeding is done in two ways: either by applying a flebotome with myrtle or olive oil of subtle composition; or by cutting with a flebotome blade, which they call alnessil, and this is its form:
Place his side thus as you have done before, and it is necessary to open the concave veins that are full and appear thick, and those which contain thick clotted blood.
And this flebotomi is of lesser width and has a finer tip, and it is suitable for the flebotomy of fine veins that contain subtle blood.
Here is the translation of the given line:
And it is necessary for the phlebotomist, when performing phlebotomy on that area, to be very careful and have great caution there, because the artery lies beneath, and if he makes a mistake and strikes with the point of the lancet in that puncture, he will cut through that artery and cause a flow of blood, so it is necessary not to use the phlebotomy needle with its sharp tip but rather as a cutter like any other.
And if the basilic vein does not appear through clear manifestation, then you should leave that area and move to another one, or search for some other limb; or perform phlebotomy at the end of the arm where it is visible; and cut it with a lancet as we have said.
But if you want to perform phlebotomy on the patient, then before constricting the arm, touch the area between where you know the pulse points are, and then press down on it with your thumb; and then stretch out the arm and cut the vein with a concave incision using a lancet as we have said; and be careful that the strike does not hit any part of the artery's location.
And when you see that by tightening the bandage there is swelling in the place where you have pressed with your finger, then that swelling is from the artery, and therefore you should avoid it.
And if you see the blood flow during phlebotomy as thin and red like a child's urine, and the blood is subtle and bright red, then know that it is arterial blood; and then you should compress and place your finger on that spot for a long time; and then remove your finger, and if the blood stops flowing in several attempts, then you should strengthen the arm and leave it be.
And protect the patient from their own mucus, and keep them in a state of fear for several days until they are healed.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And when the blood is congealed, it is good; and if not, then treat it with that which precedes the memory of the places from where the bleeding flows.
And the extraction of blood from him is difficult in many situations because of the small space of the wound and the possibility of arm movement.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.
And in phlebotomy (bloodletting), it is necessary to know the location of the artery over which fear exists during bloodletting because it is a nerve; and if one hits this nerve at the puncture site during bloodletting, the patient will fall into stupor, and recovery becomes difficult for him, and often he is not fully healed. This nerve sometimes appears in sensitivity; and if it is hidden from some people and is subtle and does not show itself, then you must place the phlebotomy needle with which you perform bloodletting using a section of linen, and avoid the nerve with your skill.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you should pierce the vein lengthwise.
The benefit of bloodletting from the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and helps with ailments of the eyes.
And it is proper in this case, if you want the bloodletting to be done with an olive lancet or a myrtle lancet; for it is the safest of all veins, as there are neither arteries nor nerves nearby.
But nevertheless it often happens that an abscess forms in some people when it is not punctured during the first percussion, and you do not notice that abscess.
The first line discusses the conditions and specifics under which phlebotomy should be performed:
And if phlebotomy is performed, it should be done on the third day or at the earliest pus formation, provided that three hours of the day have passed.
More phlebotomy which is administered, more when it brings convenience and necessity to this, whether at night or day, at any hour and in any season.
And it must be that a child should not undergo circumcision until they have reached fourteen years, and a pregnant woman should not undergo circumcision except from the fourth month to the seventh, and old women should not undergo circumcision who have already passed sixty years.
And when someone wishes to undergo bloodletting by some method or another, it is necessary to cleanse their intestines before the bloodletting with a lion'sclyster (enema), if there are any retained fecal masses, so that the veins do not carry excess humors into the bloodletting of the cleansed intestines, which could harm the principal limbs.
And here is the translation line by line from the provided text:
And then consider the filtration of humors before this if the blood is thick, through foods and drinks, and through medicines if this is possible for it.
And then immerse in a bath if nothing prohibits it, or let them be exercised by some exercise so that the blood is refined.
And perform the bloodletting in the morning around the hour of terce (about 9 AM), as we have said.
And it is necessary that the foot of that person be protected on that day from all harmful emotional disturbances, such as distress, anger, fear, and from all physical exertions, such as excessive labor, sorrow, and similar things.
And in its seat, let the causes be present which are customarily used by people with aromatics and fragrances, and with balms and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
And follow the phlebotomist on a cushion that is higher than the cushion of he who is to be bloodlet.
And then extend their arm, and the phlebotomist should rub that area with his hand two or three times; then tie the ligature with a bandage and wrap it around twice.
And if the constriction is moderate, for when the constriction is not equal, or the constriction is due to excess, then prohibit blood flow; or use a softening method, and then prevent the escape of blood from the body.
And before the constriction, it is necessary for the person to be bled to rub their hands together until the veins are swollen and noticeable to the touch.
And then the phlebotomist should anoint their lancet with a little of the proper oil; and then place their index finger of the left hand on that vein, just above the spot where the bloodletting is to be done, so that the vein protrudes slightly, and the pulsation can be felt—whichever veins you find taut like a string should be bled from, and those filled with air will contract when the lancet is placed upon them should not be bled from; and if the lancet does not enter the vein easily, that one is narrow.
And therefore, for this reason, the phlebotomist must be firm and attentive in all these matters.
And then remove the bloodletting instrument, but if the vein has been successfully opened once, that is good; and if not, you should repeat this another time after leaving that spot a little bit, or apply a compress to it, if the area is not inflamed.
And if the area is inflamed or the patient shows fear, then you should wait for one or two days, and do not tighten the bandage, because it would strongly attract inflammation, nor should they enter a bath.
And then repeat the bloodletting if necessary.
And if the incision is small and blood flows subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will come out, then you should repeat the bloodletting in that area slightly adjusting the incision a bit, and do this with a compress before the area becomes inflamed, because in many people, inflammation occurs with only a small incision.
But if the area is already inflamed, then do not repeat the procedure on it, because it does not serve any purpose; and apply some part of an ointment over it, because it alleviates the body's blood. And it is better in this place to use oil and the other ointments.
And similarly, administer a mixture of oil in all phlebotomies with which you open the veins to prevent the flow of blood from the body, and use theriac, alfalfa, and sage when one of these is placed on the area, for the blood is refined and coagulated when it thickens.
And if a large abscess is generated at the site of the phlebotomy, which often happens, especially to those who have not been bled except on that occasion or near the weak vein, then you should cool it and place on the area a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly warmed, and keep it there for about an hour, as it dissolves [the abscess].
And it is necessary to do this near the emergence of blood from that vein with the completion of bleeding or from another vein.
And if some blackening or greenish color remains in the area for several days, do not worry about it; and if you wish, apply to that area some mixture of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some mixture of the juice of mallows or calamus or similar substances.
And many white swellings and elevations should be treated by bloodletting from a vein.
And then place your hand on that area, and if you find softness, apply pressure to it; at this point, the prominence is bad and harmful; and thus beware of placing any weight there for reasons we have mentioned, because strong pressure will cause blood to flow from the artery.
And make a poultice with something that has astringent properties, so that the area becomes hardened, and then treat it with other therapies until it is healed.
And it is necessary to withdraw blood from every person according to the quantity of their strength and according to the dominant color that appears in the blood.
For if the blood is black, you should let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if you find it thick, you should let it flow until it becomes thin; and likewise, if it is sharp, you should let it flow until its sharpness is reduced.
And for those who are full and strong and have a need for blood extraction in one session, the incision of the vein should be enlarged and the bloodletting should be broad.
And in that which is frozen, the opposite should be done, and it must be extracted in clear portions, and its passage should be straight.
And the best method administered in venesection is that it be a transverse cut, not a puncture.
And this method of venesection is safe from blood flow and nerve damage, and it is more praiseworthy and safer than venesection along the length or width.
And it is customary for syncope to occur after venesection, and you must treat this before the venesection with a bit of bread infused in pomegranate juice or warmed simple oxymel; and draw the blood in three or four portions.
And if it is chilled due to composition, then take before venesection bread infused in myrrh syrup or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger, and the like, or in an aromatic and fragrant syrup.
And if syncope occurs after venesection and is caused by the loss of much blood, then it is necessary to drink water of flesh and a fragrant subtle syrup; and make use of aromatics with algalea, and anoint their feet with that.
And use of the other causes that we have mentioned in the division in the chapter on syncope for evacuation.
And if one wants to dilate their veins and resolve their blood for the second time, it is necessary for the person whose phlebotomy is considered as a moderate evacuation, and its property is cold, which evacuates the blood little by little according to the amount of the property over several consecutive days.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
More who want to draw blood from one part of the body to another, opposite where it declines, should do so on the second or third day.
May it be that in a body where the blood is already heated and sharp and causes fever, it must be bled at once and a large quantity should be let out, and the interval between bleedings should be extended until syncope occurs; because you will have preserved all the conditions of phlebotomy; and place your hand on his pulse to prevent him from dying instead of fainting, for many times this happens when the phlebotomist is ignorant or negligent.
And it is not necessary when you want to unbind the arm and evacuate blood for a second time, if the vein's orifices are already closed and it is difficult for blood to flow out, that you press on that area forcefully and slightly extend it by bending, because this is too harmful.
Keep the incision open until the second bleeding; or remain with the sharpness of the phlebotomy that coagulates the blood in the vein's orifices; or place some theriaca alfarach, or sagzenea, and compress that area gently until the blood is fully out.
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation subsides.
And if necessity prompts you to evacuate the blood secondarily, and it is not an excuse, then you bleed that person at that location or in the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called the "cord of the arm" is opened by cutting in the area of the forearm or basilic vein, when those are not found or are hidden, because it consists of those veins.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient introduces their hand into warm water until the skin reddens and the vein becomes clearly visible.
And then apply moderate tension on that area with a bandage; and then perform a small transverse incision, not longitudinally nor latitudinally.
And let the exposure be wide, and your incision should be where you cut slightly above the joint of the hand.
And if the flow of blood is blocked, then soak the hand in warm water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your goal.
But if you are in the summer days, then you are excused from soaking the hand in warm water, and instead, the body should be soaked in warm water during winter.
And the incision of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, because there are no pulsating veins or nerves here.
And the incision of the palm of the right hand is conducive to diseases of the liver.
And the quality of the incision is that you should apply tension to the hand with a bandage or with your hand, after placing it in warm water, until the vein swells and is clearly visible; then make a transverse incision; and if you cut through it completely, do no harm by doing so.
And keep your hand still during the phlebotomy, because otherwise the tendons of the fingers will be exposed and without flesh.
And then wash your hand in warm water and let the blood flow into it, for if you do not wash it in warm water, the blood will clot at the vein's opening, and this is prohibited from flowing.
And when the blood is drawn according to the necessary quantity, then you should place oil and salt on the vein so that it does not close immediately; similarly, you must do this along the entire straight path of the vein.
However, the benefit of performing bloodletting from the left hand is that it is beneficial for diseases of the brain.
And do similarly in the bloodletting of the eye as you have done in the other [procedures].
And the benefit of bloodletting from the vein sephena is for diseases located in the lower part of the body, such as disorders of the uterus, and for the retention of menses, and for diseases of the rheumatism and ulcers of the thighs and legs, and similar kinds of diseases.
And the quality of the bloodletting is such that the patient should immerse their foot in warm water and perform friction until the veins become visible; then tie a strap around the ankle joint; and at the site where the vein becomes clearly apparent, you should place your finger, from which it branches out into several small veins on the surface of the foot.
And therefore, perform a large incision or place the patient on their back with the foot elevated and separate from the swelling, for it is better and more beneficial.
And if you perform a puncture on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are located there on the surface of the foot, and apply your puncture in such a way that you do it crosswise, as if you were going to cut it open.
And let the puncture be gentle.
But if bleeding is prohibited; then you should soak the foot in warm water and let the blood flow into it until it is evacuated.
And if the puncturer makes a mistake on the first attempt, then repeat the puncture slightly higher up, for the area is salty; and do not fear any malevolence, but be careful of the nerves as we have said.
And similarly, do the same with the poultice on the other foot as well.
And regarding the sciatic vein, the area, as we have said, is below the heel behind the part of the ankle.
And the treatment of the puncture is for hip pain when it is caused by blood.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient should enter into a bath, and they hasten and stretch the thigh of the patient on the side of the vein above the ankle with four fingers under a long thin bandage, for it appears only in this way.
And therefore when it appears, then you perform a trephination on that according to each skill that is possible for you and according to the transverse position, which is better; or incise that with an incision or excise that with an excision, for the location of it is suitable.
And it is in many men somewhat similar; and if you find that one, and it does not appear to the full sense, then cut open some branch of it, and that is what appears on the back of the foot instead of the spot where the little finger would be.
And be careful of the nerves, and let as much blood flow as you wish.
Then release the constriction and place a pad over the area of the phlebotomy, compressing it tightly, because it heals quickly.
Regarding ventosa application and the qualities of using them.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.
And bleeding is performed in two ways: one of them is by scarification and extraction of blood, and the other is bleeding without scarification.
And this bleeding that is without scarification is done in two ways, for it is either with fire or without fire.
And the locations on the body where bleeding is administered through scarification and extraction of blood are fourteen places, among which one place for bleeding is alnocrati, which is the back part of the head; and another location is on both sides of the neck; and bleeding from the chin below the mandible near the mouth; and bleeding from both armpits; and bleeding from alohoster, which is at the end of the spine; and bleeding from two flanks, which are on both arms; and bleeding from both temples; and bleeding from both thighs.
And bleeding does not extract blood from the small scattered veins in the flesh, and by this you do not diminish their strength as is done in phlebotomy; nor should bleeding be performed with or without fire in any disease caused by excess until the whole body is purged.
Here is the translation of the provided line:
And therefore, when you encounter any of those causes, and particularly if it is in the third month or a bit later, then I command that ventilation be performed more than two or three hours after the day has passed.
And the treatment for ventosuction of the neck is that when you confer gravity on the head and cause it to be immersed in warm water; but it must be done near the evacuation of the entire body.
And this cupping is at the site of venesection of the cephalic vein.
And it is not recommended for someone of a cold disposition to use this, or in one who has a cold, because it brings great harm.
And by this, there is no need for the use of those old remedies, and in which heads such fresh illnesses are found.
And to that person who is continuously over it, forgetfulness (or unconsciousness) is induced; and because of this, you must command the cupper (or blood-letter) to remove his hand slightly from the cupping vessel at certain points, fearing the generation of unconsciousness.
When wind (gas) distension occurs in the area of venesection of the saphenous vein and basilic vein: by this you can relate it to asthma, and to constriction of the lungs, and to rupture of lung tissue, and to coughing, and to accumulation.
And it is necessary that the suction cup be heated slightly with alcohol, for if it is placed on directly without heating, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the suctioning of alhagdahan (a term that seems to refer to a specific medical procedure or substance) confers relief from headaches, ophthalmia, migraines, suffocation, and pain in the roots of the teeth; it is used instead of bloodletting from the temporal vein.
And you must command the person applying the suction not to press his hand so forcefully that he does not pierce the artery and cause a flow of blood.
And suctioning applied to the chin provides relief from alcohol intoxication in the mouth, and corruption of the gums, and similar conditions in the mouth; it is used instead of bloodletting from the veins located at the two lips.
And the suctioning that is applied to the two temples provides relief from headache, which is caused by an excess of heat.
And the suctioning applied to the two areas inside the ears provides the benefit of bloodletting from three veins, namely the basilica, fusca, and cephalica, because it draws blood from all those smaller veins that are in the flesh and from the smaller veins within the larger ones until the attraction reaches the three main veins.
And command the surgeon not to proceed too much in the incision, for the area is devoid of flesh, and leave his nerves and arteries intact.
And it is a cupping where one cups over the thighs and applies it to the hemorrhoids of the anus and to the pus-filled ulcers.
And it is necessary that you command the blood-letter to make a large leeching, and that it be of ash [likely referring to the area or method], for the place requires strong drying; and apply leeches forcefully and perform a light scarification with a scarificator.
Here is the translation of the provided text into English:
However, fever weakens the whole body and causes fainting in many people.
And regarding bloodletting from the veins, it is commonly applied to the veins of two arms.
And the quality of the bloodletting position is such that you should place the vein at the beginning and let it bleed moderately, without prolonging the bloodletting; rather, you should do it lightly, remove them cautiously, ensuring that the humors come to the site appropriately. And do not stop repeating this and continue until you see the site already reddened and swollen, and the coagulation of the blood appears.
And now you should scratch the area and gradually continue the bleeding little by little, then consider the condition of the body.
For that person who has tender flesh and few pores, you should scratch them once and not more, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And instruct the bloodletter to enlarge the scratch slightly and to perform the bleeding with ease.
And if there is thickening in the blood, then it is necessary to perform scarification twice, for in the first instance you open the path of subtle extraction from the blood and its moisture. And in the second examination obtained from the extraction of thick blood.
And if the blood is very foul, then a third incision should be made so that it can purge completely.
And finally, when we want to extract blood slowly or in small amounts, a scarification is enough for us.
And if we want to extract a large amount of blood, we perform it with a deep scarification; and if we know that the blood is thick, then we must scarify with an even deeper incision.
And the term "scarification" refers solely to the depth of the cut.
And if the vein is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, it is necessary that the areas for cupping be anointed more gently, more openly, and more dissolving; if it is in summer, use oils such as aloe oil, violet oil, fennel oil, or colchicum oil; and if it is in winter, then use narcissus oil, lily oil, chamomile oil, or blood oil, and similar ones.
And if the excess is thick and cold, then the oil should be marjoram oil, or balsamite oil, or aloe oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
And if the area to be cupped has large pores of tender flesh, then it is necessary to abstain from oil, and it is also necessary that before the application of the cups, the areas where the cups will be placed are washed with rosewater or cold water, or water from chickweed, or water from dock leaves, and similar things for these.
And for the one whose blood is of excessive moisture, wash the areas where the cups will be placed with sour wine, or with water from myrtle and sumac, and similar things to these.
And for the one whose excesses are thick, wash the areas where the cups will be placed with old wine, or with water from sage, which is marjoram, or from anise decoction, or chamomile, and similar things to these.
And it is necessary to avoid bathing before cupping; usually, the treatment should be administered just before bathing by about one or two hours, and it is necessary to rest shortly after the cupping.
What is meant is that bloodletting should be regulated before cupping.
Consider at the beginning: if the person who is to be bled or phlebotomized is choleric and there is sharp blood and inflammation, then cooling remedies must be taken, such as sour pomegranates, bitter endive and vinegar, and lettuce, and cold herbs, and julep, and similar things.
And stop their diet such as puddings, and meats of service birds, and dishes seasoned with sour things, and similar foods.
And for those whose constitution is cold, they should drink syrup of almonds or syrup of cold herbs like seeds, and sumac, and moderately scented wine between old and new; and it is advised that they use moderation in drinking and eating, and avoid dishes made from puddings, hemp, sparrow, small birds, and pigeons.
And on the day of bloodletting and phlebotomy, drinking should be more than eating.
And it should be given to drink at certain hours to some people theriac alpharac, or medicines of musk, such as mastic, or acetit before bloodletting or before phlebotomy or afterward, so that the principal members are comforted and the blood is made subtle; and they should not take those that are heated.
And the blisters that are made by scarification should be placed on the liver, and over the spleen and gout-affected areas, and around the navel, in the regions of the joints, and at the pit of the stomach, because these parts do not tolerate being scarified directly.
And it is not desired for these blisters but to attract blood from the member, just as we place a blister on the breast in cases of nasal bleeding; and we use them to dissolve cold and viscous humors within the member, similar to how we place them on the abdomen and navel; because they rarefy the member, warm it, and remove pain by resolving the accumulated humors.
And it is already placed on the sinuses when there is an obstruction or phlegm, because by the power of strong attraction, it removes the obstruction and eliminates the phlegm from its place.
And similarly, it acts when placed on the liver and spleen to resolve the humors trapped in those areas.
And these blisters are applied clean with only suction; and sometimes they are applied with heat.
And at times they are administered full of tepid water in the illnesses of the stomach.
And this is why the cupping glass should be filled and made larger, whether it is just hot water or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Form of cupping administered with fire: the diameter of the opening should be two fingers, as we have formed it; and the quantity of air should be half a palm; and it should be placed on his side, in the area that is within the circuit, halfway through; the suction should be slight so that an needle can enter into it.
It seems like the text is a mixture of old languages similar to Latin and Romance languages. Here's an interpretation and translation of the given sentence:
And at the midpoint of a horizontal bar of iron or wood, a candle is placed with fire.
And this cupping glass is larger than the one we have recommended; and it should be smaller than that according to the illness and the age of the person using it.
And the cupping glasses for children and those who are weakened are different from those for young adults and those with robust bodies.
The quality of applying this cupping glass with fire on the limb is to extend a strip of cloth soaked in wood fire properly in front of a small candle flame, and place that over the middle of the horizontal bar at the center of the cupping glass, so that the flame is lit around it without burning the patient's skin.
And then it should be placed on the patient's limb, with the finger over the spot we have mentioned. However, when you have the cupping glasses and do not need to keep your finger there for the vapor to rise over that spot, the cupping glass will soon dissolve [likely meaning it will lose suction].
And then ignite the cloth according to its manner [likely referring to how it was prepared], and repeat this if you need to do so.
And in the case of cupping that is administered for pleurisy, with water, in which there should be neither cross-veins nor sediment, and it is not administered until it is filled with this water, and then it is placed on the limb only temporarily.
And this is its form: And this cupping glass, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a large quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.
Bloodletting is not administered in many parts of the body but only in those parts where it is impossible to apply cupping, due to their small size, such as the foot and gums and similar areas; or on a part devoid of flesh, such as the fingers and nose and similar areas.
And the quality of using those leeches that you have found in the waters that are clean from putrefaction.
And then they should be left day and night in clean water until they become hungry, and that no residue remains in their stomachs; and then the body should be purged at the beginning with bloodletting and cupping; and then rub the patient’s limb until it reddens; and then place them on it.
And when they are full and fall off.
And if it is possible to draw out the fluid from the site using cupping, it is more beneficial for healing.
And if not, then wash the area with vinegar and then with clean water; and it should be rubbed and squeezed.
And if the flow of blood is extended near the placement of the leeches, and if that sweating occurs, then you soak a cloth in cold water, and place it on top until the sweating has subsided.
And if the blood is multiplied, then sprinkle on it finely ground vitriol or similar styptic substances until the bleeding stops; or place onto the area the mashed flesh of cooked beans and leave them there until the beans stick to the spot, at which point the bleeding will stop.
And it is necessary, if required, to repeat bloodletting, changing the spots when possible.
And if bloodletting is prohibited due to suspension, then rub the area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the spots until blood comes out; and then apply [some substance], for those who feel some blood will stop soon.
And when you want them to vomit, sprinkle a little powdered alum, or salt, or ashes on them, and they will vomit immediately.
Thus begins the chapter of the third part: on restoration. This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine; it is about the restoration of fractures and dislocations in the bones.
O, son, know that foolish doctors and common ones, as well as those who have never looked into the books of the Ancients or read a single letter from them, boast about this chapter.
And for this reason, this method of the wise is kept private in our land; and I have not forgotten it at any time whatsoever; nor have I employed what comes later without extensive reading of the books of the Ancients and study to understand them, from which I extracted their knowledge.
And then I directed myself to experimentation and study throughout my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that my knowledge contains and on which my experience has passed; for I have summarized this for you others and freed it from the length of expansion; and I have summarized this at the end of summarization; and shown this at the end of clarification; and formed several forms of treatments that are administered, as is done by addition to the declaration, just as I have done in the two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence: Here is the translation of the given sentence, line by line:
And therefore it is said that when you encounter a fracture or dislocation or twist or sprain, then at the beginning you must treat with bloodletting or splinting, or both together, unless some cause prohibits this, such as weakness of strength, or if it happens to a child, or an old person in decrepitude, or if it is during intense heat, or extreme cold.
And then be content with food such as fresh herbs and meats of birds and crabs; and prohibit heavy meats and foods that fill the veins with blood, except when you are certain of a safe application of cauterization, and if you do not fear an effusion of matter in the limb.
And then return the patient to their original regimen with which they were accustomed.
And thus as the broken bone begins to heal, then it is necessary that the patient be fed nutritious foods rich in thick and heavy nutrients with viscosity, such as foods made from baked wheat with water, rice, beans, fish, cow's stomachs, eggs, fresh cheese, thick wine, and similar items. With this regimen, the coagulation of the fracture occurs more easily and better.
And know that the fractured bones in young men and the elderly cannot be healed and consolidated according to their nature due to the dryness of their limbs.
But nevertheless, nature adjusts and you should bandage the broken bone on all sides with something similar to glue, in which there is thickness that adheres and strengthens the area until it becomes united and bonded together; this continues until strength and firmness are achieved, just as fire at the beginning, unless any cause prevents its natural process.
And for this reason, it is necessary to stop the patient's food intake, foods which are heavy, viscous, and thick, as we have said.
And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the thigh bone is different from a fracture of the skull bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the spine bone; and similarly, all other limbs are different from one another.
And I will proceed with the recollection of each type of fracture, explained in its own chapter distinct from the other.
Note the diversity of fractures within the fracture itself. And there are various types of bone fractures; for an arched fracture occurs in the ribs; and sometimes a longitudinal fracture of the bone is made: and these are the fractures of the skull, ribs, and proceeding and non-proceeding processes, just as it is done when a quill is prepared for writing, and there is a fractured injury with disruption at the head, and it is a small fissure.
And in every particular case there is a specific remedy or torment proper for restoration, according to which will come the distinct recollection of it in its respective places.
Sign of bone fracture. And by this is known a bone fracture: its deformity, and that prominence and appreciation of it to the touch, and sound when you compress it with your hand.
And thus, when there is no apparent deformity or sound made by your touch when you move the bone and the patient does not find great pain, then there is no fracture here.
Sometimes there can be a deformity or small fissure, in which case you should not manipulate it with your hand and compression; sometimes apply medicine to it, recalling the appropriate remedy at that moment; and then bind it tightly for subtle constriction.
And know that when the area is bent but not split into two or any other way that does not cause significant harm, such as when the entire part of its connection remains intact, then you should begin to correct it immediately to prevent inflammation from occurring.
And if inflammation does occur, then leave it for several days until the inflammation subsides; and then treat it in whatever way you can with skill and ingenuity.
And know that the restoration and healing of the soft tissue is quicker than that of the bone where you have inflicted a wound.
And then strengthen that second part which will bring the memory back to it.
But if you have inflicted a wound on the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from both ends, whether it is an arm or a leg; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two ropes or one rope and your hand.
And you should position the limb in such a way that you place it according to its natural shape while the broken parts are being stretched, so you must skillfully return those fragments to their places in whatever manner you can.
And be careful according to your strength that you do not cause pain or injury to the patient through your operation; and do your best to align one bone with its partner in their best possible forms.
And it is necessary that at that moment you skillfully touch it with your hand, and if there is any other cause, correct it and adjust it according to the extent of your ability.
And vigorous extension and compression are counterproductive, just as some foolish doctors often cause an abscess to occur through their operation, or cause contraction in the limb, which we have seen happen frequently due to their repeated operations.
And the quality of the constriction of the tranquilized limb is what I recommend; so that you know that broken limbs are diverse in their smallness and greatness and in the form of those.
And of those that are small like the arm and the thigh and the shin and similar to these, then it is necessary that the wrapping be of very fine cloth.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And then begin, for your evacuation of the dislocation, to apply an appropriate bandage over the site of that fracture with three or four wraps according to what the limb requires; and hold your hand slightly on the bandage.
And then come to the highest part of the fracture site, and hold more firmly so that your binding does not loosen with which you have secured the area of the fracture. And then extend the area of the fracture slightly with wrapping, and gradually loosen the binding little by little until you have restored much of its original shape.
And then take another bandage and wrap it again over the broken area with wrapping, and proceed to the part farthest from the fracture with the wraps; and perform your operation in the binding of the wrapping and in loosening it as we have said for the first wrapping above.
And then place between the layers of linen or cloth, with which the deformity of the fracture is adjusted, if there is any deformity in it; and if not, do not place anything in it for any reason.
And then place another bandage over it, and apply these properly made plaisters to the areas where there is no inflammation or abscess immediately, and then place what helps reduce the abscess and inflammation on those spots; leave that for several days; and then strengthen the area with the plaisters.
And let the plaisters be made of half a cane's width, well-formed and wisely; or they may be made of pine wood; or of palm leaves; and let the size of each plaster be according to this form and this figure:
However, the plaster that is placed on that fracture should be thicker and slightly larger than the other plasters, and the length of the plaster according to what fits the member in size and proportion; then strengthen over the plasters with another bandage according to your initial binding; then cover it with pitch properly as we have said about binding, which means your binding should be tighter where the fracture is, and as you move further from the fracture, the binding should be looser.
And it is necessary that the threads be moderate in thickness and fineness, and they should be made of flax; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operation of some false binders using their threads like ropes of twisted material, this is a great error, for when cutting the binding, equality is lost.
And fine threads are not suitable, for you will not achieve what you want with those due to tightness, and it is not necessary that between stitch and stitch there be less than a finger.
And if the patient is troubled by the extremities of the stars near the constriction in those areas, then place there wool or felted wool between so that it does not cause injury to them.
At times a fracture is accompanied by inflammation, and there occurs disruption in the chain, which will come to be remembered in that section in the second chapter on particularity.
And know that not all broken limbs should be immediately set with splints on the first day; the reason is that when the limb is large, it does not need to have splints placed on it until about five or seven days later, or even longer, according to your confidence in the prevention of inflammation and swelling.
And this is the method of plasters with which the Ancients would treat fractures, dislocations, and sprains by placing them over the affected areas.
Method of a plaster for the restoration of fractures, suitable for various complexities and especially for women and children, as it does not produce heat or irritation: take flour dust, which is the fine residue that adheres to the mill's walls due to the movement of the millstone.
And prepare it thus: sieve it with egg white, and make the mixture neither too thick nor too thin; then use it accordingly.
Another method of plaster for restoring fractures, dislocations, and sprains: take assafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is the resin of wild millet, each one drachm. x; myrrh and aloes each one drachm. v; aloe juice two drachms. xx; all should be ground and sifted, then mixed with either aloe juice or egg white if the patient’s condition is inflamed; then apply this plaster, which has a good composition and restores broken bones easily, and recommend it to many people.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
All are pounded in a mortar with fine grinding, and they are sieved, and they are mixed with water or with egg white and is administered.
Method of treating joints and bones that are dislocated from their places, which cause pain in accidents as well as fractures and breaks: take clean wool and immerse it in sweet wine and cooked oil, then place it over the affected area.
But in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration; it burns and expels pain properly.
Another method for a plaster that restores broken bones: take leaves of wild fig and leaves of wild poppy; grind all of them and make a plaster out of them.
Method for a plaster that aids in the restoration of bone fractures and when you want to resolve the remaining swelling: take roots of elder, chamomile, and flowers of violets, flour of ash, all in equal parts; grind them all and mix them with wine if the limb is not heated.
But if it is heated, then soothe it with coriander water or with water and oil mixed together.
Another method for a plaster that is more effective in resolution than the first one, when there is a hard swelling and you want to restore the limb: take roots of elder and seeds of it, hawthorn, melilot, marjoram, flowers of violets, chamomile, all in equal parts; grind them all and mix them with sage water or sweet water or wine, whichever suits the nature of the limb and the condition of its color.
And here is the translation of the given sentence:
More in Gaul, it is observed that on the fractured limb, you should place restorative substances and causes where there is drying with little heat such as myrrh, incense, and similar to those causes which we have recounted.
Method of plaster that comforts the wound and pain: take meal (flour), cheese, human placenta or thrush down, elder (plant), and salt, in equal parts; let them be ground and sifted and mixed together, and make a plaster.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence: And if you encounter a place with intense pain or redness or swelling, then you should care for or release that area immediately, and remove the plaster from it.
And take linen cloth and a wet sea sponge, and submerge that in tepid water, and with that wash the area until the redness ceases and the pain is soothed; then let the limb rest for an hour; then place upon it dry wool submerged in sweet wine and oil or ointment, and cover it for a night until you are sure there is no risk of abscess, and that the swelling of the limb has subsided, and the pain is alleviated.
And then repeat that gentle binding and apply a small plaster without tightening it as in your first constraint, and do so gently until it is healed.
And if you find that the abscess and the hardness and the pain and the swelling and all the symptoms are completely alleviated, and you no longer need a plaster or binding, then you should repeat the process as you did at the beginning in the same manner.
And if you do not encounter any of those causes we have mentioned in the limb, then do not release it but wait for three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes all of this is left for twenty days according to how it appears to you regarding the release of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and approaches the coagulation of the flesh over it.
And now adjust more on the constriction than on your initial constriction entirely, and adjust in the swelling of the food of the patient, according to which is preceded by the recollection of it.
If you see the location of the fracture already dry and withered more than it should be, then know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching that area; therefore, bathe that area with lukewarm water continuously as you clean it; and do this for all three days; and slightly loosen the tightness, and through this operation, nutrition flows to the limb, and it heals quickly.
However, what those inexperienced restorers of limb fractures do otherwise when the fracture is not restored properly at the beginning, and is instead restored with distortion, is an error according to their operation, and it causes great fear; if this were correct, the Ancients would have expanded upon this in their books and acted accordingly.
And I have not seen any of them do this, which is why it is more reasonable to believe that it should not be done.
Chapter second: On fracture when it occurs in the head.
The types of fractures are many, and their forms are diverse, and the causes are distinct. For some fractures are caused by the blow of a club, and the blow knocks all the bone inside the skull, which is left as the bone, just as this happens in wood; therefore, this type is named ascial. Or the club penetrates some part of the bone, cutting into the flesh but not passing through to the back side; and this type of fracture is called levatio absoluta.
And the severity of these two fractures is either great or small, and it refers to a fracture that is comminuted or impacted; and the cause of this is percussion with a blunt object or falling onto stone, and in their likeness.
And this fracture either is penetrating and already approaches the periosteum which is beneath the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the damage of these two fractures is either great or small.
And here is the translation of the given line:
And it is a fracture that occurs either by falling or by the impact of a stone and similar objects, which causes some shard of bone to enter the inner parts, and it happens in a concave area, just like when you hit the tiles of a roof with something and pieces of them break off and enter inside.
And this is particularly done in bodies with moist bones, such as infants' heads.
And thus to all these types of fractures and dislocations, they are treated as separate pieces, like detached stars. And I will come back to all of this in its place.
And know all these types of fractures by detection on them and by inquiry into their attempts and the presence of corrupted flesh that is over them.
And hair-like veins are known for being revealed on the bone, and they are wiped clean, and covered with cloth, because the fracture appears black.
And in the treatment of fractures, consider at the beginning the symptoms of the patient, and if you see through these symptoms that they clearly indicate fear, such as vomiting from anger, stretching out, loss of understanding, loss of voice, fainting, acute fever, and flowing out of tears with heat from them, and similar symptoms in their greatest manifestations, then it is understood that he will not be healed.
And if you see unusual symptoms, you hope for recovery, then you begin the treatment of him.
The sentence provided appears to be a mixture of languages similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here is the translation based on that understanding:
And if it is during the days of summer, then one must remove the bone before the seventh day, fearing that what remains under the bone may be corrupted by gangrene, and that accidents which we have recounted might occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the membrane covering the brain, and it is broken into small pieces and rough, then you must incise the comminuted and rough fracture, as I will recommend to you.
And it is that you shave the head of the afflicted patient, and expose the bone according to your custom and method as much as possible based on the shape of the affliction, so that it is light on the patient.
And if you encounter the discovery of bone, bleeding, or an inflamed abscess, then you should address it accordingly, which involves filling the area with cloths soaked in wine and oiled rags, and let the wound rest until the inflammation subsides and the bleeding stops; then proceed with the circumferential treatment of the bone and its removal.
And this should be done according to one of two methods of operation.
And one method is that you incise the bone with a straight incisor of this type, and this is its form: Then apply another incisor like this one, a bit further to the side than the previous one; and this is its form:
And then administer more of the incision to the side than the second.
And it is necessary to have several types of incisors, of which some are wider than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and are sharp at the ends of their extremities, and they should be made of Indian iron or steel.
And use them easily in percussion over the incisions so that the head does not come off and loosens it.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then you must perforate around it before administering the incisors with the non-penetrating drills, which are called non-deepening drills.
And they are not called thus unless those do not stop the end of the bone of the testicle at that which is near it, so that on the tumor there is a round extremity or edge above which the sharp head is left similar to an edge or a small circle, which you must prevent from being submerged and passing beyond the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take from these probes a great number of them, each suitable for the sharpness needed for each bone, among which should be present in all types of tests for the brain where the tip is sharp, the length and breadth should be according to the degree of sharpness required for this test.
And this is the form of three types of treatments: The quality of piercing around the fractured bone is to place the treatment on the bone and rotate it with your hands until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then change the treatment to another location, and place it so that all throughout, the amount equals the thickness of a nail or something similar.
And then cut with an incisor between each bone fragment, and create that subtle pus you can produce at the end of levigation, as we have said, until you eradicate the bone, either by hand or with some other tools which you will prepare for this purpose, such as tweezers and fine forceps.
And you must be cautious that the incisor does not touch any part of the spine.
And thus, after you have circumscribed the perforated bone, and separated it from the spine if it is connected to it, and extracted it, you must rasp and level it on its rough surface with a tool similar to an incisor, but it must be thinner and more subtle than other incisors.
And if any small and stubborn parts of the bones remain, then take them out easily with the tools you should use; and then treat the wound with lint and ointments as we have mentioned.
And another method of operation is lighter and farther from fear, which is called Gaulish and performed with great caution; this is its description: at the beginning, you must start to expose the part of the bone in the area where the fracture is most violent and apparent, until you have uncovered that part and placed the tip of this smooth and gentle incisor, whose form is as follows:
And it is that the lens-shaped fracture is lion-like and does not divide due to any cause, and the acute fracture divides it into two parts in lengthwise, just as it happens; that the lens-shaped fracture should be aligned with the spine with its sharp edge facing towards the bone.
And then strike on the saw of one side with a small hammer so that you cut through all the bone easily as it is turned, and be sure of the soft tissue that no accident happens to it in any way; indeed, even if the medic were the most foolish of all men and the least knowledgeable among them, certainly, and even if he were asleep.
When any additional bone fragment is attached to the os panniculi at certain points of the bone, cut it off using the pointed end of a lens-shaped instrument, and remove it easily, for it is removed without harm and fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the subcutaneous tissue, and what is severed or remains of the bone is its surface, and roughness and small splinters remain in it, then you must scrape away that roughness and remove those splinters with fine razors which you have prepared in various sizes so that you can use them in the most appropriate places and in the correct manner according to where your operation on the fractured bone requires it.
And you must use your judgment to begin scraping the bone with the least fine of those razors, and then gradually use the finer ones, and do not stop doing this continuously until you have administered the coarsest and finest of all of them.
And in each of the other small capillary and fine fractures, you must administer treatment according to what you judge necessary for the correction of it.
And it is important to note that not all who have studied this art are equally skilled or cautious in its practice. And we have demonstrated this on large fractures as well.
And if the panicle is retained when you extract the bone, then you must take cloth according to the amount of the wound, and submerge it in anointed oil, and place it over the opening of the wound; and then take another folded or tripled cloth and submerge it in wine and anointed oil and place it over the first cloth and do this as lightly as possible so that you don't burden the person; and then apply a linen bandage on top, and don't tighten it beyond what the size of the wound requires.
And leave it with this treatment for one or two days until you are sure that the inflammation is fully healed; then remove it and subsequently administer medicines that have an excess of drying properties, such as flaxseed, flour of iris, powder of ashes, and of similar substances.
And it is that you should make these medicines into a powder that is sprinkled over the wound when they are dry; generally, apply any medicine whose property is to clean without irritating.
And be careful according to your skill that the wound in your treatment is clean; and there should be no deafness of ointment or anything else; nor should you allow any virulence to accumulate in it; for when it is applied over the brain panicle, it corrupts that area and spoils it, thereby causing a malignant malice to the patient.
E accideys en le ciphac del cap, cum de lu es mondificat le os e majorment quan es menspresada la cura de lu, e es negror en la superficia de lu; e donc considera lahoras si accideys al malaute les accidentz que havem ditz, sapias que es parnicios ses tot dopte.
And if no blackening occurs except from the medicine that is placed upon it, and this blackening is due to the power of that medicine, then you must take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil, and with those anoint a cloth, and place that over the wound; then treat it with the healing spices as needed until it is healed.
Chapter III.
For the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken into more than two main parts, or one of those parts may be cartilaginous, because there are two bones in it, and the part that is cartilaginous does not break; thus, you only encounter friction, tortuosity, and sinuosity.
If one of the two parts of the nose is broken, then you must insert your little finger into the patient's nostril and align that fracture inside with your index finger, while using your thumb outside to guide it, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And this should be done gently by you, and be careful not to cause additional pain to the patient through your procedure.
And if the fracture is in the upper part of the nose where your finger cannot reach, then it should be addressed using the tip of a probe that is small enough in thickness.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should treat it accordingly.
And attend to the restoration of him on the first day of the fracture if possible; and if not, then around the seventh or tenth day you should rest the abscess cautery.
And then insert into the end of the nose a piece of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part, or place two splints if the fracture is in two parts, and let the thickness of the splint be such that it fills the nostril.
And some of the ancient restorers say that bandages should be soaked in vinegar, and changed throughout the day, but I do not see this as necessary; rather, it is better that the joint be soaked in egg white mixed with powder of millet; then leave until the bone is fixed and the cartilage has hardened.
And sometimes it is necessary to intervene in the nose, instead of using a cone, because of pus that is wrapped in linen cloth; and it is also such that the nasal fracture is quite severe and the patient is not hindered from breathing.
And this cause is not necessary for you; and if you wish, do it, and if you wish, use poultices.
And if an abscess occurs again, cauterize it; apply to the nose cerate or cotton soaked in sweet oil and rose oil, or use diachylon.
But if an abscess does not occur and you do not cauterize it, then you must cover the area externally with flour of scammony and powdered seeds mixed with egg white; then place a lion plaster over it, and do not open the nose for any reason.
If the bones of the nose are fractured or comminuted, then you must incise over them and extract them with instruments suitable for this task; then close the wound and treat it with remedies that promote healing and consolidation, and with plasters appropriate for this purpose.
And if you encounter an ulcer inside the nose, then you must treat it with cautery and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not accompanied by an ulcer, then observe if the fracture is only external and has not been split into two parts nor bent inward; in this case, the treatment is relatively easy.
Therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left side of the jaw, then insert the right index finger; and with that finger, push the displaced part of the fracture inward easily towards the outer parts, using your other hand to support the outer part of the bone; in this way, you can properly align it.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you must administer extension from both sides according to straightness until it is possible to align it.
And if you encounter the dislocation of teeth to disruption, then strengthen those that you hope will remain with gold or silver or wax thread; then place cerot over the broken jaw, and then place a doubled cloth over it, and place a well-made bandage or a piece of linen as long as the jaw over the cloth; then bind it according to how you have prepared the binding and apply it appropriately until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and feed them liquid foods through a straw.
And if you suspect that the shape has already been altered in some way, then on the third day, be cautious and unbind it; then correct what has already been altered and apply a plaster made with ground meal, egg white, or sesame flour, after you have removed the cerot from it, and place wool over the plaster.
And then when that plaster is placed and adjusted properly on the area, and the position of the bone has not been altered, leave it there without removing it until it is healed and the fracture has strengthened; for often this kind of fracture tightens in about three weeks.
And if swelling occurs again, then administer what we have said often in the treatment of it until it is healed, and let that swelling be reduced.
And if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, then consider whether it is a fragment of the bone that is separated or splinters; then you must carefully remove those splinters with what is appropriate for their removal from the wound.
And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you should enlarge it with an incision according to your necessary extent.
And then when you have removed those splinters, and the wound is sufficiently reduced, if the opening of the wound is large, sew it up; and if not, apply one of the plasters that is suitable for this purpose to heal the area until it is healed.
Capitol .v.
For the restoration of the collarbone when it is fractured.
Motàs veíguadas es trençada la furcula de la part denant deves le múscule, e aquela fractura es fayta en una de tres maniéyras.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And the operation for that, when the fracture is in the collarbone, is that you have two assistants present, so that one holds the support and follows the broken clavicle, and the other extends the shoulder to that part.
And then align the fracture with your fingers into the shape that is needed, and it should not be on a small prominence or concavity.
And if you need more extension, then you should place a roll under the patient's limb wrapped in cloth or wool, and its size should be according to your necessity; extend and lift the fork and compress the roll with your hand until you align the fracture as needed.
And if you cannot pull the end of the fork to the outer parts because it has reached the shoulder, then the patient should be laid on their back, and place a cushion over the muscle, about halfway in size.
And the assistant should press on the muscle below to elevate the bone of the fork at the shoulder joint, and then you should correct and align the fracture with your fingers.
And if you feel splinters from the fork and they are causing harm, then you must cut over that area and remove those splinters with ease.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you must plan an incision with one of the instruments that you have prepared for this purpose, since you have already placed the forceps on the fulcrum which serves as a lever; and this lever is made of wood or iron and has the following form:
And it is similar to a spoon of which this is the concavity; and its width should be according to what you need from it, according to the size of the bone or the smallness of it.
And let the length of it be as much as is possible for you during the operation; that it have two ends just as you need, and one end be wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you extracted the splinter from the bone is wide, and it is secure from pus formation, then you should bring together the two edges of the wound with sutures.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear pus formation, then you should fill the wound with cloths and poultices according to the extent of the裂伤。为了避免混淆，我将“apostema caut”解释为“pus formation”，因为这符合医学上下文。如果有其他特定的含义或需要更精确的翻译，请告知。
And if an abscess happens to appear, then soak a cloth in sweet wine and rose oil and vinegar, and place it over that area.
And overall, the bandage should not be loose over the broken bone; and therefore you must see the patient every day, so that when the binding is softened or you see the bandage already become loose, then you correct this and strengthen the wrapping.
Then place the patient's head on their pillow, and put under it a small cushion so that during the night, the pillow raises their head slightly from one side; in this way, the support of their shoulder is elevated along with it, thus elevating the clavicle fracture above the muscle; or their arm is tied to their neck.
And do not remove the bandage unless you encounter suppuration or an abscess within twelve days.
Then renew the poultice if you have seen its surface like this, and apply it to the constriction, restore it, and leave it until the clavicle fracture is restored and coagulated.
And it is strengthened and healed according to the method in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some men, it happens in less time.
Chapter VI.
On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
The shoulder blade is fractured on the side and not broken through, but only at the edges.
And therefore when the place is broken — and it is broken in the middle of him — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture force it into preparation and reduce it according to its natural form in every way that is within your ability.
Then apply powder of ground alum and lion's fat over the area; then place a layer of doubled cloth; then apply a thin linen bandage over it according to the quantity of a whole or slightly more than a scoop of the spatula.
But if the bandage leaves a concavity in some parts of the spatula area, then fill that concavity with lion's fat, and then apply the bandage evenly.
Then strengthen it with a long-lasting poultice, apply moderate compression, and secure the bandage in such a way that it does not move from its position.
And examine the binding each day; whenever it becomes softened, bind it again and tighten it, and adjust the bandage if it has moved from its position.
And lay the patient on his side.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
And so when this number is completed, then you dissolve the binding, and you must be certain which of those are bones whose beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you process the site of the bone fracture and place the splint there, then you split it over it, remove it, and proceed as we have said in the fracture of the clavicle; cauterize if an abscess occurs here.
Capitol .vii.
For the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
The foot sometimes breaks in the middle of it and this happens quickly; however, the ends move such that they come together and are reduced.
And of the accidents when the middle part is broken, it declines into the internal parts and causes great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, strong palpitations, and vomiting blood; and it is evident in the cavity where the bone is broken and not hidden from feeling.
And the restoration is that the patient should be laid on their back, and a cushion should be placed between their shoulders; then press their muscles and align their ribs with your hands from both sides, and delicately perform the operation and the realignment in every way possible and appropriate for it, until the bone returns to its proper shape.
Then place an ointment and lint over it, and cover that with a fine linen cloth or calico-like material of similar lightness, as you wrap it in a cloth; then delicately apply that to the fractured bone so that it is not damaged; and bind it around the curvature of the back several times, tightening it appropriately; then keep an eye on the bandage at all times, and when it loosens, tighten it.
And if necessity prompts the removal of that due to corrosion, puncture, pain, or swelling that may occur in the area, then you should untie and remove it, eliminate the ointment, and correct whatever issue arose through methods of treatment; then reapply the ointment if needed for that purpose; and adjust the binding until it is healed.
Capitol .viii.
For the restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
Here is the translation of the given sentence: And knowledge of it is not hidden from the senses; you should investigate it with the said methods.
And the restoration is such that you equalize the fracture with the mentioned methods as possible, within what needs to be aligned properly, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bone with a splint, if needed.
And if the fracture of the ribs is extending inward, then it causes severe pain and puncture-like sensations in the patient, just as punctures occur in one who has pleurisy, and this is because the bone affects the lining; and it leads to difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood; and this condition is difficult to cure.
And already the antidotes have been prepared with various ingredients mixed in.
And of those things I say: one must prevent the patient from consuming foods that cause inflammation and flatulence, so that the stomach does not swell and expand, and the fracture is not pushed outward.
But let us be cautious about this so that it does not easily lead to the formation of an abscess, if it does not already exist; and if it has already occurred, then it aids in addressing this condition.
And some of them said that a suction cup should be placed on it and then squeezed strongly; this seems reasonable, but it is feared that the suction cup might draw the excess substances to the area due to its weakness.
And some of them said: the area must be covered with wool that has already been soaked in hot oil, and cushions should be placed between the ribs until it is filled, such that the binding is like when you wrap that second round part; then treat the patient with a cure for pneumonia using food and medicine.
And if the patient suffers severe constriction that is unbearable, and the bone pierces the membrane with a puncture, we fear for the patient; therefore, it is necessary to cut over the area, expose the broken rib, then place an instrument over it that holds the spine in position, remembering which part comes first, and then cut the bone easily and extract it.
Then we should align the two edges of the wound, if it is large, with sutures, and treat it with plasters until it is healed.
And if an abscess occurs inside, then you should soak and saturate cushions in oiled cloth and place them over the area, and treat the patient with what is necessary for an internal abscess.
And he should lie on his side on which he sleeps until he is healed.
Capitol .ix.
For the restoration of fractures of the vertebrae of the back and neck.
During certain instances, fractures occur in the collarbone's bones, and sometimes in their articulation, and similarly to the vertebrae of the back. And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider, for if their hands are already softened, stunned, and dead, and cannot move them nor stretch nor clench them, and when you squeeze them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and they do not feel pain in them, then you know that they will not be healed, and among the signs of disposition it is mortal.
And if you squeeze them and they feel constriction with your fingers and a prick, then you know that the bone marrow is saved and that the patient can be cured with treatment.
And if this appears in the vertebrae of the neck and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then examine their feet.
And if you find that they are already softened, what happens to the hands will also happen to them, and when he lies on his back, there is windiness and involuntary discharge from him, and sometimes he rolls onto his back wanting to urinate but cannot, then you know that it is mortal, and therefore do not labor in his treatment.
But if none of those causes apply, the cause is better and lighter.
And the cure for it is that you perform the reduction of the abscess by placing over the affected or irritated vertebrae, or with poultices made from eggs; place over that several times a day until the abscess is reduced.
And now place one of the comforting and stimulating plasters, and press it strongly with a bandage; and command the patient to rest and remain calm and not sleep on the part that is painful until it is healed.
And if you find that the scraping of the bone has detached or for some reason it is already separated from it, then it is necessary to dry the wound and remove that bone; then bring together the two edges of the wound, with sutures if it is large; and then treat it with something flesh-forming from the ointments until it is healed.
And if the rear part of the bone in the buttocks, which is the end of the hip bone, is broken, then you must insert the thumb of your left hand into the buttock and align the broken bone as much as possible with the other hand according to the second method of correction; then place a plaster and splint on it if you need those, and bind it firmly.
And if you feel that the sinews are torn inside it, then you should act on that area, remove the torn parts, and treat the wound with the preceding method of treatment until it is healed.
The text provided appears to be in an old Romance language, likely influenced by Medieval Latin with elements of Italian, Spanish, French, and possibly other languages. The term "Capitol .x." refers to a chapter or section number, specifically Chapter 10.
For the translation of the provided line:
The bones of the broad thigh are broken, and if they break, then their fracture is not just at the extremities but extend along their length and slope inward; and the patient feels pain in the area and puncture wounds, and the chest is stunned when it is fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that area which is above the fracture, which is the shape of it.
And if the fracture is only at the extremity of it (the limb), then you align that according to what is appropriate for equalization, so that it resembles its natural form.
And if the fracture is in the spine or has already declined to the parts below, then you make the patient lie on their stomach until you prepare the restoration of that fracture. And then, once you have aligned that, place a plaster on it, and then put a splint of wood or bandage over that, and secure with tight binding where you do not fear any points of fracture or displacement of the splint.
And align the concavity with something that fills it until it takes on an even compression, and instruct the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
And if an inflammatory swelling occurs, then you stop the extension and restoration of it until the swelling is reduced, and place something on it to reduce the swelling as previously described; and then return to its restoration, and secure it as appropriate.
And if the bones are shattered or crushed, then you treat them.
Chapter XI.
For the restoration of the fracture of the auxiliary [bone].
Helper is that which is between the thigh and the head of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then its restoration can be done in one of two ways, the first of which is that you take a flat splint according to this thickness:
And let there be two ligaments at the two ends, and then let it be suspended from an elevated point.
And place the patient on a sheet; then extend their broken arm over the splint so that it reaches the midpoint where the curvature of the splint is attached.
And then suspend something heavy over it, or the servant should extend it to the ends; then the doctor should hold the fracture with their hands until the fracture is properly aligned and set.
The other method is that the patient should be laid back on their head and suspend the arm of the collar with a ligament; then command two servants, one to hold what is above the fracture with their hands, and the other to hold below the fracture; each should extend towards their respective end.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you pull on the fracture with one bandage and on that [fracture] with another bandage, and each of the two assistants pulls from their respective sides.
And so if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then it must be that half of the ligament is placed on the tendon and the other half should be left over the fracture by the knee.
And similarly, if the fracture is near the knee, then it must be that a bandage is placed over that area and over the knee.
Apply that with ease and do the work, and then when it is properly adjusted as needed and applied correctly, strengthen that if an abscess does not accidentally occur.
But if an abscess does occur, then loosen the binding after the seventh day, and place on it clean wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess heals, and then strengthen that area.
And the method to strengthen that area is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then put a bandage of clean cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm with those supports, and place your open hand over their muscle.
And place the cloth and strengthen over the supports the arm so that the arm is in a stable position, unless any cause from the broken bone prohibits this.
And now use splints.
And it is that you place over the fracture that splint which is more bent and stronger than the other splints; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break with an addition of three fingers on both sides.
Then tighten over the splints with the bandage that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your bandage over the site of the fracture should be tighter. And when the fracture is more extended, the bandage should be looser.
And thus you should change the position of the splints and the bandage as we have said at the time when you restore the limb to its proper position.
And if you fear an abscess may form, then you should leave the bandage and splints on until the seventh day as we have said.
Then examine the limb in all parts for three days so that no pus or inflammation may occur in the area; it is also prohibited for food [or blood flow] to reach the limb due to the constriction of excessive bandaging; therefore, correct everything according to what we have said.
If you are uncertain that there is no cause for this, then do not loosen the ligature until three days or more have passed.
And let the patient's body lie on its back, with their hands placed upon their stomach.
And place over the splint a pad full of wool evenly, and be mindful at all times, day or night, that the shape of the broken limb is not loosened or dissolved, or that the bandage becomes too loose; therefore, correct this entirely with your skill.
And provide the patient's food according to the order we mentioned before, in such a way that the food is light at the beginning while it starts to strengthen; and then you must gradually make the food more substantial for them.
For it is customary that the splint and the bandage remain tight for forty days; and afterwards, they must be loosened, and a bath should be administered and treated with ointments that correct that condition.
And if the fracture is a severe grind (comminuted), then you should not loosen the bandage and the splints until forty days or up to two months.
The given line appears to be indicating a chapter or section title in what seems like an old text. Here's how it can be translated:
For the restoration of a fractured arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called the radius and ulna; of which one is smaller, and it is the one that connects to the thumb, and the other is larger and is the one placed below the small finger, on the part closer to the wrist.
And often only the larger bone is broken, or the smaller one, and often both are broken together.
And when the smaller bone above is broken, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is even easier.
And when the bone is broken below, then the fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And worse than that is when two bones are broken together.
Therefore, if the broken bone is the smaller upper bone, then it is appropriate for the doctor to restore it with slight extension easily before it heals.
But if the larger bone is the one that is broken, then it is necessary to apply more forceful extension.
And if both bones are broken together, then you must apply even stronger traction.
And you must place your hand in the proper position for its restoration and extension over a cushion, with the wrist of the hand at the upper parts more so than all other fingers, and the little finger lower than the others, and the patient should be seated on a low stool.
And let there be a cushion in front of him at his height or upright position, so that the patient does not move around.
Then the minister extends the arm from the lower part with his hand or with bandages, and another minister extends it similarly above.
Then the doctor should realign the bone as he returns it to its best possible position.
And if there is doubt in the setting of the bone, then you must carefully reduce every piece to its proper place with your skill.
And if it appears separated with doubt that the joint is dislocated and there is no hope for restoration, then you should work on it and treat it according to the method we have described above.
But if the fracture is accompanied by inflammation, I have already made a separate chapter on this, so follow the treatment outlined there.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should soak a cloth with a wax made from oiled and white beeswax, which is of medium thickness between thick and thin, and place a strong cloth over it with a fine bandage until the abscess yields; then remove the wax and apply a plaster prepared with ground powder and egg whites, and then apply straps; and let the strap that is placed over that fracture be more on the side and stronger.
And you should know that the number of bones in the arm is seen in major dispositions, or rather a fracture in one part or two parts together.
And then apply your bandage firmly and forcefully on the fracture site, and if the bandage slips upwards from the fracture or downwards from it, adjust the bandage slightly looser according to how it was initially applied at the beginning of this chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, and not hard or rough, and the thread with which it is bound should be of the proper thickness between fine and thick, as we have recommended.
And examine the limb and the joint after a few days. And if any cause occurs that requires correction, such as inflammation that affects the limb, and now it is necessary to soak the limb in warm water until that inflammation subsides.
And leave the limb unstrained until it rests, and then reapply the bandage.
And if the bandage is already softened and the bone is properly set and resembles its original state, then correct everything with your skill.
And consider whether nutrition is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive constriction, for then you must slightly soften that area and leave it for several days until the nutrition can flow there, and then strengthen that area.
But if in the patient there is none of those causes that we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to perform the procedure within about twenty days or around that time.
Then the arm of the patient should be suspended due to its restless movement, and make the patient sleep on their back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or in thirty-two days, or it is often restored in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the condition of the compounds and the disposition of the healing power.
Chapter XIII.
On the restoration of fractures of the wrist and fingers.
Know that the wrist of the hand and the knuckles of the fingers can indeed be fractured, and such injuries are often due to sudden impacts or blows.
And when the hand is fractured or broken, then it is necessary for the patient to follow a regimen and place splints in front of it according to equality, and then place the hand on that which is extended.
And then the minister extends the broken bones and the doctor aligns those that are disjointed with good alignment.
And now it is necessary to place a plaster and wadding, if you do not want an abscess to form from the cautery; then cover it with a cloth according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in linen.
And if the fracture is inside the palm of the abdomen, then make a kind of ball out of cloth, and instruct the patient to hold that with their fractured hand; then bind it with long cloth.
And let the stomach be lifted with cloth underneath it, so that the belly is applied to the palm; and press it according to what is needed.
And if the fracture is on the outer part, then it is necessary to place two splints under the broken area, holding them in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; and then apply the bandage, just as the hand is turned towards the little finger between the fingers with ligaments.
And if a fracture occurs in one of the bones of the fingers, then if it is a bent finger, adjust it as needed and then press it with the palm; if you wish, place a small straight splint on it so that the fracture is raised and not crushed.
But if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as in the middle finger, or the index finger, or the ring finger, or the little finger, then it should be aligned and bound with the adjacent finger; or all can be bound continuously, which is better; or place a small splint on it, just as we have said for the bent finger.
And consider, in your restoration, and then that one, the disposition of a hot abscess and its opposition — with your operation — concerning what is needed when any cause of those occurs, according to which the narration is repeated.
Capitol .xiv.
For the restoration of a fracture of the thigh bone.
The bone of the thigh is broken and is felt to change position as it shifts toward the front and to the highest swelling.
And the restoration is done thus: the bandage is tightened over the fracture and another bandage is placed under the fracture, and the patient is laid face down on their stomach.
And then the minister (likely referring to a medical practitioner) extends the entire limb to its proper position according to its nature, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
And if it is applied at the root of the thigh, then the limb should be brought down to the level of the pubis, so that the extension goes inward, and the other limb leaves the fracture.
And similarly, if the fracture is near the elbow, then the bandaging should be done close to the elbow, and the extension should be made toward the parts below it.
Then the doctor equalizes the bone with both hands before reducing it to its natural shape and the bone is joined by a good union; then it is necessary to apply a plaster and binding, unless an abscess has occurred in the limb. But if an abscess does occur, then you leave it for several days until the abscess naturally bursts and drains, and then you return to your treatment.
The binding should be done as follows: you must wrap a hard bandage around the fracture, fold it two or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap the thigh until you reach the ankle and the root of the knee.
And insert a long strip of cloth between the knee and the thigh near the elbow toward the lower parts; let the ends of the strip come out at the highest part of the two areas, then wrap around the thigh and the knee what remains of the bandage.
And then place over the thigh in the location of that fracture some splints, and place one splint on the bone of the leg.
And then fill the spaces between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the constriction is alleviated.
And then begin with strong binding in the middle over the location of the fracture with three or four wraps, and as you move away from the area of the fracture, make your binding looser and lighter and softer.
And then extend the two ends of the bandage to the areas between until it reaches the ankle of the foot, and tighten both ends of the splints on the other side so that the binding does not move from its position.
And then apply the binding in such a way that it does not cause any corrosion, inflammation, swelling, or similar issues to the limb; and if any of these conditions occur, then loosen the binding, and correct whatever has occurred as soon as possible, according to what we have said many times.
If there is a piece of bone in the wound that protrudes, then you must clean it as much as possible; and if not, cover it with something and remove it, treating it in such a way that healing begins before it is completely healed.
And sometimes this thigh fracture is treated by setting it with splints, just as we have said in the helper and in the arm.
But however in the restoration of him in such a manner made do not cause the patient to limp; and if it is restored alone, besides which something else should be applied to the other side, then it is necessary that he limps who is always affected.
And know that the thigh is strong in forty days or a little more or a little less, and all of this depends on the diversity of the complexions and of the other dispositions.
Capitol .xv.
For the restoration of the fracture of the collarbone.
Understand that a fracture of the kneecap can occur rarely, but it often happens in scattered cases.
And if you encounter a fracture, then it is not just a crack or bruise in its parts, and this can be one wound or several wounds, and over all of this has been the feeling.
And the restoration of it is such that what has been broken in its parts should be aligned and joined together where it can be added and conjoined as much as possible by means of equalization, facilitation, and construction.
And then apply a plaster and place it over that round spot if you need to do so; and bind it tightly with a bandage suitable for this purpose.
And then consider all the treatments we have recommended for other fractures, such as applying a cautery to an abscess and similar procedures that are applied to any accident with what is appropriate until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the restoration of a fracture in the thigh.
Know that in the thigh there are two bones, of which one is thick and is named for the thigh itself; the other is slender and is called the fibula.
And it happens to some types of fractures that what happens to the two bones of the arm also occurs, and thus the restoration of it is done in the same way as the restoration of the arm, and its operation is the same.
And if both bones are broken together, the thigh is displaced in all directions.
And if the bone is fractured more finely, the chest is turned towards the parts in front.
And if the thickest bone is broken, you will find that out, and it is one of those causes that are not within your control.
And then administer extension, equalization, and ligature of the splints according to that alignment.
However, if the leg fracture is slight with small fragments, the extension should be less and lighter, and alleviate it with your strength.
And in the leg, there is sometimes a reason for an operation on the arm, which is when you align the splints and complete your entire procedure. At that time, you will take wooden pieces from pine trees, which are placed under the causes that are placed on supports, and they are made somewhat like palm branches; choose those with small thickness, not too large, and their length should be according to the length of the leg, and from the knee to the foot.
And then wrap each piece of cloth in two layers according to its length, and place one layer over the part of the leg on one side and the other on the other side, extending from the knee down to the base area of the foot.
And then bind the two splints at three points of both ends and in the middle, because with this structure, the leg is prevented from tilting to the right or left side, and remains in proper position.
And already a wooden board according to the length of the chest has been administered; and it is placed on the patient's chest to prevent any movement.
And it is especially necessary that you do this in a fracture, and when with that, it is properly called a plague.
And then consider every day the chest and study with that which has been previously studied, and you guard against abscesses and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any of those causes occur, then apply to it whatever is necessary until it is healed.
It seems like you've provided a chapter or section heading from an older text, likely a medieval manuscript or an early printed book. The heading "Capitul .xvii." indicates that this is the 17th chapter or section of the work in question. Without additional context or content from the chapter, it's not possible to provide further translation or explanation. If you have specific lines or paragraphs from this chapter that need translation or interpretation, please share them and I will assist you accordingly.
This line translates to:
At the ankle, not all fractures occur; but in the bones of the foot, fractures do happen occasionally; and in the toes of the foot, few fractures occur, and none happen to them except for attrition in the joints of disposition.
And if the bones of the foot are fractured and sometimes those bones need to be elevated above each other within them, then the patient should place their foot on the prepared ground as follows.
Then place the foot on what is elevated of those bones, and then compress them, press, and align them back into their proper places.
Then apply a plaster and bandage over it, and place a small board with two rounded ends under the sole of the foot.
Then secure the foot with a proper structure, as you have wrapped it with cloths and other materials that are necessary.
And after three or four days have passed, then you untie the bandage, for you will find the bones aligned, whether they were broken or dislocated, and the operation on them is thus as you know.
But if some of the toes are broken, then restore them and align them as I have taught you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. And then place the fractured finger under a splint according to the length of the finger, and position it slightly to one side; and then lay the foot on that table which is recommended to you, and secure it with a proper binding.
And if what is fractured are two or three or more bones, then place on each finger a splint of its quantity wrapped in linen cloth, and secure the splint at the lowest part of the foot, and it should be standing on one end of the table so that you pierce the sole of the foot to ensure it has good retention.
And it is important for you not to forget that you should not consider all the causes which have been mentioned to you in other fractures and accidents we have discussed; and apply yourself to each accident with what is necessary.
Capitol .xviii.
Regarding fractures of the female chin and of the male penis bone and member:
When the neck of the woman is broken, then make that cut in the loosened area, and then tilt her to one side of the back a little, and she should be held from behind.
And then the midwife fills the container with broth, and it is done in his bowels just as hoped; and then the woman is shaken, and raise the back of the child little by little, for all this is forgotten until it reaches the opening of the bowel just as hoped and the broken bone returns.
And then place pillows under his back, and when he needs to urinate, turn him easily onto his side so that he can urinate, and afterwards return him according to the manner in which you initially positioned him, and then return him to his original pillow.
And do this for seven days or around that time, for he is being restored.
And if you want, take a sheep's bladder and attach a reed tube to the urethra; insert the entire bladder into the penis, and then blow into the tube with force until the bladder is inflated inside the penis, for the fracture will return to its proper place.
And then it should be filled with a poultice and kept for several days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the thigh in a man or woman is broken, then administer its restoration and fixation according to what we have recommended for the hip bone.
And what is right is not hidden in these rare and nearby fractures, especially for one who has some study and experience and understands my writings; for this fracture signifies to you the greatest opportunities for correct treatment in its restoration and binding, and thus understand well.
And when the man's penis is frostbitten, take some goose fat, and put the penis in it; then cover it with a cloth wrapping, keep it wrapped up, leave it like that for three days or so, and it will be healed.
Chapter XIX.
For the restoration of fractures of the bones when it is from an injury.
It is convenient for those to whom a fracture with swelling occurs, and especially if the bone is large like the femur or the humerus, or similar to these, that you should care for it and perform trepanation immediately if the conditions for trepanation are favorable to you as we have said above.
And if the wound flows with blood, then you must take care of stopping it by sprinkling powdered earth over the wounded area, if there is no other remedy available.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that same day, and do not prolong this, unless an abscess occurs.
But if an abscess occurs, then you should delay the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess has been reduced, and do not approach it on the third and fourth days, for you will cause bad accidents.
But if the broken bone protrudes above the skin, then you must reduce and align it with your hands easily and with little extension.
But if you are not prepared to extend and align it with your hands, then you should reduce it with this instrument; the instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight digits, and its width according to the size of the injury; therefore, it is necessary for the doctor to have three or four of these, depending on what is needed for treatment in all types of fractures.
And it should be round and have little thickness so that it does not bend when applying pressure on it during the operation.
And it has an acute extremity where its edges are at the ends; and the upper part of it is generally thick throughout, and from the middle part into the divisions.
And this is its form:
And it is named in Greek "voluntary hernia", which is a kind of rupture.
Therefore, it is necessary that the extremity of the limb be raised above the prominent part of the bone.
And push that in at once so that the bone returns, and it should be aligned with some adjustment.
And therefore strive to align the ends of the fracture together, and if the broken end is delicate and does not accept the instrument properly, then you must incise the end of that bone so that the instrument may have power over it.
And if you cannot reduce the bone completely as we have recommended, then incise it with whichever of the incisors we have mentioned is suitable for it; or cut it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
Then smooth out what remains of roughness and small splinters on the bone.
And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction the patient experiences intense pain, then you should know that the bone has not been returned to its natural position; and then do what you can to greatly aid the patient.
When your restoration of the bone is complete, then soak a cloth in black styptic wine, and especially if it is summer, do not place cerot or any other substance containing oil on the wound, so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption.
And then administer poultices at the time of the peak of the bone's restoration, and leave the wound uncovered so that you can cut away the scab with scissors and use bandages according to the extent of the wound.
And be cautious to not strain the wound with the fracture, for many times foolish doctors have done this, causing their patients to suffer death or a corrosive or festering illness, which is gangrene. And if your fracture is light, flexible, different from the other fractures.
And if the wound is large or it is a bad wound, and you fear the various accidents we have mentioned, and you find pain in the area, then do not leave poultices on it, but instead use a bandage of hard cloths instead of poultices and bind it tightly with those.
And after one or two days when the wound begins to generate pus, then you should remove the cloth that you had placed over it, and then apply plasters, ointments with which it is our custom to treat wounds, such as tetrapharmacon and similar ones.
And it is necessary for you to loosen the bandage and examine the wound each morning and evening until it is consolidated and stabilized, and it must be prepared in such a way that pus can flow from it to other parts easily.
If many days have passed since the wound occurred, and it has not healed nor separated from the arm, then you know that there are small signs of corruption for which you must investigate the wound with a probe. And of those signs of corruption, those that are separated should be removed and extracted. Those that do not separate and cause the limb to swell and bring about pain, you must incise them according to what is possible for you.
And if you encounter in the wound gangrene or mortification, which is stiomenios or another kind of corruption and putrefaction, then it is necessary to treat each one with what is appropriate for it, as is described previously in its own chapter.
And on this matter where my speech must focus and you should pay close attention: when a large bone is fractured, elevate the limb as you would for the thigh and lower leg, similar to how you treat larger limbs. Do not assume traction or extraction too often, as these can lead to death; instead, leave what remains inside to decay, as it will eventually fall out on its own within 20 or 30 days. Then treat the wound if you see that it needs attention, and if not, leave it be.
The line "Capitul .xx." appears to be indicating the start of chapter or section number 20 in the medieval medical treatise. It doesn't have a direct translation into English but can be interpreted as:
For the given sentence:
Motals visible appear this swelling in the trace of fracture healing, and more so near the joints, which distorts the shape of the limb; therefore, you prohibit the limb from its natural movement.
Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer among those medicines that have astringent properties such as alum, ash, myrtle, cicely, gallnuts, and similar ones; in this way take some or all of these, and boil them with vinegar that has astringent qualities, or with egg white, or with sweet wine, and place that on the swelling using lint, and bind those over it with a good constriction.
And leave the constriction for several days without loosening it; then loosen that and repeat another binding until the swelling is reduced; or apply a piece of lead lightly over it, because lead has the property to reduce anything inflated in the limbs.
But if the swelling has already turned into a hard mass and is constricted, and it is necessary to carefully remove that, then cut through the highest part of it, and excise the excess and protruding parts, or reduce it using warm poultices until it is diminished; and care for it until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the restoration of a fracture when it is set and then the limb remains delicate and does not heal according to its natural course.
When a bone fracture is restored, and the limb remains thin and weak, this does not happen without cause: one of which is an excess of solution in the ligament and inadequate ligation; or due to excessive tightness of the ligaments that prohibit nutrition from reaching the limb; or by excessive embrocation; or by unnecessary movement at inappropriate times; or by a lack of blood in the patient's body and their weakness.
And the treatment for this is to feed the patient and make their heart tender until the blood multiplies within them; administer baths; and introduce joy and happiness to them.
Then place a poultice on the limb so that the poultice attracts nourishment to it, or continue to apply a warm water embrocation until the nutrition flows and returns to its natural state.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of fractured bones that have healed crookedly and preventing the necessary operation on them.
When you encounter a limb already restored near the healing of it from curvature and prominence at the broken bone and knotting, and this is due to the deformity of the shape of the limb, yet the limb is not hindered in its natural function, then there is no need for you to heed the words of those who think that limb has been newly broken.
And there are indeed foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is greatly reproachable, leading to great fear, the sign of which is mortal.
But if the lameness and knotting are recent, then they must be treated with tepid water in which mollifying herbs are boiled, such as the leaves of celery and its roots, and mallows, and similar ones; and it should be made into a poultice with a mollifying plaster like well-made dyallaquilon; or take the mucilage from the root of celery and mix it with pigeon droppings or oil of cerami, and apply it as a poultice with that; or take fat figs and grind them with pigeon droppings, and similar medicines used for strengthening consolidation.
And sometimes it is dissolved with frequent light friction that should be done with moist hands, and the movement of the limb should be administered to all parts at all times.
Here is the translation of the sentence you provided:
Capitol .xxiii.
Of speaking on dislocation.
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e fa venir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.
Therefore, when you encounter a dislocation, it is necessary to immediately attempt to reduce it, and do not delay the reduction, for if delayed, the area becomes inflamed and the joint swells, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
And for this reason, it should not be massaged or stretched during the time of inflammation, because doing so can cause spasms and increase pain.
When this occurs, you must prepare for the surgery of the patient, and then wait until the inflammation subsides; afterwards, the limb should be anointed with warm water and oil, and then it can be reduced easily.
And every limb should be treated in such a way that its proper function returns to its natural state.
And I have already ordered the chapters of dislocation as they proceed in fractures; from the part of the body most superior to the one that is lower.
Capitol .xxiiii.
For the translation of the given medieval medical text:
So dislocated the two jaws do not snap; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two methods: either they are moved slightly from their positions and softened a little; or they are completely dislocated in full, between which saliva flows out of the patient and they cannot hold it nor can they close their mouth, and the tongue of the patient is wrapped up in their words.
When the dislocation is slight, it often returns to its proper position with little cause in most cases.
But if the dislocation is complete and total, then it must be gently reduced right away, and should not be delayed at all.
And it is that the minister holds the head of the patient, and the doctor inserts the thumb of one hand into the area of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth of the patient if the dislocation is on one side; or the doctor inserts both thumbs together if the dislocation is on both sides, while the other fingers of the hand are outside equalizing them; and the doctor commands the patient to relax their jaws and allow them to move from each side; and the doctor equalizes the jaw and pushes it until it returns to its place.
And if the reduction of it is difficult, and especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer an evaporation with hot water and oil until the reduction of both is gently made, and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
And when they are returned to their place and aligned, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, then apply a cloth soaked in wax over them, made with wax and oil rubbed together; and then bind it gently with moistened linen.
And let the patient sleep on their back, and their head should be placed between two pillows, so that it does not turn to the right or left; and do not force them to chew anything; rather, their food should be finely chopped, until such time as the pains subside and the jaws are relaxed, then let them eat what they wish.
And this should be administered with ease, and do not work against the opening of the mouth by forcing food and drink and spitting, until the jaw is relaxed and healed.
And if it is difficult to reduce two dislocated jaws when they are out of place and do not return to their proper positions, then often fevers occur frequently and there is continuous sweating, and the patient’s belly becomes strongly distended, and they vomit pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of impending death; and often the one to whom this happens dies within ten days.
Chapter XXV.
Of the reduction of the dislocation of the shoulder and of the extremity of the muscle.
The shoulder is not dislocated inward due to its continuation with the arm; and sometimes it is dislocated outward, and this is evident by feeling.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms. Then compress the area with your palm using strong pressure, for it will return.
Then place an ointment and poultice on that area and apply it firmly.
However, the extremity that connects to the elbow and continues from it is not dislocated at any time; therefore, it must be reduced and aligned as we have said and according to your equipment.
Then apply an ointment and poultice, and bind it tightly, and instruct the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until they are healed.
And with this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is returned to its place when it has been separated from its location.
It seems like you've provided a chapter or section title, "Capitul .xxvi.", which in English would translate to "Chapter XXVI." Without further text to work with, this appears to be the heading for the twenty-sixth chapter of a document, likely an old manuscript given the style. If you have additional text from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to share!
On the reduction of muscle dislocation.
Know that the muscle is dislocated in only three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated at the junction of the tendon to its attachment point.
And the second is when it is dislocated at the upper part of the muscle, and this happens rarely; and it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in front by the nerves.
And it is most often dislocated outward at the lower parts of the tendon, especially in those whose muscles have little flesh, where it dislocates easily; but in those with more flesh, it is displaced outward with difficulty.
And it often happens that some people suffer from a blow or fall, and the muscle of theirs becomes swollen with a hot swelling, and is considered to be dislocated by this.
Then it is necessary that you proceed with this while you are properly positioned above them, and then continue with the treatment of them.
And it is known that the dislocation occurs when there are deviations in the normal flickering of the limb; therefore, you can distinguish between a dislocated muscle and a healthy one, because you will find clear differences between them; and at the head of the dislocated muscle, you will find a concavity where touching the head of the muscle feels like an egg, and the patient cannot bring their hand to their ear or move it in any way.
And if the foot or its parts are dislocated, you will find a clear touch, and it is not hidden.
And this dislocation is easily reduced when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
And the reduction of it is that the minister raises the limb above its joint; then place your thumbs below the limb, and raise the joint forcefully back to its proper position, and the minister raises the limb, extends it upwards, and then places it down so that it returns easily.
But if it does not return by the methods we have mentioned and has been dislocated for several days since the initial occurrence, then the patient should be bathed in warm water and given an emollient that softens and loosens, similar to a decoction of elder flowers, fenugreek, and mallows in water, which should be administered.
And then the patient is laid down on their back and placed under the soft woolen cushion that is balanced between lightness and firmness, and then the doctor places his foot on the sphere, and raises the head of the muscle with strength, and holds the patient’s hand so it is not strained at the joints below, and another assistant holds the patient's head so it is not strained at the joints below, for that [position] quickly returns to its proper place.
And if you wish, reduce that swelling in this manner: and it is that you should have present a man who is taller than the patient, standing on the side of that area, and interposes his muscle under the hernia of the patient and raises the hernia upwards so that the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the sides below his belly. If the patient is light, then it must be suspended by something else that causes weight to be added, so as to pull down on him, because the dislocation returns quickly.
And it is reduced according to another method: and this involves planting a long pole in the ground with its head rounded in shape, like a mortar pestle, neither too thick nor too thin, then placing the patient on top of it; then placing lion's cloth over the head of the pole, so that the patient stands along the length of the pole, and then extending one arm towards the ground from the opposite side; and stretching out the body strongly from the other side because the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if it is difficult to reduce it due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this treatment: take a stick whose length should be two arms' lengths, and its width should be four fingers, and its thickness should be light enough in proportion to the tip like this:
And then place linen cloths over the round head so that the fire does not harm the patient.
And then place the pillow under the patient's head, and extend the hand or arm over the splint between their parts, and bind the splint to the helper and the arm and the extremity of the hand.
And place the arm on a step of a ladder according to the latitude, and the hand should be extended towards the sides, and the other body part should be suspended from the other side, because the joint will be set soon.
And when the instrumentation of him is completed according to whatever manner that is possible for you, and then it is necessary that you place upon him a thin strip of wool of equal quantity; and then apply a plaster prepared with powdered mallow seeds and egg white over all the muscle, thus covering it above, and then strengthen the thin strip with an appropriate binding; and the bandage should be wrapped around the plaster, and his hand should be attached to his neck, and it should be left alone, and his hand should not be moved for seven days.
And it is necessary that the food of the patient be reduced until the limb is strengthened, for it is better for the recovery of him.
And then the food should be gradually increased over seven or five days and exercise should be undertaken; and if it is stabilized and not softened, then he is healed.
But if the joint is dislocated multiple times due to humidity that affects him or by another cause, then it is necessary to apply a cautery with three burns, as previously stated in the chapter on cauterization.
And if all this is done and after seven days the bandage is removed and the joint is not healed, and the plaster and the constriction are reapplied several times but it does not heal and hangs down and cannot raise that arm to parts above, then you know that the nerves of him, which are at the head of the muscle, have already been cut or stretched or softened, and understand that the joint will never be properly set in its place.
Regarding the dislocation that occurs in the feet and ankle or the parts behind it, the reduction is done with impulse and extension using the hands until it returns to its proper place.
And another constriction should be applied there, and care for it until it is healed.
And if during the healing you notice heaviness in the limb and slowness in its movement, then the patient should use baths several times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original natural state.
Chapter XXVII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the knee.
Know that the joint of the knee is dislocated with difficulty and likewise returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all directions, more so at the front part than behind, and the dislocation of it is not hidden from you when you see or touch it according to whatever figure it is dislocated, and when you adjust the dislocated knee with your hand, this is clearly evident to you, for the joint becomes concave and cannot bend the leg, nor can it touch its own muscle.
And it is necessary that you cool it and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before an abscess forms, for if an abscess does form, the reduction becomes difficult, and the limb will not be fully healed; especially when it is behind, for it is worse than all other types of dislocations, more painful, and often leads to death with it.
And the restoration of it, when it is one that can be reduced, is to extend the limb with two hands, and expand the arm, placing the doctor’s hands on the knee and pushing the joint with the tips of his fingers together, or with the edge of his palm until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it by bending the arm with their hand, until you hit the elbow with the edge of your palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey to the reduction, then administer strong extension and forceful motion.
And it is such that two ministers extend the arm, and two ministers hold that limb so that the extension is not hindered.
Then the arm should be rotated in all directions, since it is wrapped with a long folded cloth over his hand or bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint that area with some oil so that it facilitates the causes that help in lubricating the joint; then forcefully push the joint with a strong thrust until it returns to its place.
Then for the reduction of a dislocated shoulder, it should be placed on a padded support where there is styptics and poultice with egg white, and it should be pulled with a downward traction, and the arm should be suspended by the neck, and left like this for several days.
Then it should be loosened; and if the joint is returned to its proper place, then you untie the bandage from it and leave it.
And if you see that the joint is not well healed, then repeat the plaster and the bandaging, and leave it for several days until it is fully healed; and then remove it.
And if you encounter serious issues near the reduction of the joint, and its position is in motion, then administer moistening through baths and gentle friction, and compression until it is alleviated; or place an immobilizer over the joint to stop the movement, which is a matter of fatty motion; and then bandage it, leaving it on the bone day and night. And then remove that, and place it in a bath; when it is soaked, then rub the joint with moderate friction, and then apply an immobilizer over it again, which is for joint movement, once, and the second time, and the third time. using immersion in a bath until it is softened.
And if you wish, place a moist and scraped cowhide over it and bind it tightly; do this several times, as the moisture will help to return it to its proper position.
Capitol .xxviii.
For the treatment of a dislocation of the shoulder, which is the joint between the arm and the hand.
When the hand or sometimes other joints are dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is easy, but the opposite is true for other joints. However, it must be done quickly in reducing it at the time when it is dislocated, before the area becomes inflamed or an abscess forms there.
And the reduction of the dislocation is that you place the joint of the patient's arm on a table and the assistant extends that arm, and the doctor places his hand or palm over the prominence of the joint, and pushes it until it returns to its proper place.
However, it must be considered that if the palm is already dislocated from the wrist, then the patient should place the back of their hand on a table for the extension and reduction; and if the dislocation is prior to the back of the hand, then the position of the hand should naturally be on the table so that the doctor's hand can press over the prominence of the joint.
And if it returns immediately, that is good; and if not, then strengthen that area with a soft bandage after reducing the swelling and leave it alone; do not repeat this procedure, because if you do, it will neither withstand nor allow for the reduction of pus accumulation over the coming days.
However, if the joint remains twisted; and you find no other cause in the patient except that the hand is weakened and cannot be strengthened, then know that the nerves are either cut or torn. In this case, there is no remedy but to strengthen it with a cautery near the injury, and thus you provide some relief.
Therefore, when the dislocation has been returned, then place over it the bandage we have recommended, and let it be left and tightened for five days; and then it should be loosened and left, and the hand of the patient should be exercised.
If the movement of the patient is restricted and you encounter some gravity or heaviness in them, then relieve that with warm water and friction several times until it is alleviated.
It seems like you've provided a chapter or section heading from an ancient text, likely related to a medical treatise given the context of your previous request. The heading "Capitul .xxix." translates to "Chapter 29" in English. If you have more content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to share!
This phrase translates to:
At certain times, the joints are dislocated in all parts.
And when any finger of those on the back or palm side is dislocated, then grasp the finger and push the dislocation back into place with your hands until it returns to its proper position.
Then support the tip of the finger and leave the part that was dislocated suspended, and keep it like that for two days.
Then suspend and extend it until it is properly straightened on that same day.
And when it is not straight, loosen it according to that method, and do not cease to loosen it during the day and exercise it with movement, and loosen it at night as well; do this for several days until it is straight.
And do the same if it is dislocated on the palm side of the hand; loosen it in that area and perform this as your first operation until it is healed.
And similarly do the same when it is dislocated in other areas.
Capitol .xxx.
For the given line:
When a complete dislocation of any of the vertebrae in the back or neck occurs and several vertebrae are displaced from their positions, then there is no cure for that condition, because death awaits the patient.
And the sign of this is that the excretion of the patient is expelled beyond their will, and they cannot retain it; and often some of the patient's limbs or one side of their body or both arms or one of them are weakened; or a vertebra is dislocated from its place, for often it is dislocated and often the relocation of those [vertebrae] to their proper places occurs.
Therefore, that area is already inflamed behind and is called gout.
And here is the translation of the given sentence:
More in those that come from trauma or by percussion or similar to these, the Ancients have spoken extensively about methods of cure with long-winded speeches, most of which return with little benefit; but I have already summarized that which excuses brevity due to excess, by my proximity to my own understanding, with which I have explained and formed this from various instruments different from those with which they would show and explain these.
And of those conditions, none are cured except for that which occurs properly on the skin with what I recommend.
And it is that the patient should be laid face down on a soft pillow near the wall, and their legs should be stretched out below them with a moist dressing so that the feet are not hurt.
Then a straight pole should be placed, fixed in the ground at the head end of the pillow near his head, and another pole at the foot end of the pillow near his feet.
And the minister holds the rod, and it should not be fixed in a socket; and another minister holds the other end according to that form.
And then wrap around the head of the patient and leave the titillating ligament firmly in place; extend the extremity of the ligament to the post which is at the head of the bed, and tie that one there; then tighten another ligament over the hips and legs of the patient, and secure the chest; then adjust all the ligaments and tie those to another post which is at the feet of the patient.
And then the minister should extend the ligaments at the joint of the bone, and do not leave the two bones and the ligaments in their fixed places without being fastened as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or he places them on a table, and then he adjusts his feet on the table until it returns.
But if it does not return by this method, then take a table the length or width of which is about three arms' lengths, and cut into the wall near the patient a space in which the end of the table can fit. And then place half of the table on the vertebra, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and pulls strongly so that the vertebra is straightened and returns to its proper place.
And if you want to, use a handle that is turned by hand; and it should be such that you place the head of the patient between the rear ends of two posts, the length of which should be one arm's length, and you place the head in the space between the rear ends of two more posts; and the distance between each post should be a palm, and already there is a hole made in each post through which the handle turns, and each post should be firmly fixed to the ground so that it does not move.
And let there be one round post in which the handle is placed, and it should rotate in the two holes of the two posts.
And at the end of it, there is a hole in which the post is fitted, the length of which is one palm including what rotates; and the two other posts are similarly constructed.
And then tighten the ropes that you have stretched on the feet of the patient at the hole where his head is placed, and the ropes that you have fastened on his thighs at the handle where his feet are placed.
And then each turn should have a minister who turns the crank with their hand, and the doctor applies the splint as we have said.
And when the vertebra is returned to its place and the area is leveled, then it is necessary to apply a dry poultice with egg white, and also tow; and then place on the poultice strips of cloth whose width should be about three fingers or around that size, and the length of which should cover the area where the dislocation was, and over the part of the vertebra itself.
And then it should be bandaged with the bandage we have mentioned, and the patient should be given subtle nutrition until they are healed.
And if any prominence remains in the area at the end of the healing process, then it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and dissolve, using the application of the board we have recommended for a long time; and already a plate of lead is applied to that area.
And sometimes prominence occurs at the back of the spinal vertebrae, and it is caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone which protrudes so much that you should not apply this medicine to it, for it could cause fatal harm.
Capitol .xxxi.
For the translation of the given medieval medical text line:
Know that the joint of the bone and the joint of the muscle can only be dislocated, not fractured, and do not treat those in the same way as you would treat other joints with minor displacement and indentation.
And the joint of the ankle is dislocated in four ways, for it is dislocated inward, or outward, or forward, or backward.
And it is most often dislocated inward, and rarely forward or backward.
And the sign of dislocation inward is that when you align the leg of the sick person with the healthy one, it appears longer and the heel is more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their foot towards the little toe, and this is where the swelling due to inflammation occurs, so that the head of the thigh bone has already reached here.
And the sign of dislocation outward is that the symptoms are contrary to those [of inward dislocation].
And the sign of dislocation forward is that the leg extends completely, but it cannot bend at the painful area in the heel, and if one attempts to move it forward, it cannot; the urine is retained, and the ankle swells due to inflammation, and movement is restricted towards the sole.
And the sign of one to whom a dislocation in the rear parts has happened is that he cannot extend his leg, nor can he bend the front part before bending the knee, and the thigh on that side is shorter than the other, and the knee is softened, and the head of the thigh bone is displaced from its proper place.
More on the treatment of this type of dislocation is that you consider, now, if the dislocation is old and ancient, which has already been established with having examined it closely, you administer reduction to it and leave it according to its condition; however, it is not in full recovery at that point; therefore, there should be no hastiness in its treatment.
But in the case where the dislocation is recent and belongs to one of the four types of dislocation, you must be careful to return the joint to its original position by extending it inward and outward, and moving it left and right, for it will strongly return to its proper place and requires no further treatment.
However, if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong assistant and extend the arm of the patient from below, either by their hands or with a bandage that is tied over the arm above the elbow; another assistant extends the hand of the patient upwards so that they hold the patient's wrist from below; then tightly bind a leather strap over the armpit, and have another assistant hold the end of the strap.
And extend it or the part within towards the armpit area, or towards the back from the shoulder blade area.
And let there be an extension of all these at once within which the patient is elevated with their body off the ground and remains hanging.
And this kind of extension is common to all four.
And therefore, if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then in every special case, it is necessary to speak of the proper treatment.
In the reduction of the dislocation, when it is displaced inward, the patient should be made to lie on their side; then place the ligaments over the edge of the thigh in that spot which is between the head of the thigh and where the kneecap is located; then extend the ligament upwards from the area of the knee to the higher part of the fork (likely referring to the hip joint or a similar anatomical structure).
And then another minister should firmly take the arms of the patient, and apply pressure to the thick area of the thigh of the patient and extend outward forcefully, because that will return it to its proper place.
And this type is a lighter cure with which this member is reduced compared to the other types.
And if it is excused on you and you do not obey this type of treatment entirely, then the feet of the patient must be tied together with strong, light binding over both ankles and both toes.
And let the length of each thigh be the quantity of four fingers, and let the sick person's chest be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
And then the patient should be suspended over the head of the post, and it should be in the house; and the length from the ground should be the quantity of two arm-spans.
And then command a strong young man to press the head of the thigh, and let him be suspended with the patient by another young man, and the other young man pressing the thigh strongly forces it, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
And in the proper reduction, when there is a dislocation on the outer part, the patient must lie down according to what we have recommended with cold application; and the ligament should be tightened over the affected side of the body properly and over the feet.
And then two sticks are placed, one under the feet of the patient and the other under the head; and then sticks adjusted to the middle of the thigh should be placed on which wet cloths are wrapped, so that the patient is not harmed by the stick being between their thighs, for you must ensure that the extension to the parts below is not hindered.
And then each minister extends to their part, and the doctor with his hand equalizes the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the front parts, then it is necessary that the chest be extended slightly, and it follows according to this same narration about the thigh; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the diseased jaw, and then compresses that with the other hand, and with that compression extends the part below towards the chin.
And if the dislocation is in the rear parts, then it is not necessary to stretch the patient out on those parts, and they are raised above the ground; rather, they should be placed on a hard surface, just as one would do for an examination if their shoulder is dislocated outward, according to what we have said about placing them between two supports; and they lie face down with their limbs stretched out, as we have mentioned, without delay.
And it is necessary to apply compression with a board on the place where you have put the joint.
Thus, when the reduction is completed as it should be — and the sign of the reduction is not hidden from you, which is that you extend both arms of the patient, and when you see them equal and the patient stretches out their arm and expands its function, then you know that the limb has returned as it should — then you align two cushions and place a bandage so that the joint is not moved in any part; and keep the patient at rest for three or four days.
Then remove the bandage and the dressing, and compare one arm with the other.
When you see those marks on the skin, then you know that the dislocation has been fixed, and then let the patient go.
And if you see any cause of softening, then you return and plaster that area, and cover it according to your initial structure, and leave it for three days.
Then loosen that area, and have the patient walk around for several days until it is strengthened and comforted.
Chapter .xxxii.
Of the treatment for the dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder is dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outward, inward, and more towards the back; it is not dislocated towards the front.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you ask the patient to place their chest against their thigh; if they cannot, then know that the shoulder is dislocated.
And the restoration for all types of dislocation is that you make the patient stand straight, ensuring they extend their chest as much as possible; place your face against theirs, and put their foot between your feet; then hold their shoulder with your palms, keeping them between your fingers on their shoulder with strength, and another assistant should stretch their arm until the shoulder returns to its place.
And the sign of its reduction is that their chest adheres to their thigh with an effortless elevation.
Then apply a plaster to it and make the chest adhere to the thigh; then bind those areas with a bandage for three or four days, and afterwards unbind them.
And do not allow the patient to walk for several days until they are healed and strengthened.
And if the reduction of it to you is necessary, then administer strong extension with the ligaments which were previously described in the treatment of the hip.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the treatment of the dislocation of the talus.
The talus is sometimes displaced by slight movement and sometimes dislocated completely. The dislocation occurs either inward or outward.
And the sign of its dislocation is that the talus swells, proceeding to the side to which it is dislocated.
However, the treatment for its displacement is a simple reduction, which involves extending it easily with the hands and keeping it in place until it returns to normal.
However, in the treatment when it is completely dislocated, you must make the patient stand straight, and have a strong and valiant assistant behind the leg of the patient at the midpoint of the dislocation.
And then you hold the foot with your right hand on the upper part of it, and with your left hand on the lower part of the foot at the ankle area.
And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand for two times, and then extend with your left hand; and push the sole of the foot with your right hand away from the chest.
And do this two times as we have counted.
And then push the sole of the foot towards the chest for the third time, and you should be at the ankle.
Thus, it returns in one attempt or two following this method, and if you can rotate the foot, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation on it until it returns.
But if it is forbidden for you to reduce it by the method we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a small stick firmly in the ground, which should be between the patient's thighs, and you have already wrapped a cloth around it so that it does not hurt the patient.
And then the minister holds their thighs, and another minister extends the foot with their hands or with bandages laid over the ankle of the foot; and then each minister extends against the extension of his partner, and the patient's penis is extended between the patient’s thighs holding it so that the body is not pulled to either side because of its extension.
And then the doctor aligns the dislocation with his hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh on both sides, so that the dislocation returns easily.
And then when the dislocation returns and you are assured of the success of the reduction, place a plaster and bind it tightly with bandages, and tie the foot to the bed with bandages.
And you must be careful of the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the bandage over it is not too tight and does not compress it strongly.
And then leave it for two or three days; and if the bandage becomes loosened, tighten it again.
And then untie it on the third or fourth day, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days. And if it is necessary to proceed beyond that space, there is no guarantee that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted, and then it will not receive healing.
And if you encounter an abscess to cauterize, then it is necessary that you administer in the discharge of it what precedes in our narrative, in another place for treatment and application, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.
For the translation of the provided medieval medical treatise-like text:
It is necessary that which is dislocated be treated with slight extension without force; and this is not difficult, first it should be gentle.
But if the dislocation is in some of the toes of the foot, then it is necessary to make the patient place their foot on the ground or on a table, and let them be positioned as if they were walking.
Then you stand firm and place your foot on the area near the joints that you are treating, and then press that area with your foot with force until it returns to its proper position, ensuring that it is leveled and does not appear raised in any part.
Then place the patient's foot on a table that supports the entire foot, which has two ends, and then tightly bind that area with appropriate and firm bandaging for three days; then unbind it and have the patient rest and walk moderately for several days, until it is strengthened and recovery is ensured.
Chapter XXXV.
On the types of dislocations caused by blows or fractures or both together.
When any of those causes occur, and you are engaged in the treatment and restoration of the dislocation, death may often result.
And by this, it is not necessary that the one who presumes over the cure of the sick be anyone but he who is wise in the art, of long experience, merciful and compassionate, not hasty, not rash nor presumptuous; and let him begin with medicines that will abate inflammations and swellings only to a certain extent, and leave the patient's fate to divine judgment, unless it is someone from whom you hope for salvation from peril, or some alleviation of the illness, in whom there appears some hope. And then strive as soon as possible to reduce the cause in its early stages before it leads to inflammation and swelling.
And then, if the member returns as we wish, administer treatment that reduces inflammation and swelling, and cure the wound with one of the most drying ointments suitable for it.
And if a dislocation occurs with a fracture and affects the separated bones, then you pierce their juncture, and proceed as we have said in simple injuries of those parts that are involved in such cases.
And guard and avoid, according to your ability, those in the pathway of fear as instructed by my teaching; for this is better for you to honor your Creator, and more lasting for your glory, and more beneficial for your body as you will see in your time. And so perfect the words of Al-Bucasis [Albucusim] perfectly, for which God be blessed. Amen.
