O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre,
For the operation with hands is greatly prohibited in our region and in our time, except that some knowledge of it remains and traces of it are still visible; and nothing has remained of it except some small descriptions in the books of the Ancients, which have altered much and led to errors and misconceptions such that its intentions are closed off and its strength and art are weakened.
And it seems to me that I revive or rather apply that according to the order of this treatise in a way that includes exposition and clarification and abbreviation; and for this to come with the forms of the cautery tools and other instruments of the work through the addition of clarification, and for the preparation of them, which is necessary.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And by this Hippocrates means that it is not in the name but in the small deed, and especially in the skill of the hand.
But we have already spoken of this in the introduction of this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said about anatomy will not avoid falling into error, which can lead to the death of people, as I have seen too many of those who are formed in this science and fall from that because of their lack of knowledge and experience.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And I saw another doctor who took out a stone from a man who had suffered in his condition, and the stone was large, and he came to him and extracted that stone with a piece of the bladder, because that man died on the third day.
And I have already called for extracting it, and saw that due to the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I knew above him that he would die.
And you saw another doctor who was receiving payment from a duke of our land for surgery, and they came upon a black castrated man who had a fracture in his thigh; and the doctor prepared with his ignorance, extracted the fracture, over the wound, with cushions and splints with strong tension, and did not allow the wound to breathe.
And then release the binding according to their desires, and apply relief, and keep them dry for some days and command that we loosen the bandage; and this should be done until the thigh and foot become inflamed, and it leads to corruption.
And I was called upon him, and prepared to loosen the bandage, and achieved calmness and alleviation of his pains.
However, if corruption was already confirmed in the limb, because it could not be restrained, and the corruption would continue to spread within the limb until the patient was at risk.
And you saw another doctor who punctured a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated around those days, until the malignancy of it was greatly increased by its lord.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And by this, sons, it is necessary for you that the operation with hand be divided into two divisions: one is an operation which is associated with health, and in work with which there is danger in the greatest dispositions.
And I have already expressed this throughout this book in which I found an operation that has error and fear; therefore, it is necessary for you to keep this in mind and let go of that, so that the pages do not lead you to speak out of turn and dishonor you.
And therefore take up your weapons with diligence and protection of God, and treat your patients with happiness and firmness.
And use the best way by the grace of God to lead to health and favorable outcomes, and leave behind terrible diseases that are difficult to heal, and arm yourselves against what makes you fear, so that hesitation in your faith and in your name does not escape you: for more remains for your glory, and further yet in this world and afterward for your sanctities.
Here is the translation of the provided line: Do not treat bad illness poorly, so that you are not named a bad doctor.
And I have already divided this book into three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter is ordered concerning the head down to the feet, in the forms of instruments and in the tools of cauteries, and of what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter is about drying and piercing, and about cupping, and plasters, and the extraction of arrows and similar objects, all chapters and orders concerning the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter is about restoration and dislocation, and the treatment of fractures and similar conditions; this chapter is ordered from head to foot and includes the forms of the instruments.
It is necessary that I speak of the quality of the benefits and harms of that cautery and in what conditions the use of a cautery is prohibited.
Therefore, I say that the discourse on the quality of the benefit and harm of cautery is long and verbose, subtle by science, and secretively hidden; many wise people have spoken about it, and they disagree among themselves; to me, a little of their discourses suffices, for fear of prolongation.
And therefore, I say that cautery is generally beneficial to all complexions, whether they are with matter or without matter, except for two complexions, which are dry and without matter.
In a dry and cold complexion with matter, there is disagreement; for some say that cautery is beneficial for it, while others say the opposite, that cautery is not suitable for a disease that is by nature hot and dry, because the nature of fire is heat and dryness, and it is inconvenient that a hot and dry disease be treated with something that is burned and dry.
And those who say the opposite argue that cautery is beneficial in all hot and dry diseases that occur in human bodies, for when you compare the body of a person and its humidity to the nature of fire, you find that the human body is moist.
And I say by the speech of that person, who has experienced this to me several times openly.
However, this does not apply to those who are already experienced and trained in the chapter of cauterization by previous practice, and have understood the diversity of human composition and the disposition of diseases within themselves, and their causes, and the accidents thereof, and the duration of time for them.
And in other complex conditions, there is no need for fear, especially in cold and wet diseases, because all doctors agree on these, and they do not disagree about treating them with cautery.
And know, sons, that of the secret of healing by cauterization with fire and of its goodness, especially concerning cauterization combined with burning medicine, is that fire is simple, the action of which only reaches the member being cauterized and does not affect another adjacent member except with slight harm.
And here is the translation of the given sentence:
Here is the translation line by line:
And know, sons, that they forget the time in which it is appropriate to perform cautery and consider the best time of spring.
And I say that cautery is appropriate at all times, so that the harm caused by accidental time is submerged in the healing brought about by the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for necessary pains or severe pains, strong and urgent, which do not tolerate delay because it is feared that malice may arise from them, which is greater than a small harm entering through time.
And this does not fall into your feet, or, sons, this is only esteemed by the common people and foolish doctors; thus it is that to that disease which is cured by cautery it is not always effective, and they pause at that consequence.
And the cause is not as they think for this, for a cautery is nothing more than a medical practice that alters the composition and dries out the moistures which are the cause of the pains.
But nevertheless, cauteries are abundant in medicine due to the desire for its value and the virtue of its operation and the greatness of its master.
And it is possible that his illness may return at some time in the future, according to the complexity of the patient and the location of their disease, as well as their strength, and what has been prepared within their body due to the accumulation of excesses within them, and what they have acquired through their diet and similar causes; however, if the illness for which a cautery is administered is a subtle condition in members with few excesses and humidity, such as tooth cauterization for pain and similar treatments, it is possible that such pain may not return to him, but this applies only in small cases.
And the common saying is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this saying is correct, not in the way some people understand it, for I believe that there is no cure that truly succeeds without medicine or any other cause before resorting to cautery.
And the cause is contrary to that; the intention that cautery is the last resort of medicine is only when we administer methods of cure in certain diseases, and those medicines do not yield results, then at the end of the treatment, one administers cautery, and it proves effective for that. And now here it is clear that cautery is the last resort of medicine, not according to the understanding which the common people and many foolish doctors hold.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they did not say this except for the equality of gold and the excellence of its substance.
And they said that the site of cautery does not make a scar, which is not absolutely true, for I have already tested this and found that it only happens in some bodies and not others, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron as they said; however, when you do cautery with fire using gold, it is not clear to you because it burns according to the amount you want due to the hardness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive moisture; and if you place it over a flame, the gold melts from the heat, and some flakes fall into the fire causing the craftsman to be preoccupied with this.
And because of this, cautery with iron should be performed more lightly and more cautiously to correct the procedure.
And I have already organized this chapter on cautery into sections, and I have arranged those of the foot within the feet, so that I enlighten the inquirer about what they want to know from it.
The first chapter.
This cautery confers dryness and heat on the accidental humors of which there are two causes: it is the cause of sweat and a multitude of rheumatic fluxes, called running from the head to the passages of the nose and ears, and much sleepiness, and toothache and earache, and universally all diseases that come from cold, such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is as follows: first, command the patient to be evacuated with purgative medicine for three or four nights, according to the strength of the patient, their age, and their habits.
Then command him to shave his head with a razor. Then have that person lie down between your hands on a lowered bench and place his hands on his feet.
Then place the tip of your palm near the nose between his eyes, at the tip of his nose. However, when your middle finger has reached that spot, mark the area with a probe, and then heat the olive cautery, which has the following form:
And then place that over the marked area with tension, in such a way that it descends gradually, with which your hand is slowly tightened, and you turn that.
And then lift your hand lightly and look at the area, and if you see any part of the bone exposed, about the size of a grain of barley, then raise your hand, and if it does not return by itself when you remove your hand with that instrument, or another one if it is cooled down, until the bone is seen as I have told you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the area and leave it for three days.
And then place over it a cloth soaked in vinegar and leave it on until the heat of the burn is diminished. And then treat the area with a four-part medicinal ointment until it is healed.
And it has also been said that when the wound remains open, it is better to bathe it with wine, because it is better and more beneficial.
And some of them say that the area around the bone should be cauterized, and the cautery should be applied until some part of the substance of the bone adheres.
And then remove what is adhered to the bone, and then heal it.
And others said that with the cautery reach the posterior area, pressing strongly on the bone until it smokes, and this is the method of small alphectomy. And they believe that from that place, vapors emanate from the head.
And if the wound is kept open for a long time, then it should be treated before it becomes solidified.
But I have not seen these two types of cautery used on everyone, but only in some people out of fear; and leave that aside, you must tell me, it is better for health when it happens; for the head is affected by a discontinuity just as we have testified in other members, and especially so when the patient's head is of a delicate nature.
And the first type of cautery is safer and better, you must tell me; and with that method and using that technique, it is more beneficial for health.
Second chapter.
About the cautery of the head.
When chronic and prolonged pain occurs throughout the head and persists in the patient, and you have used scrapings, cochlias, capipurgations, plasters, washes, cadels, guailines, and similar treatments, and especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that only contaminates and does not benefit from those causes, then consider whether the patient's head is of strong constitution in its nature; and if it is not delicate and finds great cold, then cauterize it with another type of cautery leaving aside that one. And then cauterize that area above the horn of his head with a cautery until the vein is severed. Cut the tendon and expose the bone by the amount we have recounted, and cauterize that area with a cautery at the back of the head in the spot which is called the sinus — and this is the location where the suction cup is placed. And move your hand in this manner, and do not expose the bone, for the patient will find much greater pain from this than from the pain of all other cauteries on the head.
And I will describe this cautery in its place, for the cautery with which you cauterize the crown of the head and the occiput is a finer cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is its form.
Chapter three.
On the cautery of non-traditional migraine.
When pain settles in the part of the head or extends within the eye, the head should be cleansed with medicines, and other treatments, which I have described in the sections on diseases, should be administered; and if all this is not effective, then cautery can be applied in two ways: either by cauterization with an acute burning medicine, or with iron.
More cautery with medicine that burns is when you take a dose of alcohol, and you purify it and light the ends of it from both sides. And then you cut into the painful area on the temple with a slanted lancet until it reaches the spot where the pain is hidden.
And then apply force over it with a bandage through continuous pressure, and leave it for the duration of three hours; and then remove it and draw it out elsewhere, and leave the wound open for two or three days, and then place something over it soaked in balsam until the area becomes warm.
And then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, do this with some combustible medicines, which I have written about in the two treatises on combustible medicines.
Also perform cauterization with an iron according to this method: ignite using a cautery iron, which has the following form:
It is called a "claw clamp," because the head of it is shaped like a claw with some curvature, and in the middle part of it, there is a small prominence.
And then place it on the site of the pain, and hold your hand firmly — so that the artery beneath does not adhere — and rotate the iron little by little with speed.
And if the quantity of what is adhered by the pressure of the chain is such that it covers half of it, lift your hand so that the artery which is beneath is not compressed, so that blood flow does not stop.
And then soak a cloth in salt water and place it on the area, and leave it there for three days; and then apply a cloth moistened with balm, and then treat with an ointment until it is healed.
And if you do, cauterize with the tip of the cautery knife as a cautery, and be careful not to cut an artery in this modern non-traditional way.
Capitol quart.
From the cautery of ancient migraine.
When you treat migraines using what we have said about the previous treatment and what we have mentioned in the divisions of diseases, and if the treatment does not improve, and sometimes due to the illness, what we have previously recommended with the first cautery or medicinal cautery is insufficient, then it becomes necessary for you to whiten the knife-shaped cautery until it is whitened [heated], and mark the location of the pain with a line as long as half your finger, or a bit more; and then place your hand once and press strongly before incising the artery and reaching the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to be careful with the continuity of the jaw, which is damaged by chewing, and that the tendon is not adhered and the nerves that affect it are not spasming.
And if it concerns the protection and caution of the blood flow from an artery that is being tied off, for there is fear during the tying off, especially for those who do not know what they are doing and are inexperienced and rash; and they leave the operation at its beginning.
And I will come with a reminder of the regimen for accidental blood flow from an artery according to its method, in its place within this book.
And if you see this illness is not helped by this cautery and the body of the patient seems tolerable, apply the cautery to the middle of the head as we have recounted, and treat the plague until it is healed.
And if you want to, administer the cautery which we have mentioned in the chapter on arrow wounds with a cautery having two blades, and this cauterization is better and more appropriate.
Capitol .v.
Of the cauterization of ear pains.
When pain comes to the ear due to cold and is treated with laxative causes and with the other cure which I have mentioned in the division, and if the pain is not alleviated, then apply the cautery, and this one is called puncta, of which this is the form:
And then puncture near the inflammation, and lead it around the entire ear as a wheel is turned, or in the circle of each segment if the pain is in each one. And then gradually move the cautery along the edge of the earlobe little by little until you have felt the area with your hand.
And if the cautery of ten points is done all over the ear, clean that area, and then treat the places in between to heal them.
Chapter VI.
On the cautery of tumors.
A tumor that is treated with cautery is one of the types that come from phlegm, as we have said in the divisions of diseases.
Cauterization is not suitable for the type of tumor that results from drying or spasm of the nerve.
When you treat that kind of tumor with herbs, bloodletting, and fumigation, and if your treatment does not provide comfort, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: one should be at the edge of the earlobe, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of the two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the diseased part, because softening only occurs in the part that appears healthy.
And the form of cautery is that you cauterize that area with the cautery at the tip of the most prominent part of the earlobe, a little above the horn of the head, and on the temporal region another one, the length of which should be according to the length of the little finger, and place your hand with the cautery until the quantity of half the thickness of the skin is burned.
And this is the form of the cautery, and it is made of iron, the shape of which is set forth here. However, it is more delicate that it appears just as you see; and it must be that the cautery is slightly less coarse in its thickness.
Then treat the area with what has been previously described until it is healed.
Chapter VII.
On the cautery of old apoplexy.
When apoplexy is old and you have treated it with what we have said and your treatment does not take effect and the patient has no fever, then cauterize that area with four cauteries: on all the horns of their head; and with a cautery at the middle of the head, as we have said; and with a cautery on the nape. And the method of the cautery is done according to what was said above.
And it is already cauterized on the mouth of the stomach; and it is more towards the rear; and then it is treated with what you proceed to use.
Chapter VIII.
On cautery for forgetfulness caused by flame.
Those that should be given to the patient at the beginning are large jujubes and pills that cleanse the kidneys.
And then shave the entire head of the patient and place on their skull a plaster of cerate as described in the treatise on plasters.
And apply that several times, for that is the method of cautery. And do this according to the order of the doctors which I have already mentioned.
And thus if healing is good through those means; and if not, then apply three cauteries on the back part of his head, which should descend from the highest part of the head towards the lower part near the neck. And pause between each cautery the thickness of a finger, and then care for the cautery as has been done.
And if you add more and the patient can tolerate it, then apply the cautery to the middle area; and if you want to increase it further, now cauterize that area over both sides.
Then care for that area until it heals; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form previously given.
Chapter IX.
On the cauterization of the appendix and the relaxation of the entire body.
You should proceed with the relaxation of the head using jars and as we have said; then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize that area with a cautery in the middle of the head, and with a cautery over all sides of the head, and with a cautery on the back part of it, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the illness of relaxing the body excessively and the patients tolerate it and the illness is severe, then cauterize that area with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and finally with a cautery until it is healed around the spine area, and raise your hand gently. And then treat that which needs healing, and this should be done with an olive cautery.
It seems like you've provided a section or chapter marker, "Capitul .x.", which likely means "Chapter 10" in medieval text formatting. If you have more content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, please provide it, and I'll be happy to help!
Regarding the cautery for epilepsy.
The epileptic is not cauterized unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And thus, it is necessary to cleanse the brain of the patient at the beginning with herbs and with the other treatments that we have mentioned in the section when the patient is strong and can tolerate the administration of medicines.
And if it is a child who cannot tolerate the medicines, then administer small doses and masticatory treatments that cleanse the brain, for several days beforehand, with improvement in nourishment.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize it with a cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and with another cautery on the occiput, and also cauterize each temple. And if the patient is strong and tolerates [the procedure], then cauterize that area with the cauteries I have mentioned, having paralysis and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And let the cautery be olive according to what precedes.
But if the patient is a child, then apply a gentle cautery in this manner.
Chapter XI.
On the cauterization for melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupted humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize that area with the cauteries we have mentioned in the section on paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess that turns to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give them something to drink that purifies their brain, according to what has been mentioned previously in the division.
Then shave the head of the patient, and then properly apply a decoction made from it around the circle, and then place that in the middle of the head.
And the patient should sit sideways, and be held from all sides.
Then apply an ointment; and it is better to use old sheep's fat. And warm that over the fire with a moderate heat by measure, which he says is best when it is more inside him. And then place that in the middle of his head in the circle, and leave it inside so that it can be warmed.
And do this with the patient throughout the week once, along with the other regimen of good food until they are healed; or if you wish, cauterize that area by making small points according to what is best for them, but make sure your hand holds a cautery arranged in such a way: this is a type of cautery which moistens the brain equally.
Then place that embedded cloth in a bowl or in crushed mullein leaves.
Chapter XII.
On the cauterization of water descending into the eye.
When it is clear that water has begun to affect the eye by the signs which I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give the patient something to drink that cleanses their head, and protect them from all moisture.
And have that [substance] soaked in a bath for several days.
Then command them to shave their head, and cauterize that area with a cautery in the middle of the head; then cauterize that area with two cauteries on both temples if it is the beginning of water flowing into both eyes, or on one side if it is the beginning of water flowing into one eye.
Cut with a cautery all the veins and arteries that are below the collarbone; and let the cauteries be at that length in the width of the temples.
And be careful of blood flows when it is being cauterized; and if you see any blood flow, stop it with some medicine, which is available to you.
And come with the wisdom of extracting veins and cutting them, and being cautious of blood flow.
And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck between two bones with two backward-pointed cauteries.
Chapter XIII.
On the cauterization of old tears (or chronic tear duct issues).
When the tears of the eyes are old and persistent, and through the veins and arteries that are visible on the outside of the head, it is confirmed that this is due to cold and phlegmatic excesses, then cauterize those areas using a cautery as described in the chapter on the beginning of water flowing into the eyes. Apply a cautery at the middle of the head, and with two cauteries between the temples, and with two cauteries on the neck between two bones. And if you need an additional treatment, then cauterize that area on the entire side of the thigh up to the end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
Capitol .xiv.
Of cautery for the foul smell from the nose.
When you treat that illness with what we have said in the division and your treatment does not improve it, then prepare and give to drink to the patient some decoctions for three nights; then shave his head, and cauterize the area with a medium-sized cautery using olive oil. Then cauterize that area with a carnation-shaped cautery using two cauteries on both eyebrows, leaving the hair slightly untouched.
And be careful of the artery so that you do not burn it.
And this is the shape of the carnation-shaped cautery.
Chapter XV.
On the cautery for softening the eyelids of wounds.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened due to illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with this lunar-shaped cautery; and this is its form:
And if you, cauterize that area above both eyebrows with two small cauteries in all parts, and let them be extended towards the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the quantity of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand on the cautery, but rather to the extent that one-third of the eyelid is adhered.
Capitol .xvi.
Of the cautery of the eyelid when the hairs are converted into particles inside and puncture the eye.
When the hairs of the stomach are converted into internal parts such that they puncture the stomach, cautery is applied in two ways, either with iron or with burning medicine.
If you use a cautery with fire, command the patient beforehand to remove his hairs just as they clean them, while they are long and shaved; and if you pluck those from their roots, then hold the areas of the skin with a bandage so that it is not harmed until the hairs have grown back.
When they have grown back and are shaved, then place the head of the patient in your lap, and then apply something over the eyelids of his eyes with a template, shaped like a leaf of mercury, and let the beginning of the template be close to the hairs.
And then apply something soaked in egg white or in a lint paste over the wound.
And then heat the cautery, which has this shape.
And then cauterize over the figure which you have marked, little by little, in small increments, until the surface of the chain, which is like a myrtle leaf, is completely burned and clearly visible.
And the sign of health in your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hairs of it raised due to the puncture of the eye.
And then raise your hand and leave it for three days, and then apply something soaked in oil until the scar is healed. And then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
But if any cause returns through the hairs near their root and the eyelid is softened, then apply the cautery again over that area just as you did initially.
If the hairs are in the eyelid, then cauterize that area so it is raised to its natural position and smoothed out, ensuring that the hairs do not bother the eye.
But the cautery with combustible medicine commands the patient to pull out the hairs so that they are extended and smoothed, and then make a form like a miter leaf from linen cloth.
And then take soap known and fresh herbs amounting to an ounce or as much as that, and thoroughly mix those ingredients well, and do this with a fomentation so that it is not chilled; and then spread this over the cloth which has been made like the form of a miter leaf, and place that on one eye or both; and place the eye lightly covered in egg white, and the patient's head should be in your hand.
And place your finger on the medicine and press it lightly without damaging it until the patient feels the biting sensation of the medicine, for the sensation is like a burning to them.
And when you perceive that the strong biting sensation has occurred, then remove the medicine and rub it with your finger; once the biting sensation ceases, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water. Now consider if the eyelid is already lifted as washed, you should clean the constriction with fire or incision, for then it is well done; and if not, return to applying the medicine on the spot where it has not yet had an effect and continue until your operation is smoothed out and the eye contracts properly.
And then place over the wound a border within which the chain of the adherence is eradicated, and then treat it with an unguent or another substance so that it may be healed.
And it is necessary for you to perform your operation with vigilant diligence so that no part of the medicine falls into the eye. And if the eyelid near those days becomes softened and some cause from the hairs punch into the eye, then reapply your medicine on the area where the eyelid has been softened, just as you did at the beginning, and then surround it with a substance to be healed.
And this is the form of the mirtle leaf.
And you should know that the wounds of men are diverse according to their magnitude and smallness, and therefore according to this your treatment is made.
And do not hide the path to perfection from one who is studying this art.
Chapter XVII.
On the cautery of a fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the eye.
When you treat a fistula as we have described in the sections on diseases and your treatment does not succeed, then it is necessary to cauterize it according to this method: instruct the patient to rest their head on your lap, and have another assistant hold the patient's head with your hands in such a way that the head is neither strained nor moved.
And then place a cloth dipped in egg white or in a paste of flour on the eye of the patient.
And then heat the cautery, which has the following form:
Here is the translation of the given line:
And if you want, proceed by entering into the other extremity. And if you want it to happen in such a way that it is attempted.
However, that which is concave is better for the task at hand.
And then press the fistula if it is open, and extract the pus from it and dry that area. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
And then place over it a cautery that is well ignited, and hold it in such a way that your hand keeps the cautery away from the nostril entrance, so that your hand does not tremble or disturb the patient, and then place the cautery on the ulcer of the nose and burn that area.
And if at the beginning of your cautery you penetrate into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice as needed; and leave it thus for three days, and then apply ointment to the wound and surround it with a drying balm until it heals.
But if after eleven days it is not healed, then apply a sharp and corrosive medicine until the bone is exposed and scraped as you deem necessary in its treatment.
And there is another method of cautery for a fistula that some earlier practitioners said: penetrate the site of the fistula and open it, then place within that fissure a thin thread shaped like the area; pour into that fissure about one inch of melted lead; hold the thread firmly with your hand to ensure the patient does not move so that the melted lead does not reach beyond the intended area; cover the patient’s wound with egg white or water, for the lead adheres to the site of the fistula and heals it miraculously.
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a probe into the nose and reduce the fistula to the core of the nose according to where it will come to its proper place.
It looks like you've provided a chapter or section heading, which in this case is ".xviii." This translates directly to "Chapter Eighteen" in English. If there's more text from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to share!
This phrase appears to be describing the cautery of an anal fissure. A translation into English would be:
Motives seen cause fissures in the lips, and especially in the lips of children.
Therefore, when you treat those cracks with what we have said in the divisions and your treatment is not effective, then apply a small knife-shaped cautery according to this form that is shown:
And let the cavity of it be according to the subtlety of such a thing.
And gently place that heated instrument into those cracks so that the cautery reaches the edge of the cracks.
And then treat that with suppositories so that it may be healed.
The text you provided appears to be in an old Romance language that shows influences from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here's the translation for the given line:
Of the cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
When an abscess forms at the base of the uvula or on the palate or around the roots of the teeth, and then it swells, and subsequently bursts, and then becomes old, and pus flows out forming a fistula, and if your treatment does not lead to healing, then you must heat a cautery according to the amount received in the fistula, and then insert that heated cautery into the passage of the fistula, holding it inside until the hot iron reaches the core of it; this procedure should be done once or twice. Then treat it with what we have said about internal healing until it is healed.
And thus, if the slough is separated and healed, that is good; but if not, then it is necessary to expose the area and remove the corrupted bone according to what will be described in its chapter.
Chapter XX.
On the cautery of teeth and the soothing of veins.
When veins are softened by moisture and the teeth are painful, and if your treatment with medicines does not help, then place the patient's head on your knee, and then heat the cautery, the form of which will be described shortly. Place the quill over the tooth and quickly insert the heated cautery into it, holding your hand a little so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reaching the root of the tooth.
And then lift your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
And then the patient should fill their mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and afterwards spit it out, because the rotten tooth is hardened, the softened gum is strengthened, and the corrupted moisture is dried.
Chapter XXI.
On the cautery of tooth pain.
When tooth pain is due to cold, or if it is cold or inflamed, or if you do not find relief with medication, then apply cautery in two ways: by using the horn of a cow, or by using fire.
Cautery with horn is when you take the horn of a cow and boil it in iron water, then take a piece and wrap it in linen, and then apply it to the painful tooth while it is still hot from boiling until it cools down.
And then repeat this several times until the heat penetrates to the root of the tooth.
And if you want, soak wool or cloth in the liquid mentioned above, and place it over the painful tooth, and place a heated iron on top of that until the iron reaches the core of the cavity of the tooth.
And yet, the cautery with fire is what you should pay attention to the needle of iron or bronze, and if there is any roughness in the core and the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the wound.
And then heat the cautery which will take the form you desire, and place it on the tooth while keeping your hand inside to ensure the cautery is sufficiently heated; and do this several times until the pain subsides or on the following day.
And it is necessary that by the application of that cautery, the patient fills their mouth with good food and holds it for an hour, then cleans it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
And cauterize whichever extremity according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the cannula:
Chapter XXII.
On the cauterization of exstrophy.
When the swellings are caused by phlegm and cold humors and do not respond to digestion through medicines and you wish to digest those lightly, then ignite the cautery which has a shape as follows, having two curved ends so that smoke comes out from one end of the cautery, and place that ignited cautery once upon the swelling, and repeat if necessary until it reaches the core of the swelling.
And if the swelling is small, then apply the cautery according to the size of the swelling, and afterward leave it for three days and place a piece of cloth dipped in ointment over it until what the fire has burned is healed.
Then treat it with ointment and bandages until it is healed.
Chapter XXIII.
On the cautery for hoarseness of voice and constriction of the windpipe.
When the humidities come upon the canal of the lung, and especially when this happens due to cold composition, then it is necessary that the patient be evacuated at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize those areas by applying a cautery to the root of the windpipe in the affected area.
And be careful not to penetrate too deeply with the cautery into the groin, nor burn more of the skin than necessary.
And cauterize that area with another cautery at the joint of the neck in the last vertebra of the spine. And the cautery should be applied in the manner previously described.
Then treat that area with the method described until it is healed.
Chapter XXIV.
On the cauterization for lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are caused by infiltrating humidities, and the patient does not have fever or consumption and the illness is chronic, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the furcula (collarbone) at the points near the lungs and ribs; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot between the two malleoli; and let the cautery be applied according to the previous form.
And if you wish, perform your cautery by puncturing with a cautery that is called "puncta," the form of which you precede in the puncture for ear pain.
And make points within these areas for them; and then treat that with whatever method which is prescribed until it is healed.
And here is the translation:
Capitol .xxv.
Of cautery of hemorrhoids which is the head of the aiders.
When the head of the joint is dislocated due to slippery moisture and is not fixed at the time of its return, you should place its dislocation where it usually returns, and then with a small movement it gets dislocated again, as we have testified, so that first you reduce the dislocation, and then the patient should be turned over on his back or on his side; and then lift the chain which is inside the socket towards the upper parts using the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated inwardly.
And then light the cautery having two heads; and this is its form:
And then cauterize the chain before it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cautery will come to have four heads.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this count, and that is why there are eight cauteries.
And then place salt on the cautery points, and subsequently secure the patient in tranquility, ensuring that the limb is not moved for some time until it is healed.
And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and this has to be done, then cauterize over the muscle with a claw-shaped cautery or with multiple pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed, moisture is reduced, and the patient is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On the cauterization of the stomach.
When cold and various humidities come into the stomach, causing it to distend beyond its natural composition and multiply rheumatic conditions in him, if you continue with the methods of treatment but do not achieve resolution, then the patient should lie on their back propped up, extend their arms and legs, and then cauterize that area with three cauteries: place one claw-shaped cautery under the feet for a length of one finger, and two other cauteries below each side of this cautery so that the shape of a triangular cautery is formed; space them out so they do not touch to avoid excessive burning.
And if the depth of the cautery is two-thirds the thickness of the chain.
And let the shape of the cautery be according to this form with this addition: And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle part of the stomach according to this form; and this shall be a cautery according to the shape of a circle according to this form:
And let the stomach be cauterized in points to someone who is frightened by this cautery: and it means that you place on the stomach points according to the amount you want with a probe, and then cauterize those points with a cautery; and then treat that area with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Chapter XXVII.
From the cautery of the cold spleen.
When pain in the spleen arises from cold or moisture or due to excessive wind (gas) that disrupts its normal composition through superfluous egression, and the patient is treated as we have said but does not improve, then the patient must be made to lie on their back, and you should apply three cauteries with a thread according to this form and quantity over the spleen below the hypochondria, which will help the patient's recumbent position.
And the space between each cautery should be according to the thickness of a finger, and the cauteries should be according to the length of the body straight.
And do not press too hard with the cautery.
And if the amount that is added equals half the weight of the chain, and it should not be any tighter; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them lie down, with their legs spread apart and their arms raised.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a knife-shaped cautery, when done with subtlety and prudence in the art.
And be careful not to process too much during the cauterization, and let the application cover the entire chain so that it adheres to the whole body and penetrates into the intestines, for the chain here is subtle; know this.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the piercing of an abscess in the armpit with a cautery.
When there is an excrescence or abscess in the armpit and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the armpit or in its skin, then if it is in the flesh of the armpit, the patient will experience heaviness and sharp pain.
And if it is in the skin of the armpit, the pain is very sharp and often the treatment can exhaust even the most skilled doctors.
Therefore, the patient should be placed face down on their cervit (likely referring to a type of support or bed); then probe the area of the abscess with a tent (possibly a slender instrument); then heat the cautery, which resembles a rod, the form of which has been described on the previous page. And cauterize with that cautery until all the wound is burned, until it reaches the bone, until pus comes out.
And then treat that by treating other swellings until it is healed.
And it is not necessary to use this form of cautery except by one whose study in the art of medicine has been prolonged, and in whom many illnesses have been known; yet even this should sometimes be bold on this operation, yet still leave that to us, and it is better.
Capitol .xxix.
From the cautery of pleurisy.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And then immerse it in oil and heat it over the fire, and then cauterize with a cautery at that spot which is between the continuation of the collarbone and the neck; and with two small cauters guide them slightly downward towards the area below the beard, and with two cauters on that which slopes between the fifth rib and the spine, tilting slightly to the areas behind; and with another cautery in the middle part of the foot; and with another over the stomach, and with three cauterizations at the areas behind; and with one cautery at that spot which is between both shoulders, and with two cauters from both sides of the foot, leaving the cautery which is between the two shoulders.
And you do not need to touch your hand with the cautery, but rather apply it to the surface of the chain (likely meaning a specific part of the body or an area marked for treatment) in operation.
And the ancients have already said that some men use an iron cautery resembling a ray and heat it up, then place it in the location between the ribs, until they reach the abscess with it and clear out the pus, just as we have described for the abscess of the liver.
And in this puncture with a cautery, there is no need for fear, because one dies immediately if you apply it to the location of the fistula that cannot be healed.
Chapter XXX.
On the cautery of the mole.
When you treat the disease of the mole using what we have said about the treatment in the division and if your treatment does not succeed, then apply cautery to it in three ways, all of which are correct. One of these methods is to make three or four linear cauteries according to the length of the mole, similar to the shape of the liver cauteries, the form of which has been described previously.
And there should be the thickness of one finger or a little more between each cautery, and the method of the cautery should be the same method we have described for the cautery of the liver.
And do not bring your hand close to the cautery; and the patient should be lying on his back.
And there is another method of cauterization, which involves heating the cautery with two burners, a technique we have described in the chapter on muscle dislocation, and lifting the bandage that is along the side of the thigh where the patient lies on his left side.
And let your elevation, with which you lift the bandage according to the length of the body, be such that cauteries can be made according to the width of the body.
Then insert the two burners, which you have heated, into that area where with them you penetrate the bandage from the other side.
Then remove the cautery; and thus four cauteries have been made.
And if you wish, cauterize using a cautery with three burners.
Then you treat the cautery after it has rested and stopped bleeding for several days, because it is more beneficial than other previous causes in the healing process.
Capitol .xxxi.
From the cautery of hydrops.
Cauteri no catz en ydropici sino en alcinte3 proprietary.
When you treat the dropsy with the methods of cure that we have mentioned in the division and do not conform your treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with four cauteries around the navel and with one cautery on the stomach, and another cautery on the liver, and another cautery on the spleen, and two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, and a cautery in the center of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach. And the depth of the cautery should be determined according to the severity of the disease.
Then leave the cautery open so that it burns for a long time.
And do not evacuate the patient from treatment immediately after the cautery because it is necessary for two intentions to be added to it, and thus it will quickly aid in their recovery.
The shape of the cautery with which the abdomen is cauterized should be key-shaped, according to the previously described form, and the shape of the cautery with which the back is cauterized should be olive-shaped, according to the previous description of its form.
Capitol .xxxii.
Of the cauterization of feet and of the thighs.
When the feet are inflamed with dropsy and filled with watery fluid, you must cauterize the feet on the back of the foot between the little finger and the ring finger, lift your hand with the cautery without twisting it; then raise your hand, but do not completely withdraw it, because the watery fluid will ooze out.
The cautery is made in this form: Then make two cauteries on both thighs, and let each one be performed with the pointed end of a knife-like cautery. And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh: place one at the top and the other at the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh, two cauteries.
And leave the wound open for a long time so that some fluid may ooze out of it.
Then treat it with those causes which we have mentioned.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the cautery of the abdominal area.
When the belly is weakened by cold and humidity which impair its virtues, these being the digestive and retentive functions that reside in the stomach and intestines, it is treated with methods of cure rather than prevention. Sometimes patients have endured cauteries to exhibit virtue, so you should cauterize that with a large cautery on their stomach according to what has preceded in the cauterization of the stomach, with a circular cautery and four cauteries around the delicate navel, using a subtle nail-shaped cautery; and with a cautery over the alvine (related to bowels) area above the larger muscles, or with two cauteries.
And if you expel the excessive humidity and the patient can tolerate it, then apply a cautery over the bladder and over the intestines, and strongly adjust two cauters near the stomach and close to the inguinal area, for this is a perfect cure for quickly alleviating the condition without error.
It seems like you've provided a section marker, "Capitul .xxxiv.", which indicates the start of chapter thirty-four in a text. Since there's no additional content to translate or explain, if you have specific lines or content from this chapter that require translation or explanation, please provide them, and I'll be happy to assist!
This line translates to:
When it is in the nature of old hemorrhoids or thick humors that infiltrate or corrupted humidities, and they are treated with what we have said in the division and you do not approve your own treatment, then cauterize with three cauteries on the pus of the lower vertebrae, small and small triangular, and with a cautery above the navel by two fingers.
And if you think that the stomach of the patient is chilled and the food of the patient is not digested, and their face often becomes inflamed, then cauterize that area on the stomach with a large cautery as previously described; and with one cautery on the spleen, and another cautery on the liver with a nail-shaped cautery, leave the cautery open for some time, and then treat internally to heal them.
Chapter XXXV.
On the cauterization of the throat near the removal of them (the growths or affected areas).
When you cut away the growths, then ignite the cautery that resembles a ray. Then insert that ignited piece into the severed artery, and keep your hand steady until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood is coming.
And do this once or twice, for if they are too numerous, then cauterize each one as we have described, and then treat them with ointments until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on any area, it is more harmful to healing.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the cauterization of fistulas that are naturally harmful in those areas.
When nature does not obey the treatment we have recommended for it, and the patient is frightened by this, they should be treated with a cautery.
Therefore, when someone has a fistula that is naturally harmful and is old, it discharges pus and corrupted moisture. What is most appropriate in this case is to probe it with a fine needle, and then determine the depth of it with the aforementioned needle.
And ignite the cautery that resembles a ray. And then place the ignited cautery into this fistula, according to the extent to which the probe enters.
And repeat the application of the cautery inside until those corrupted parts are burned thoroughly once or twice or thrice, according to the extent of your need.
And beware of burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula leads to the body of the bladder or to the intestines, then be careful of all those areas; and do not do this unless the fistula is in a fleshy area and you think it is not penetrating further.
And then treat the area inside until it heals.
And if the area is sealed off and the materials are cut off from it, and remain that way for a long time, then know that it is already completely cured.
And if the materials are not expelled from it, then know that it is penetrating either into the marrow of the corrupted bone or that this comes from those causes which will bring about a recurrence in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.
Of the cautery of hemorrhoids.
When hemorrhoids cause pain due to cold or excessive wind (gas), and thus the life of the patient is disturbed, then it is necessary to apply cautery on the hemorrhoids with a nail-shaped cautery over each one, for which the precise memory (procedure) should be recalled.
And apply the cautery strongly with a small interval between them, so that three linear cauteries will result, and thus they will be more effective in healing.
Chapter XXXVIII.
Of the cautery of the bladder.
When you encounter weakness and softening of the bladder due to cold and humidity such that the patient cannot retain urine, then apply cautery slightly above the bladder, where the pubic hair begins. Apply one cautery on the right side and another on the left side of it.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the number of the patient's fingers; apply the cautery at the lowest part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And let the cautery be in the shape of a claw as it is processed.
Capitol .xxxix.
Of the cauterization of the thigh.
When cold and humidity come into the thigh, and because of this impregnation is prohibited, and their menstruation is corrupted, and the provocation of it is delayed, and you experience pain due to the retention of it, then the area should be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cauterization of the bladder; and with a cautery over the most affected part below the thigh, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be a clavilh.
Chapter XL.
On the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle.
When cold and moist humors are poured into the area of the ankle, and these cause it to slip out of its proper place, a sign of this is that one thigh appears longer than the other when compared. And the area of the dislocation is found where it bulges out.
Then it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the area of the ankle with a circular cautery, after you have marked with your hand around the affected area as it is twisted, so that the dislocation falls in the center of the circle.
And it is the cautery with which the shape is preceded in the cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize that area with three large olive wood cauteries.
And let the cautery be done according to the quantity of the thinness of the entire chain; and then care for that which needs to be healed.
The text appears to be in an old Romance language that shares similarities with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. The provided instruction is a chapter or section heading:
From the cautery of the sciatic vein.
When pain comes to the upper part, and it is caused by cold and moisture, the patient is treated as we have said and do not disagree, and this is outdated; now you must purge the patient of thick humors with foul pills or artificial pills or similar ones; then cauterize that area.
And the method of cautery in this case is according to two methods: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
Follows according to two scientific methods, of which one is that you cauterize that area on the broad part with three triangular cauteries in this manner; and do so with them to achieve good depth. And let the space between each cautery be the width of a finger, and if the cautery is made of olive or grain [likely meaning olive oil or grain flour].
And sometimes it is necessary to apply the cautery at a specific spot on top of the ankle, making four cauteries.
And if you wish, cauterize with the circle which precedes the form in the cauterization of the dislocation of the ankle, and within that circle, burn off the protrusion of the entire tendon.
And this is the method of cautery in surgery when pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.
And if the pain extends into the thigh, then cauterize it with two cauteries on the thigh over the area where you will circle around the patient's pain; and with one cautery above the ankle by four fingers, you should cauterize the outer part.
And if the cautery is knife-shaped, then the depth of the cautery should be according to the extent of the severity of the condition.
And if the patient indicates that the pain extends to the area near the toes of the foot, then cauterize it where they indicate with a cautery using three points or four or more if needed for that area.
And if the patient indicates that the pain is from the heel to the thigh, then cauterize it there with a knife-shaped cautery.
And be careful in any cautery that you do not use the cautery so much that you burn nerves or large arteries, and by doing so, you harm the patient badly or cause contraction.
And I have seen one and another of those who cauterized on the ankle and ultimately in the cauterization, and the hot fire inflated inside until the tumor reached the foot, and the fire perforated and corrupted the entire foot. And then apply a strong solution for the abdomen, and after that, death.
And if the pain is in two parts at once, cauterize each according to this method.
And the wise ones also spoke about the cauterization with this type of cautery, which is made in the following manner: make a circle of iron whose circumference is half a palm; and let its hole be as wide as a date seed or slightly less.
And within that circle, there should be another third; and the space between them should be equal to the thickness of a chicken's eggshell; and those circles should be opened from two sides; and the length of those rods should be one or two inches; and make on those iron edges properly shaped in the circles; and this is its form:
Then it should be heated in the fire until it becomes red-hot and emits sparks, and then place it on the affected part of the ankle, with the patient lying on their side. And then cauterize that area with three round cauteries at once.
And then leave it for three days; then apply a plaster to it, keeping the wound open for several days; and then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And of the good cauteries for him who has suffered them, and find with that the spot on him.
And with a cautery combined with adhesive medicines, you should make two circles having an armhole perforated in which they say is the width of an iron door hinge; let the length of the walls be in their nature either two nuts or keys whichever.
And if the spaces which are between each quantity of the thickness of a finger; and they should be opened below and above, and they should contain themselves in this form:
And then place over the joint of the knee the patient lying on their side, and press your hand over the joint of the knee; and then take warm water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that should be close to a small fire little by little, and apply that for about an hour, and let the patient endure the burning and adjustment — for that will cause burning similar to fire — until the burning ceases.
And then raise your hand with the instrument and clean the warm water off the entire knee with cold water.
And then leave it for three days and place a bandage over it until the blackness from the burning is gone, and leave it like that for several more days, and pus will flow out of it; this is the final stage of healing.
And then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
And if the pain is spread in the thigh or the abdomen, apply the same procedure as was done for the knee, where water is used similarly.
And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about that in the treatise on the refinement of medicines. Take equal parts of alkali and unextinguished ashes (likely meaning unslaked lime), mix them together, and place them in a new pot, one part of which should have a small hole perforated for the amount that will enter the ray (possibly referring to a spout or outlet).
And place the bottom of the pot inside another inverted pot, and pour soft water over the alkali and live ashes to cover them by one finger's depth. Then, compress them with your hand with good pressure, and let the sharp water that drains out flow into the part below in the inverted pot.
Then collect all that water and pour it over more live ashes and fresh alkali because this will result in a strongly acidic mixture, which is used in many medical procedures and for the cautery of other body parts, as this operation involves fire.
And regarding some medicines with which a broad cautery is performed, such as teztizic (possibly a specific medicinal substance), honey of anacranthus, ashes mixed with soap, among others that are combined.
And Gaulus recounts an operation and treatment used by one of the ancients to cure pain in the ankle and sciatic vein, praising it highly as being very effective, saying that no other treatment is necessary, and claims that one application heals completely as he recommends, for after immersing that joint in a bath, it is already healed.
And it is that rue should be taken, and if rue is not found, a fresh fig should be used; and it should be crushed with a little salt and placed on the ankle where there is pain, or on the thigh, or on the hip, and it should be bandaged.
And it should be left for a quantity of three hours or for the amount of time that the patient feels relief from the application.
And then place him in a bath and when his body is warmed, put him into the sun, for the pain ceases and he is healed.
And know that it is not necessary for anyone to use a cautery with these medicines, only near the evacuation of the body.
But Escorides says that when the vein is cauterized with a goat's horn, it greatly benefits him; and the cautery should be applied in this second manner: wool should be soaked in old oil and placed between the toes of the foot and the fossil.
And then take dried goat fat and ignite it until it turns into charcoal; then place it on the wool and spread it out until it is extended. And then repeat this process, and do not stop until the inflammation from the bite reaches the ankle and the pain subsides.
And this method of cautery is called cow cautery.
Chapter XLII.
On the cautery for foot pain.
Sometimes pain in the feet is caused by various reasons, such as from cold, or from a blow, or from excessive evacuation, and by causes similar to these, due to the infiltration of cold and moist matter.
And cautery should only be applied in this specific case which is caused by the infiltration of cold and moist matter.
Therefore, after evacuating the patient with fitidal pills and similar remedies, apply three lines of cautery on the foot where the pain is, each line according to the width of the foot, and mark them with a thread, placing five cauterizations or more in each line, depending on the tolerance of the patient and their strength.
And let cautery be done with a pointed cautery.
And if you want, cauterize with three cauteries or with four using a medial claw-shaped cautery according to this form:
Chapter XLIII.
On cautery at the onset of jaundice.
Small yellow spots often appear with this disease in small children; and the sign of its onset in children is that it affects their structure, causing elevation and movement in the eyes.
And you will find that the lower vertebra of the spine and of the bones begins to protrude over the other vertebrae.
And therefore, when you see this and wish to prevent it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery according to this form: so that the cautery covers the entire part of the vertebra equally.
And if you want, cauterize around the circumference of the vertebra with a pointed cautery, making two lines or three. And let the points be placed close together.
Then treat the area in between to heal it with what we have said.
Be careful not to apply the cautery to swelling that is caused by nerve spasms.
Chapter XLIV.
On the cautery treatment of gout and joint pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that infiltrate each part of the body, and when pains occur in the feet, doctors customarily call this gout properly.
And thus, when gout caused by cold is treated with this method of cure and the pains are not alleviated, then use cautery to alleviate them.
And it is that you should cauterize around the joint of the foot with multiple cauteries after evacuation in the area of the joint.
And let the cautery be an olive-shaped one, which has the following form:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pain rises into the fingers or other joints, and this often happens, then cauterize each finger with three or four cauteries all around using this olive-shaped cautery.
And if more cauteries than these are necessary for you, then cauterize accordingly and do not press your hand too hard with the cautery beforehand; only apply it around the area of the knot.
And if the pain rises into the finger and the hand, then apply the cautery that we have mentioned in its chapter.
And if the pain is only in the muscles and it is called rheumatism, then puncture around the spine as it curves, puncturing along those two lines.
And if the pain remains in the toes, then puncture around the spine above each toe and along the palm of the hand.
And if the pains approach over several days in the joints or muscles, then cauterize them all around with the help of instruments.
And you do not evacuate the patient of good regimen and reception of medicines, for if a good regimen is followed and phlegm is evacuated with this cautery, he will be healed, God helping.
Capitol .xlv.
Of cautery for fractures.
When there is inflammation in the knees and pushing of the intestines before the hernia at the genital area, and this begins to happen nearby, then you must order the patient to leave their food for that day and use lenient causes so that the swelling descends from their abdomen.
Then follow the patient with your hands on their back, and command them to keep their belly inside so that nothing is ejected or the hernia or intestines appear.
Then return and with your tied fingers, test the rupture over the bone of the pelvis, marking the end which resembles half a circle at the upper parts of the body.
Then prepare the cautery, which has the following form:
until it becomes red-hot and gives off sparks. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and place your hand over the area to prevent the intestine from coming out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs, placed a cushion under them, another servant on their chest, and another on their feet, who holds their hands.
And then place the cautery over that mark with your hand holding the cautery straight, and insert it until you reach the bone of the heel within the middle of the wound; and repeat with that another time if you have not succeeded in reaching the bone on the first attempt.
And carefully observe the condition of the intestine during your cautery, so that you do not burn the intestine, which could result in the death of the patient or another serious harm.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your operation is not successful.
And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size and proportion.
And then care for the site of the cautery for three days with ointment until the burn scar is healed.
And then treat that area with other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient should lie on their back for forty days until the site and the wound are fully sealed.
And it is necessary to reduce the patient's nutrition according to the length of their treatment time, which shrinks their stomach, and ensures that the intestine does not come out due to the effort of healing.
And then when it is time to lift [the patient] after about forty days, administer a properly prepared medicine, and keep the patient on that for another forty days.
And let them be reduced in labor and the abundance of food and drink, and loud voices, for when they use this regimen of complete healing, they will be healed.
And I will describe the treatment of ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if they do not want to suture it, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and let what is protruding from the wound be about one-third of it; then treat it as we have said, and do not adjust [or reduce] it.
And some of the earlier [authors] have said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery in this manner, since it is marked out with a probe:
And a line is placed horizontally at the highest part of the rupture on the side, and another line above it; then place your hand with a nail-shaped cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better.
Capitol .xlvi.
From the cautery of sprain.
When pain occurs in the upper limbs due to a blow or percussion and that pain persists for a long time and does not improve with any form of treatment using medicines, then you must cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And the cautery should be applied to the entire limb according to its size and smallness, strength and weakness, and the location of the twist and pain.
Therefore, if it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery on it; for customarily such pains require punctures from one limb to another that approaches the area of pain, so you must continue with the cautery until the patient is healed.
Chapter XLVII.
On the cauterization of leprosy.
Some lepers see great improvement with the use of cautery, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of blood and melancholy.
And when you want to cauterize the patient, consider if the leprosy is common and can be cured as we have said in the division [of the text], and do not delay. If you fear that the corruption will spread throughout the patient’s body and all of their constitution, then cauterize them on the head with five cauteries: one at the middle of the head, a second slightly below it towards the forehead at the end of the hairline; two on both temples; and one behind, on the nape or neck.
And place your hand with the cautery slightly inside to press on the bone a little pressure, and from there displace the scales, so that the expiration of large vapors is alleviated in him; and cauterize on the swelling as necessary.
And if leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then you must cauterize those areas with the cauteries we have mentioned above; and with a cautery on the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on both cheeks, and with two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, and with six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and with one large cautery on the vertebrae near the hip, and one on the ribs, and with two on the knees, and with one on each knee, and with two on the elbows, and one on each elbow, and with two on the shoulders, and with two on the muscles, and with two on the tendons of his foot; and cauterize those areas over all the joints of his fingers and toes, and over each heel of his feet, and over the nails of his hands.
And be careful of the nerves that are on the heel so you do not burn those.
And sometimes it is cauterized with one cautery on the bone of the penis and another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the liver.
And know that the more you apply cauteries, the more beneficial and effective it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain from the cautery, just as they do not feel it on their clothes, because their body is already numb.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or few according to the members and joints, depending on what is preceded by the specifications of the instruments.
And then treat the cautery with flour of crushed garlic mixed with honey and apply other treatments until it is healed.
It seems like you've provided a section marker or chapter title without any text to translate. If you have a specific sentence or passage from this section that you would like translated, please provide it and I will be happy to help!
It appears you've provided a title or heading in an archaic language similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Based on the context, this likely means:
When any limb is numb or asleep and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but it does not heal, then you should cauterize that numbed limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
And let your cautery enter the incision of the cord a little. Then treat that area with ointment until it is healed.
And sometimes a stupor (numbness) that affects the hands and feet, and the vertebrae of the back, is cauterized to address the flow of nerves which affect that limb, and the stupor is thus alleviated.
But do not attempt this unless you are knowledgeable in the anatomy of the limbs and the distribution of nerves throughout the moving body.
Chapter XLIX.
On the cauterization of ulcers that are malignant.
When an ulcer is old and does not respond to any of the medicinal ointments, then you should cauterize that area with a cautery slightly more according to the amount of the thickness of the skin until the whiteness and color of it are reduced, and its color changes.
And then treat that by using flour of ashes and lentils with rubbed oil and with leaves of arnica, and with the blood of a dove or with the blood of a thrush, from each one is a part and all are mixed together, and then apply it on a cloth and place it over the area until it is healed.
It seems like you've provided a section marker or heading, "Capitul .l." (which might be intended as "Chapter I" or "Chapter 1"), but without additional text to work with, there isn't content to translate or explain further. If you have more text from this chapter that needs translation or interpretation, please provide it!
This line appears to be the title or heading of a section in an ancient medical text. Here is the translation into English:
When cancer begins and you wish to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around its circumference just as it appears.
And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the latter cautery in the middle of the area; but I have not seen this, for I fear that it might become ulcerated, and I have indeed seen this happen several times.
And it is better that it be cauterized around its circumference with a circular cautery as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Chapter II.
On the cauterization of hernias.
When some hernia is delayed in maturation, and this is due to an excess of moisture or the condition of the patient, who is old and frail, with little blood, or due to time, and you wish to hasten the maturation of the hernia; then cauterize around its circumference with small pointed cauteries; and afterwards leave it so that it may hasten in maturation.
And if you want the perforation with a cautery, then ignite the cautery which has this shape: and place it in the middle of the area to be treated so that it penetrates the tendon.
And if the cautery in that place where it is placed alleviates the body of the arm; then take care of it until it heals.
Chapter II.
On the cautery of corrosives.
Corrosive is a wandering corruption in the limb, which corrodes it as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you find that the corrosive is in a place that can withstand cautery with fire, then ignite several small, and large enough, claw-shaped cauters according to what is appropriate for the location of the corrosion.
And then cauterize it thoroughly until you eradicate all the corrosion and leave no cause of it remaining.
And then leave it for three days, and place over the cauterized areas a dressing made with oiled cloth until all the scabs are removed and all the corruption is eradicated.
And then treat that with flesh-generating ointments.
And if within three days the flesh does not grow healthy and there is no corruption, that is good; but if not, then apply the cautery again over the areas that are corrupted.
And corrosive treatment is sometimes done with sharp medicine, for that serves as a substitute for cautery. However, cauterization with fire is a quicker remedy.
And I have already mentioned the treatment with sharp medicine in the division, and thus use that when you have urgency.
Chapter LIII.
On the cauterization of claws and other similar parts.
Often found in the affected areas of the foot, which is called a claw, and it is a significant condition, an ulcer that distorts the foot; and cautery on these is done in two ways, namely cautery with fire and cautery with hot water.
Mays cauteri am foc es que igniscas le cauteri concau semblant a pena de voltor, le qual sia feyt de ferr segon la quantitat la qual contengua le clau de tota partida, e sia de subtils marguas.
And then place that heated cautery on the shoulder, and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the shoulder until the cautery reaches the depth of the shoulder. And leave that for three days until it begins to sweat out through the arm. And then apply a plaster made with crushed wild mallows mixed with salt, and leave the plaster on that area for one night, because it will root out its foundations.
And then treat the area with an ointment made from generative flesh until it is healed.
And if it does not convert and often appears on the surface of the body, especially in the hands and feet, then you must administer these cauteries with water. You should take a quill made of horn or iron or from the wing of an eagle, and place that over the claw; then pour a small quantity of warm water into the quill, and hold it with your hand, rotating it around with the compression of your hand all around, pressing the edge of the tube against the nail bed. The warm water will reach the root of the nail through this method; let the patient endure the sting of the warm water for an hour, and then remove it, as the claw with its roots will be eradicated.
And in this way, they do it by placing one next to the other until they cover all of those which are on the body.
And then treat those abscesses where the roots of the claws have been eradicated with those ointments which cause the flesh to regenerate.
It seems like you've provided a section or chapter marker, specifically "Capitul .liii." (Chapter LIV, which stands for 54 in Roman numerals). This indicates the start of Chapter 54 in a document, likely an old text given the style. If there is specific content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, please provide it, and I would be happy to assist further!
This phrase "De cauterizacio de tremor" translates to English as:
When there is a tremor due to cold in the nerves or from a cold fever, or for another similar cause, then you must cauterize that area with four cauteries or five on the vertebrae of the back, placing one cautery between each vertebra; and apply a cautery on their feet, and above their stomach, using an olive-shaped cautery.
And the trembling of the patient is calmed and hastens the healing of the cold disease.
Chapter V.
On the cauterization of various accidents to the body.
When in the body there are blisters and ruptured pustules which are formed from thick corrupted matter; therefore, at the beginning when they appear, it is necessary to cauterize over each head of the fistula with a fine cautery using myrtle twigs whose end is extended with fire; or with long ash twigs; or with a lentil-shaped cautery.
And sometimes the cautery is also applied at the beginning of its expulsion in this manner; and they are not believed to be cured until the excess is disrupted by doing these things, and they are healed through them.
But however it must be done near evacuation with phlebotomy.
Capitol lvi.
Of cautery for accidental blood flow due to artery incision.
Watchful troops should divert the blood flow that results from an artery being cut, which can cause inflammation or lead to the formation of abscesses or cautery on the limb, and similar conditions, making it difficult to remain there.
Therefore, when this happens to someone, then you press with your hand on the artery's opening, and place your finger there to firmly pinch it so that the flow of blood stops while keeping your finger in that position.
And then place in the fire the small and large olive-shaped cauteries, in great number, and blow on them until they are all red-hot.
And then take one of those, either small or large depending on the location and the wound where the artery is ruptured, over that vein that you have carefully cleaned with your finger, and hold the cautery until it is applied and constricts the blood flow.
And if blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you move your finger and remove the cautery, then take another appropriately sized cautery from those which are prepared in the fire, and continue to apply them one after another until the bleeding is stopped.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are there, and ensure that no other harm comes to the patient.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding in any other way except by four methods: either by using a cautery as we have mentioned, or by extraction if it cannot be extracted, for when extracted, the ends of the fibers are burned and the blood flow is stopped, or by binding with a strong ligature or bandage, or by placing medicines on it that have the property to stop the bleeding; and they should be bound tightly with a pad under moderate compression.
And he who administers a moderate restriction on him with bandages and with tightness using cloths or by positioning burning and similar causes, does not provide comfort but rather pain.
If this condition affects someone and the doctor is not present nor medicine available, then open with a gentle pressing of the index finger on that vein as we have said, and understand the great constriction inside so that the blood remains from the most superior part of the wound; and over the artery do not remove your finger; and above the artery sprinkle cold water of great chilliness until the blood is congealed and thickened; and also consider whether there is a need for cautery or medicine.
About incision and perforation and bloodletting and phlebotomy and wounds and their similarities.
We have already said in the first chapter about all diseases in which cautery with fire is appropriate and with combustible medicine, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for them along with the forms of the cauterizations; and I have ordered the chapters from the highest part of the head down to the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter in the same manner, so that the seeker of this information may be relieved regarding what they have asked about.
And before I begin this, son, you must learn that in this chapter is feared what is in the first chapter on cauterization.
And for this reason great caution must be taken, because in the operation described in this chapter many times there is evacuation of blood which holds life, whether by sprinkling from the vein or cutting into the abscess or opening for extraction or purging of the plague or extraction of an arrow or incision of stone and similar procedures. And accompanying all of these [symptoms] is fear and trembling, and in most cases, it leads to death.
And I warn you that this should not happen to you in which there is danger, for sometimes your ways as a person can be mixed with the ways of diseases. And of them, there are some who will go with their sickness and it is light, but you should consider death for him, because of the intensity of what he finds in his illness, and due to the length of his sickness, and with the illness comes fear which signifies death.
And among them is the one who gives you his possessions and says [you will be healed], hoping for healing from that person, while their illness is perilous.
And therefore you should not consent to what comes to you in this manner; and your caution should be greater than desire and greed; and do not assume any reason for this except certain knowledge that confirms what you must do, and which leads to praiseworthy outcomes.
And use this in the treatment of all your illnesses for prognosis and indication of health restoration, because in that lies help to you in acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, children, may God inspire His understanding in you and not remove direction and protection from you, for that is in His hands.
And I have ordered this chapter distinctly by sections following the chapter on cautery, and the treatment from head to foot, so that what you seek and need may be made easier for you.
First chapter.
On the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Know that this illness often occurs due to childbirth and when the wet nurse tightens the child's head with violence.
And sometimes for hidden reasons which are not known.
And I have only seen this disease in children; and in all those whom I have seen, death was sudden, and thus to me it appears as a work left undone in them.
And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of the child was so enlarged that he could not bear it due to the size of his head, and the humidity increased until it caused death.
And this humidity is either added between the skin and the bone, or it accumulates beneath the bone on the spine.
For the operation on that area where the humidity is between the skin and the bone, and if the swelling is small, then you should split open the middle of the head with a cut横向的切割应该翻译为在长度上，但根据上下文，这里可能是指在宽度上进行切割。因此，更准确的翻译可能是：
And therefore, if the humidity is increased more and the abscess becomes larger, then there are here two incisions according to this method:
And if the humidity is near the bone, a sign of it is that you see the corners of the head open on all sides and water is squeezed out when you press that area with your hand from inside, and this was not hidden from you. You must cut in the middle of the head with three incisions according to this method:
And then extract all the moisture through the incision; and then secure the incisions with bandages and poultices; and then fumigate it from above with wine and oil until the fifth day, and then remove the dressing and treat the wound with lint and ointments, and bind the head evenly; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
And there is another method of incision, which you should consider based on the magnitude of the abscess and the collection of water, for sometimes it is more pronounced in the occipital area, or in the frontal part, or on the right side, or on the left side; and thus pay attention with the incision where the abscess and the accumulation of water appear, and do this according to what is best possible for you.
And be careful not to cut the artery, which could cause bleeding and lead to the patient's death due to that blood flow and evacuation of moisture.
Second chapter.
When catarrh or rheumatism occurs in the joints or feet, and it is chronic, and you do not find healing through medications, then the final remedy for this involves starting from those two arteries.
And therefore, when you want to incise those areas where the patient has hair on their head, then rub the area with a coarse cloth so that the arteries appear, and then tightly bind the neck of the patient with some cloth; then identify where the vein pulses; and place the spots of each near the points close to the ears, which are concealed in some men.
And then press on the artery with your thumb, and then incise each one with a sharp spatula, penetrating inside the bone, and do this along the length of the head.
And if you want, insert the spatula under the artery and break it at the points above the incisions.
And the length of the incision should be about two fingers' width, for when any vein is incised, the blood flows out with a pulsating discharge, which escapes frequently in bursts.
And if the artery does not appear at the incision site, then you must measure from the earlobe a distance of three fingers, and then mark with a needle, and proceed to enter the bone.
And the amount of blood that should be let is an ounce of wine, and strongly it does not bleed more or less from him, and all this depends on the quantity which appears due to the strength of the patient and the fullness of their artery.
And then consider the wound, and if any cause of swelling remains on the bone, then cut away that part so it does not become an abscess.
And then strengthen the wound with poultices and linen bandages, and then treat it with ointments until it heals.
Chapter III.
On the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
When someone suffers from chronic migraines or sharp pains due to moisture and qualities in the veins of the temples, or if these are severe and similar to those, and treatment with medical methods does not help, then we resort to extracting the arteries in the temples or cauterizing them as we have shown.
And the method of the operation and extraction is that the patient should shave the hairs on their temples; and locate the visible artery in the temple where it is shown to you by its pulse, as it is hidden in most people due to thick hair.
And if it is hidden from you, then the patient's neck should be stretched with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with warm water until the artery appears clearly to you. And now take the spatula, which has the following form: And then you incise the vein with ease until you reach the artery; and then insert and extract it in such a way that you remove it from the vein and expose it from the tunics that cover it, on all sides.
But if the artery is thin, then wrap it with the tip of a needle, and then cut a part of it according to the extent to which its ends are stretched or contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, because if they are not cut, the blood will not flow out completely.
And then evacuate one to three uncii of blood.
And if the artery is large, then you must tie it in two places with a strong double thread of linen or with long cords, and do not allow putrefaction before the wound heals and the flow of blood stops.
And then cut away the excess that is between two ligaments; and do this at that time or another appropriate time.
And if you want, cauterize that area with a cautery between the bone using a knife-shaped cautery before cutting off the ends of it, and let it remain in place for the same procedure.
And it is better to perform the procedure when the patient does not have fever or a heated constitution; for cautery is one of those causes that helps dispel harmful moisture, and thus it is better in treatment.
And before the extraction of the arteries, fill the area with an old plug, and place it over the wound properly dressed, then treat it with drying medicines to promote flesh growth and with bandages until it is healed.
And if while you are working another flow of blood comes from the artery, then you must take care to stop that bleeding, either by using a cautery or by filling the area with a plug, and hold your hand until the bleeding is stopped. And if none of those causes are present to you, then place your finger on the spot where the blood has coagulated, and sprinkle the area with water of vehement coldness until the sharp pain subsides, and be strong according to what is needed.
And what is lighter in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two blades, since you have marked the two spots with a probe, and then place them, ignite them, until they reach the bone and divide the vein into two places, so that what is between the ends of it is elongated, because they are not fully consolidated by this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And let the sharpness of the two blades be similar. However, if the sharpness of the two blades is less, it is better, because if they are as sharp as two blades close to each other, they will not cut the flesh too quickly.
Therefore, since there is some thickness in them, the heat of the fire is retained in them, and the flesh is cut lightly.
And this work is better than all other works and lighter.
And let the space that is between two ribs be the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
Chapter four.
On the treatment of acute and acidic tear conditions of the eyes.
When those tears are acidic, and it is the condition of the veins that lie above the forehead which have become inflamed, and if you do not find any other cause for medical treatment, sometimes the face of the patient turns red, and they feel a crawling sensation on their forehead as if ants were crawling, and their eyes become weakened to such an extent that the eyelashes are known to be affected, and the eyelids are irritated by the acidity of the tears. The ancient bitter mixtures were used in the treatment of such conditions, and I do not name this treatment without reason.
And you command the patient to shave the hairs that are on their forehead, and then make three incisions equally spaced along the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is about two fingers: the first incision should be equally distant at the length of the nose in the middle of the forehead, the second according to the length a little beyond the movement of the tear ducts which are in the lacrimal area, and the third on the other side.
And be careful of the beginning of the arteries which are on two sides, and extend your hand from the continuation of both jaws. And if the space between each incision is the quantity of three fingers put together.
And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloths with which you dry the blood.
And then insert the spatula with two sharp ends, of which this is the form of the incision: The sentence "que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio" can be translated into English as follows: Here is the translation of the provided sentence: And then stretch this spatula and insert into the first incision another instrument which is called a scalpel, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And place the sharp side of that instrument against the adjacent flesh and the tendon, and the other side towards the bone, and push it in until it reaches the middle fissure, and with that cut all the vessels descending from the head to the heels.
And continue the incision to this part of the tendon, and then do that in the middle fissure between another fissure.
And when an equal amount of blood flows out, squeeze the areas where clotted blood is present.
And then place in each fissure some old goat hair, and put on those areas a powder mixed with wine and oil and sour wine, and ensure that no harmful swelling occurs.
And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of warm or tepid water, and then treat it with a basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil and other ingredients until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.
For the given line:
When there is a sharp and continuous discharge coming from some veins, and sometimes the patient's eyes are slightly weakened, and their vision has become weak, and their eyelids are ulcerated and lose their hair, and in the forehead area there is an acute pain followed by sneezing, then you should know through these symptoms that the discharges do not come but from small veins inside the body.
And the best treatment for this is as follows: command the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision in that area at the midpoint of the forehead, a small one in width (and begin the incision from the left temple towards the right temple; the incision should be through the bone; extend your hand beyond the swollen temples which are affected by chewing), until the bone is exposed.
Dry all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth, and then pack between the two edges of the incision with old wool or cloths. And then apply a powder mixed with wine and oil on top to prevent an inflammatory swelling from forming.
And when you loosen that and see that the abscess has already decreased, then it is necessary to massage the area where new flesh begins to grow, and subsequently treat it with a drying regimen which will cause new flesh to grow, just as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them, and from these make a plaster and apply it to these areas for the growth of new flesh.
Chapter VI.
For the given line:
Every cause that affects the ears is of four types: either it is mineral stone or something similar to stone, such as iron and glass, or it is from plants, such as beans or peas, or it is due to fluid causes, such as water and sour wine and things similar to them, or some animal.
And thus when a stone enters the ear or another similar cause from those that do not fit or grow in the ear, and expose the ear to sunlight, and if you find the stone, then distill some substance like violet oil or sizami, and then administer its extract, and induce sneezing with conditions, and plug the nostrils before the act of sneezing. Then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear's rim, and extend the ear towards the affected areas, for small particles often get stuck due to these causes.
And if it is not stuck, then administer the extract using an instrument called the gesti epicicarios subtil, which has the following form:
And if it is deeply stuck and can be removed with the instrument, that is good; otherwise, administer the extract using a fine needle of double duplication.
And therefore, if it is not blocked by that, then make a tube of iron and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal and seal around the tube with wax and softened oil so that nothing is open except the tube. And then extract with your wind with strong suction, for such troops of things as we have recounted.
If it is not treated in this manner, then take some alum or a vessel that has been used to hold birds for a small amount of time, and place that at the end of the ray, and then wrap it properly over that area. And then insert that into the ear canal easily, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
And therefore, if it is not cured by all the causes which we have recounted, then you should consider cutting it before it becomes an abscess or spasm.
And the method of cutting it is that you first bleed the patient from the saphenous vein and extract blood according to the virtue of their constitution, then make a cut between your fingers and turn the ear upwards, and finally make a small incision at the root of the ear and remove the pus from the deeply pressed area. And let the incision be of a crescent shape until you reach the stone, and once the stone is found, remove it if you can with appropriate instruments; then close the incision quickly at that time, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the cause in the ear is one of the growths that have grown and become inflamed, then administer its treatment and extraction; but if it does not respond to you by coming out, then take a thin, subtle spatula according to this form: And administer with that the extraction of the wax which has been poured into the ear.
And do not perform this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor from the ear. Place it in small pieces, and then extract them using your fingers or with subtle movements, or through incision as we have said, for this makes the extraction easier.
However, when water has entered the ear, the patient should use sneezing at the beginning with certain conditions, and fill their ear with some old cloth, and lie down on the side where the water is. If it is thus expelled, that is good; if not, then take small, thin pebbles about the length of a finger, heat them slightly over fire, and have the patient insert one of these into the canal of their ear, jumping up from that side and striking another stone against the one inside the ear to induce percussion. Do not stop this procedure with the stone until all the water has been expelled from the ear.
Do not stop this procedure with the stone until all the water has been expelled from the ear. And already the water should be poured into something like paper or a reed, and put one end of it in the ear and extend the other end with fire until its middle is burnt.
And then place another syringe and do this as many times until all the water is extracted, and suck that with a cannula in the same way as mentioned above for the stone extractor.
In the extraction of an object entering into that ear, if it is small and similar in appearance, treat it as we have said in the division; but if it is large and causes pain deep within the eardrum, then administer its removal with gentle manipulations and compressions, for the cause is lighter than all other causes that occur in the ear.
However, in the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it with what we have said in the division and in the tract on distillations and your treatment does not succeed, then you must examine the ear in the sunlight.
And then if any cause of the worms appears, extract it gently or with subtle compressions; but if no cause appears, then take a cannula that is narrow at one end and wide at the other, which should have the following form: And insert the delicate extremity into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; then suck out with force using that [extremity], and do this several times until all the worms are expelled.
And if you do not obey the instruction, then plug and seal the cannula circuit with wax as we have said; then administer distillates which have already been proven in the treatment of worms, and you will find this in the treatise on distillates.
And let your effusion be with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, which has the following form: And make it of silver or bronze, leaving it straight, with a small tube in it, and a plate on top.
And thus it should be designed to fit into the opening of the cannula container where it will be necessary. And if you want, take the rod and wrap the end of it properly with a cloth, then pour oil into the concavity of the ear or juice from some herb, or whichever of these medicines you choose into the cannula — which is in the ear — then insert the rod with the cloth on top and press it gently with your hand until the oil is expelled into the concavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
And that which is inserted into the ear should already be slightly warmed with fire. And be careful that the substance you will distill into the ear is not too cold, for medicines for the ear do not tolerate that.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of ear obstruction.
Sometimes, some children are born from mothers with unruptured membranes, and this can also happen to adults, where the ear canal is obstructed by plaque or flesh growing in that area; and this obstruction sometimes occurs at the entrance of the ear canal without touching the eardrum, and sometimes it affects the outer parts.
And that which occurs at the entrance of the ear canal, without affecting the eardrum, is often in a more difficult condition to heal.
And in cases where the eardrum is involved, you must expose the patient's ear to the sun and examine it closely. And therefore, if swelling appears, open it with a fine scalpel which has this form:
If the extremity of it in which the width is small, of which one part is sharp and the other is not; and the spatula should be on two sides so that it does not injure the ear.
And therefore if the obstruction is due to flesh grown in the ear or on it, then take that with subtle needles and incise that very easily so that all the flesh may be removed.
And if there is an obstruction in the ear canal, then take fine wool and warm it slightly with fire, and then place it in the ear canal.
And therefore, if you find that the patient breathes easily with this method due to the gravity of exhaling, alleviate the oppression on them easily; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
And then place in the ear a piece of cloth the size of the width of the tube that you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take some wax, dip it in warm water and sprinkle ground powder over it and use it; and if you find the ear to be abscessed, then you must remove the wax and replace it with other wax that you will wrap in cerot made with rose oil until the abscess begins to soften; and then treat it until it is healed.
And if bleeding occurs, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use another treatment that restrains the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
The text appears to be in an archaic or medieval form of a Romance language, possibly Old French or a similar dialect. Here's the translation for the given line:
Of the treatment for athelisz, which affects the eyelids.
Attaching the conditions that sometimes lead to moisture around the eyelids of the eyes, and at other times are dry.
Therefore, you must hold those with tweezers or in an ounce, and cut them with a sharp instrument from their roots, and then place your hands over the trimmed areas.
And if pain with a flow of blood occurs, then you cauterize those areas with a subtle lens-shaped cautery.
And the best cautery is applied near the incisions and observed returns when any cause of the hemorrhages remains; and when they are cauterized with fire, those hemorrhages are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for swelling that occurs in the eyelids of the eyes.
Spots are often seen in the eyelids of the eyes, which have a cause that resembles swelling in its strength and hardness, and thus the swelling is called by this name.
And it is an accumulation of thick moisture on the eyelid beneath and above.
Therefore, the operation for it is to consider whether the swelling is developing in such a way that it appears from the eyelid and is bad throughout; and the cause of it is slight.
Therefore, make an incision over it along its width, and then squeeze it throughout with ease until it dries out, and then suspend it with a bandage and cut it off.
And if the wound is large, then you should close it with stitches; and take care of what is inside so that it heals.
And if it is minor, you will not suffer harm from that which the warmth of it restores and reincarnates.
And if the swelling is declining towards the inside of the eyelid, you should expose the inner surface, suspend the swelling with your thumb, starting from where it begins to swell, and press all around it; and if the eyelid at the start is elongated, this does not matter in any way.
Then at the beginning, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area with something that promotes healing until it is healed.
Chapter .10.
From the treatment around the upper eyelid.
Almost always it is grey matter that is generated in the tunics of the upper eyelid, and particularly among children, it aggravates their eyes and affects their sight greatly; and they cannot look at the brightness of the sun because tears collect for them due to this.
And thus you find them lying on their faces all the time, and they sleep on their faces; and so at the eyelids of their eyes, the eyebrows are moist, which have already been covered by swelling, and an appearance of cataract is evident in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel a cataract inside them.
And one method of the operation is such that the patient places his head on your lap, and then you place a cloth over him and make it hot, and make a circle according to the amount which contains arthernach from all sides, and then place that over this and press with your fingers all around so that arthernach is gathered in the middle of the circle, and then create moisture in the middle of that using a spatula inserted along the width, and the incision should not be larger than the one made in flaubotomy.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Therefore, extract it with cloths with which you have wrapped between the fingers mentioned at the outer parts and roll between the right and left hand until it is dispersed.
And be careful not to place yourself in the fissure so that with the spatula you do not reach too deep and disturb it.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence, line by line:
And so some use salt and place it in the cavity of the裂开处，以便去除那种湿气。
And then treat that which needs to be healed within.
And if you encounter an abscess in the area, then treat it with soft plasters until it heals.
Chapter XI.
On methods of applying heat to the body.
When thick hairs grow on the eyelids, different from natural hairs and are old, these annoy the eye and cause various illnesses such as constant tearing and softening of the eyelids and film, which can lead to the destruction of the eye called "tactinir" of the eye. It is treated in four ways: by cauterization with fire; by sharp medicine as previously mentioned in the chapter on cauterization; by atactini through incision and suturing; or by using tubes as I will explain.
Therefore, you must place the head of the patient in your lap; then turn the eyelid with your left hand. If it turns easily, that is good; if not, insert a needle into the part where there is pus under the eyelid, and let the needle penetrate upwards with the thread close to the margin of the eyelid where the hairs grow, near the hairs, and pull the thread towards the upper parts with the eyelid, turning it over.
And then introduce the instrument inside the eyelid, placing the hairs tightly with a spatula from the larger lacrimal duct into the smaller one; and then extract the pus and cover the eyelid with fine dust of cotton or cloth, and then sew over the eyelid with thread, and thus it should be as depicted in the figure of a myrtle leaf.
However, the figure should be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, for this varies among individuals, because some require a significant incision in the upper eyelid depending on how much the eyelid has been loosened.
And then insert with the spatula along the two lines that you have marked, starting from the larger lacrimal duct into the smaller one. And if your incision is near the natural hairs, it should be as thick as that of the king's [presumably meaning it should be of significant thickness or importance].
And then place the needle at one of the two angles of the wound, and then scrape that entire area clean, and then suture the two edges together with a thread or fine woolen yarn, and wipe away the blood, and if you wish to do so, attach any excess pus to both eyebrows using sticky substances, but if not, disregard this step.
And then loosen the suture of the wounds between three or four days, and then treat it.
And if you wish, leave the wound unsutured, and treat it with something that dries and constricts, for the eyelid being raised requires the sealing of the wound and the addition of thread; however, suturing is better. Therefore, this is what the ancients taught regarding treatment.
However, one must be careful with the patient, and it is of good practice, and there should be no fear.
And there is another method in surgery, which involves shaping the eyelid like a myrtle leaf, and then lifting the eyelid with three separate and gathered threads according to this form:
However, if that is not possible, hold the threads, and since it is not equal, take a needle with thread and insert it into the middle of the shape, and place another thread near the larger lacrimal duct, and the second thread near the smaller lacrimal duct, and adjust the threads between these points equally, and then lift your hand with an equal elevation, lifting the entire chain that has been shaped as we have described.
And then bring together the two edges of the wound with stitches, and care for it so that it may heal.
And if an abscess occurs in your incision or your wound, drain that abscess with wax and the like, and with unguents.
And sometimes you may encounter an eyelid where the hairs are inverted; then you should use what we have mentioned about incision; however, stitching is more intricate in such cases.
To anesthetize with reeds follows this method: and it is that you turn the eyelid inside out and split the structure within as I have described; then make two reeds or two fine splints whose length should be according to the length of the eyelid and their width should be half the width of the spatula. And you have already made incisions at the ends of each section where you have the threads.
Then carefully apply each [reed or splint] over the part of the eyelid that is excess from the eye, and secure the reeds of each section with a strong binding, and leave it like this for several days, because the constrained area will die off and dry up and will fall off on its own.
And if it is delayed, then break through with the saw at the bones, and then treat the wound until it heals.
When it is secured, the eyelid is lifted and the hairs do not poke.
And this is the form of two canes which you will make according to this shape: and there should be the quantity of the length and the width neither more nor less.
Chapter XII.
On the removal of hard, piercing hairs from the nose using a needle.
When there are unnatural, hard, rough, and piercing hairs in the nose, the procedure is that you take a fine needle and place it in some fine wool or linen, and then carefully adjust the ends of the needle and hold them gently but precisely. And the length of the wool or linen should be about the quantity of one palm.
And then you apply another subtle ointment over it briefly, and bind the extremities of that if you so desire.
And then place the patient's head on your lap, and be close to the sunlight so that your work may be clearly seen, for this is a subtle and delicate operation.
And then insert the needle into the root of the hair that requires treatment, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid before removing it from the natural hair.
And then pull the hair upwards and insert it into the slit, and let the hairs be one or two or three but not more.
And then pull your hand with that inside so that the hair is removed by pulling it out through the eyelid with the natural hair.
If it is necessary to draw out the poison and the hair is not removed from the area, you should apply the poultice made with that powder to the affected parts so that the poison can be drawn out of the wound effectively.
And look at it with the vision of the wound, because when you situate the patient and the faithful one, and all shout and clean the wound, and leave the clamps for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and new good flesh grows over it.
And if the hair is shorter, then you adjust a long hair from the natural hairs, and lift it with that, or leave it inside so that it stretches somewhat in space, and then you lift it.
Capitol .xiii.
From the treatment of inflammation that comes upon the upper eyelid.
When inflammation comes in the eye, and it is a contraction of the eyelid when it contracts upwards, to the right or left side, due to poor healing of wounds or burns or cautery, and it is called leporine, and this condition can be either natural or accidental, and it is caused by the healing of wounds, burns, or cautery, or resembles such ailments.
The method of the operation is that you cut through that scar tissue and separate its lips, and place in it, where those are separated, a piece of linen cloth, and tie them until they heal.
And it is not necessary for you to treat it with methods that dry out and constrict; because if you do so, the inflammation will return worse than it was at any time before.
Use those that soften it, such as fenugreek, and fumigate with water in which their ashes and seeds are mixed, or an ointment of daisy, which should be liquefied with some oils, and soak the cloth in that, and treat it with that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you should pierce with any instrument that is not solid according to the form that ignites at the beginning.
And this operation which we have spoken of is nothing more than some correction of a hernia that does not return to the form of the place as it was before.
Chapter XIV.
Of the treatment for ectropion which occurs in the eyelid.
This inflammation which occurs in the eyelid is properly called an sty; and it can be either naturally occurring or accidental.
And an accident is caused by a blow or by cutting or by cautery or by other similar means.
And the method of the operation is that you take a needle with double thread, and insert it into the flesh, making it pass from the left lacrimal to the right lacrimal, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then extend the flesh at the points above with the needle and pierce it with the needle, and incise with a broad spatula. And then return the shape of the eyelid as needed; if not, take the reed and place it in the cut shape, and with that turn the eyelid, and create the two slits on the side of the eyelid accordingly.
And let the ends of the two slits be at two angles of the incision that you have made where they converge, and form an angle between them so that when they come together, a figure is formed by them.
And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
And then remove the flesh in the amount that is the width of the sharp object left behind, which is the eyelid.
And then align the separated parts and sew them together with wool thread; and then treat them with what we have said about the mollifying medicines and the poultices until they heal.
And if you need to operate by incision or suture or cautery, then you must make a flat incision on the skin of the eyelid as described. Then separate with the poultice between the two lips as we have said.
In summary, for the treatment of an operation when it is above or below, as it occurs in the surgery, according to the preparation method of the operation, and that is in the form of various particles.
And the skilled artisan always prepares in every possible way to restore the figure to its natural form, or close to it, and that patient according to what is most advantageous for him concerning the operation and the instruments in the best conditions.
Capitol .xv.
Of the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in many individuals where the upper eyelid is adhered to the white part of the eye, and it restricts its natural movement and functions, you must intervene by inserting the tip of a spatula under the eyelid, lifting or stretching it out with tweezers.
Then you cut through the adhesion with a fine spatula, which should not be sharp at the tip of the incision, keeping it slightly blunt so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and ensure the spatula does not scratch the eye with its sharpness.
And may your incision carefully separate the adhesion so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and the entire adhesion is healed.
Then you put salty water in the eye with which you wash it; or distill juniper dissolved in water onto it.
Then separate the eyelid from the eye with goose fat, and place wool soaked in egg white over the eye; on the third day, use consolidating treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .xvi.
From the inflammation of the eyelid and the prominence of flesh from the lacrimal area.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And both conditions do not begin except from the larger tear duct, within which it gradually covers the sight and prohibits light and movement of the eye.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence line by line: And then take a needle and insert into it a horsehair or ox hair or cow hair, or similar, or strong thread, or double the small end of the needle little by little and place that in the middle of the nail, and penetrate that with the needle, and bind the nail with thread; and extend that to the upper parts, and scrape with the hair the side of the nail which is the matrix. And in this way you should proceed by placing the probe inside the patient's rear end.
And then you incise the remaining part at the root of the lacrimal duct with a fine spatula or small scissors, and separate the flesh from the natural lacrimal to ensure that continuous flow of tears does not result from this incision.
And sometimes the nail is extended with sulfur or with quicksilver, as we have said, and then it should be extracted with a lion-shaped spatula, which has this form:
And be careful that with the spatula you do not touch the corneal membrane and cause a rupture, and that the pupil is not pierced.
Then introduce a small amount of finely ground salt or seasoned plaster into the eye and leave it there until the next day; then treat it with what is appropriate until it heals.
And if the nail is not flexible and you cannot insert the needle, nor can it be placed in that one-inch area, then this kind of nail issue is treated with medicines, and it is healed just as described and recommended in the division.
And if you want to incise that area, then open the eye of the patient and take a fine spatula with an acute edge shaped like this: with subtlety. And if you find that it is rarefied and confused and embedded in that area, then apply a distillation of your choice to the eye using seasoned plaster or roasted plaster or finely ground salt, and keep the eye covered until the next day.
And then repeat the operation on that area until everything of it is removed, but rather let a counter-irritant cautery be in the wound, because when you leave that, treat at the beginning the inflammation until it is healed.
And then repeat your operation on that area until it is healed.
The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if noted in the wound causing great harm, should be suspended with a thread; and cut that part from it, but do not complete the incision so that you do not cut the tear ducts.
And then drip into the lacrimal duct a strong and made mixture until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the incision of a boil and what is born from tight flesh in the wound.
Sometimes in the wounds of some individuals, hard flesh grows and covers the pupil, or approaches and presses closely upon the eyelids, binding them together from the outer parts and assembling like a rough barrier.
Here is the translation line by line:
And let your incision be with the scalpel that we have recommended in the section about the nail, or with small scissors with which ashcel is collected according to how it will come into form near this chapter.
Therefore, when your incision is completed and all that flesh has been removed, then fill the wound with finely ground salt or sprinkle on it red powder similar to corrosive medicinal powders, and place over the wound outside a piece of egg white until it is ensured against abscess formation.
And if any cause for concern remains and there is an abundance of corrupted blood, and you fear that an abscess may form, then leave the wound open and treat that abscess with whatever will cure that abscess, and then repeat the operation until it is healed, and similarly do so in the flesh adjacent to where this kind of wound occurred.
However, you must ensure that all healing of the wound proceeds either naturally or accidentally through the use of instruments, and do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that the limb can sufficiently endure such an operation.
Chapter XVIII.
On the collection of pus in the wound.
Pus comes from inflamed veins that are hardened over the wound and prevent proper healing, causing the wound to fester for a long time.
Therefore, it is necessary at the beginning that you consider whether the wound in which there is pus is strong and if there is no other illness besides the pus; then you should collect that pus.
And you command the patient to rest their head on your lap, and then suspend those veins with an ounce or two according to your judgment; and let that ounce be of subtle doubling in this manner:
Or use two ounces gradually in one dose according to this method:
And then those veins should be tied with fine threads delicately, and cleanse the blood little by little until you see those veins cleared of dirt and turned clean.
And be careful that you do not lead the dirt with the edges of the spatula; and let your operation be in the middle of the day when the sun is up, and be firm in your operation so that you only incise those veins.
And when you have completed the procedure, then apply wormwood or rue to the dirt, because its sharpness will corrode what remains of the sediment.
But if it is not possible for you to complete everything in that hour, then apply a plaster with something that reduces the pain, and leave it for several days until the pain is subdued and an abscess is prevented.
And then apply the same method to the second area until it is healed.
And this is the form of the scissors:
Chapter XIX.
On the reduction of nasal fractures.
When you treat fractures with cauterization or sharp, burning medicines as previously narrated and it is not healed, then do not generate heat in it, but make an incision over the abscess to allow its maturity, and extract all the moisture within it until the bone is exposed.
And then when the bone is exposed and there is corruption or blackening in it, you scrape it with an instrument that has the following form:
And it is called the rough head, and it is made of Indian iron, and its head is round like a sieve that is made pointed by filing or finely perforated (as shown in the following form).
And place it on the corrupted part of the bone, then rotate it between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that the corruption has been scraped away.
And this should be done several times, and then restore the area with drying and astringent causes.
Therefore, if the area is stabilized and good flesh has grown there and the body has been separated from the pus and it remains like this for forty days, and it is not renewed, and it does not become inflamed, and no accident occurs in it, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then it is not about generating anything but rather reducing the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: you must expose the bone either with fire or with sharp medicine, and once the bone is exposed, then take a tool in accordance with this form:
The tip of the tool should be triangular, and the shaft should be gradually narrowed towards the tip in such a way.
Then place that [tool] on the bone, near the lacrimal area; extend your hand a little from the nose, and then rotate your hand with the tool until it penetrates all of the bone. The patient will feel this because air will be forced out when you do this.
Therefore, now restore the area with astringent and drying medicines as has been mentioned.
Here is the translation line by line:
Capitol .xx.
Of reducing the prominence of the wound.
When the swelling appears entirely and you do not cause any harmful or diminishing effect in the vein, then you must purge the patient, and then follow up with it, and then apply cupping to the neck at the site of scarification and sucking properly; and then apply over the swelling an ointment which is made from acacia, aloe, honey, and tragacanth, and then strengthen the plaster on the swelling with fine powder.
And the method of powders is that you take skins of mulled lions, and each skin be folded into four pieces; and make those powders.
And then place those one over the other according to the amount that the wound requires. And then bind those with a strong, tight cloth; and repeat the cupping with suction after scraping; and then remove the cups and leave the wound exposed day and night.
But if the bandage becomes loosened, then it must be tightened.
And then remove the bandage day and night as we have said.
And if the wound has already been reduced, it is good, and if not, then repeat the plaster with the powders and binding and cupping until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the incision of the uveal tunica prominence.
When there is disruption in the uveal tunica and it becomes prominent, protruding from the eyelids like a knot of raisin, and takes on a human-like form due to this, if you wish to incise this, the operation should be performed as follows: insert the needle at the base of the uvea from below upwards, then place another needle where the double thread is located near the lacrimal area, making sure it penetrates properly while keeping the first needle in its position; then incise the area of the double thread and lift the part of the uvea along the circumference of the needle with that thread and tighten it well.
And then remove the needle and place over the wound wool soaked in egg white, and leave it until the thread falls with the grape.
And then treat the wound with something that strengthens the interior so that the plague may be healed.
And sometimes, it gathers from all sides with a circle of cloth around the wound to form a large swelling, and then it should be pierced with a fine spatula to reach the core of the wound, allowing the whitish moisture to flow out, and the swelling will decrease immediately.
And then strengthen the interior so that it may heal.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of hiccups.
This illness, which is called hiccup, is nothing but a spasm that occurs in the diaphragm, resembling descending water, and it is not exactly that.
The method of treating it is to have the patient sit upright on a prepared chair. Then take their head in both your hands and direct it towards the side where you see the spasm coming from, and then stop its descent and keep it still, and the patient will see the causes just as they appear.
And if it does not go down below, know that it is water.
And if the descent of the pus has not been prepared as we have said, then place the patient between your hands and take a fine spatula and use it to separate the panniculus from the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tunic at the crown (inside the socket), until the pus is thoroughly drained.
Therefore, when it is poulticed, then you should distill hot water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have already boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then it is treated with other methods until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of water (fluid) descending from the head.
We have already mentioned the types of water in the division and which ones are suitable for piercing with a needle, declaring that according to health.
Now it is necessary that you place the patient between your hands on a chair and tie their head tightly with a binding agent.
Then place your left hand near the eyelid of their eye if the affected eye is the left one; or use your right hand if the affected eye is the right one.
Then with your right hand, take an almond if the eye is the left one; or with your left hand if the eye is the right one.
And then place the almond-shaped object near the crown due to the thickness of the ray in the white part of the eye next to the smaller tear duct, and then insert the almond with force and rotate your hand with it.
And then penetrate into the white of the eye and feel that the ulcer has already reached it due to its condition.
And it is necessary that the measurement from the almond to the pupil be equal to the space from the pupil to the end of the black part, which is the crown of the eye; for you will see with that pupil through the clarity of the corneal layer.
Then place your hand within the location where the water is, and then you pull it down once and then again, and thus if the water descends quickly, now look at the patient on which you should focus your sight immediately, and keep it in their view.
And then rest for a while; if the water has descended, then you should pause again before any kind of liquid is poured.
And then when it is cut and does not descend, you should extract the liquid easily, and rotate your hand slowly inside. Then dissolve a little clear salt in water and wash the wound with that solution; then place a small piece of cloth or stopper or wool soaked in oiled rose and egg white over the wound and secure it there.
But we and those of our time place on that wound some crushed comfrey mixed with egg white.
And if the liquid does not penetrate the wound due to its hardness—because there are some people whose wounds are very hard—then you must take the spatula named alberid, which has the following form:
And then pierce that joint with it, but do not force your hand too much, and the goal is merely to create a fine opening for the liquid.
Then introduce the liquid as we have said.
And you should complete your work by preparing the patient's dark sleeping chamber where they sleep on their back in a completely motionless state.
And pause in the nature of the condition so that it aligns with its natural state, and do not move their head to the right or left side at all.
And let the dressing be according to its placement within the third day.
And then remove that from the dark mass and expose the affected sight, and show them some causes, and then reapply the dressing within the seventh day.
And it is not necessary to do this during the hour of treatments or right before the infusion. However, it is necessary that you do this so that the water can gently permeate through with great and vigorous attention.
But if an abscess forms and requires cauterization, then you must remove the dressing before the seventh day, and treat it with whatever method alleviates the abscess.
Then you should clean the affected area and place a dressing over the face of the wound through which the movement of the affected part is regulated, leaving it in place for several days, while it remains in the dark mass.
And then it is laid down gently from that position and turned onto its side in its causes.
And know that in surgery, it is not excused for the disciple to see certain things multiple times, and then you should be bold during the operation.
And it has come to us from some of those who are in Al Artach, and some say that fire is made in Al Ayrac, a mound that is pierced through which water is drawn.
But however I have not seen anyone in our land who has perfected this, nor have I read this in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the spices from Magdala for which it is placed on those who ignore them:
And let them be made of wax or of proper iron, and let the extremities of them have this subtlety triangulated, the sharp end thus as that is the form.
Capitol .xxiv.
From the treatment of flesh hanging from the nose.
When on the nose diverse kinds of flesh grow that cause something akin to a stinging sensation from heavy smoke or like a swelling in the nasal area; and this ailment is called polypus because it resembles that swelling. And if it is cancerous flesh, it appears pale; and what is not pale-colored is not lion-flesh (likely referring to healthy or non-cancerous flesh).
Therefore, in those cases where the flesh is not fraudulent nor cancerous, it is necessary that the patient sit between your hands and be placed in the sun, and you should open his nostrils, and pierce the area with a needle in those areas of the flesh. And then extract that to the outer parts, and then dissect what you have grasped of those with a sharp and fine spatula from one part inside where you know all the flesh has been removed; so if there remains any cause by which the amputation is possible, then cut through it with one of the fine instruments easily until nothing remains that could be a reason to leave anything behind. And if it is dominated by blood or an abscessed apostema that has become inflamed, then you apply what is necessary; if it is one of the malignant apostemas, then you cut and cauterize it until the blood is stopped and all the cavities are removed.
And then it should be placed in the nose near the beginning with wine or water. But if the nose is open and you process moisture that reaches the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
But if the moisture does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside there is flesh still present in the pus over the bones of the nose to which amputation has not been successful.
Therefore, now it is necessary to introduce a thread into the area where there is any swelling, and tie knots in the thread at intervals, placing between each knot a distance equal to that of a finger or thumb, and treat the patient by inserting one end of the thread into their nostrils either with your hand or another method that is possible for you.
And after this has been done, that he draw his breath in such a way that it reaches the canals of the nose, and let him sit over his handkerchief, for many white-covered faces perform this action at schools, and it is an easy method for those who wish to do so.
And then place the two ends of the thread, one end coming out over the nose and the other remaining inside the nose, and then apply stitching to the flesh with the knots that are on the thread, and do this until you know that the flesh is already secured by the knots of the thread.
And then extract the thread and place it in the nose near the site of the bleeding, put a plug there, and do this for three days or longer until the poultice has dissolved all that is rotten from the flesh.
And then at the end of the treatment, place a lead cannula in the nose for several days until it is healed.
If you decide to use drying as part of the treatment, apply it accordingly.
And this is the form of the instrument used for nasal medication delivery with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nose:
And make this from silver or ceramic, which should resemble a small open lamp, like a little bowl, and the body similarly.
And if you want, make a closed tube like a reed, and the opening of the instrument used for purging should be flat and uncovered; to which you should hold it at the back part of him, with which you have what is heated in oil or whatever you want from the juices and suction devices.
Chapter XXV.
On nasal polyps in the outer parts of the nose.
Small greenish growths are nasal polyps in the outer parts of the nose, and they swell and increase within a few days to the point where their presence is noticeable.
And because of this, you should incise it at the beginning of its appearance and completely remove all of it. Then place a cautery or a burning medicine in its place over the area.
But if the incision is delayed until it has grown larger, then consider whether it has become hardened, firm, dark in color, and less sensitive. In this case, do not touch it with iron, for it is a chronic aposteme; because many times one who incises this aposteme does great harm to the area where it was.
And if the abscess is of a red appearance and not of a black color, and whenever incision is possible in all of it, then evacuate the patient and incise that without fear, and treat the area with something that dries and constrains until it heals.
Chapter XXVI.
Of缝合鼻子和嘴唇和耳朵的情况，当它们的连续性因伤或类似情况而断裂。
Know that when you cause a rupture of continuity in one of these cartilages, you do not succeed much in that operation except in some cases.
Therefore, when someone has any of those causes, you should consider if it is a fresh wound with its own blood, and then you should缝合伤口的两边，并且接下来治疗内部以促进愈合。
And if the edges of the discontinuity are already separated and each is made whole, then you must pull each part of its visible chain until blood comes out. And then bring together the two lips with sutures and tighten them, and sprinkle dragon's blood powder over them, which has been finely ground, and place over the powder a piece of diafinition plaster or some other consolidating plaster, and leave that dressing for two days or three, and then remove it and replace the plaster until the stitches have separated on their own, and then treat with an ointment until it is healed.
And the method of suturing is that you close the discontinuity using needles as we have recommended in the suturing of the abdomen, or close the discontinuity with stitches as you know how to do.
Chapter XXVII.
On the extraction of those causes that occur within the two lips in the internal parts.
Often, in many men, within the internal parts of their lips, there appear hard swellings resembling lard. Some of these are smaller and some are larger.
Therefore, you must turn the lips inside out and cut each of those hard swellings completely, then fill the area with finely ground sage until the blood is constricted. Then wash it with sweet wine and treat the area with a styptic agent until it is healed.
Capitol .xxviii.
From the incision of the flesh fitted into the gums.
There are many swellings above the flesh fitted into the gums, which the ancients called alveoli. Then you must suspend that with an ounce or hold that with forceps and incise that deeply to its root, allowing the pus or blood to flow.
Then apply over the area some crushed sage or other styptic or cicatrizant powders.
And if that flesh returns, then incise it again, and cauterize it, because after the cautery it will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
On the extraction of teeth with forceps.
When on the surface of the teeth, both those inside and outside, and between the gums, there are sharp splinters, decayed parts, and some swellings that are blackened or take on yellow or green colors, indicating corruption in the gum and leading to decayed teeth.
And therefore it is necessary that you seat the patient between your hands and place their head on your thigh, and examine the teeth in which you see those scurfy deposits and causes resembling sand so that none of them remain, and this is done for the blackness and yellowness and other conditions to be cleansed.
Therefore, if what remains is at the beginning of the reason, that's good; and if not, then you repeat the reasoning on those [points] another day and the second and the third until it comes to the final statement in which you want.
And know that teeth require various forms and many shapes of forceps according to what is prepared for your operation. And therefore the razor with which the tooth is cut from inside is different from the razor used to cut between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of razors you should prepare, which you will see shortly:
Chapter .xxx.
For the eradication of teeth.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Here is the translation line by line:
Therefore, you must be certain which tooth is painful, and once you know well, then you need to scrape around the tooth with a spatula that has some power, until it separates from the gum all around, and then pull it out with your fingers, or with fine scissors bit by bit until it comes out completely.
And then take large strong pliers for good leverage or a strong extraction, and hold the patient's head between your knees so that you can control it well and it doesn't move, and then pull the tooth straight out in such a way that you do not break it, nor cause greater pain to the patient.
And if it is not easily removed, then take one of those instruments and carefully extract it from all sides, applying force to remove it just as you did at the beginning.
But if the tooth is loose or corroded, then you must wrap that loose part with cloth and secure it with the tip of a fine thread so that it does not break when you apply pressure to it with the pliers.
And it is necessary that you act carefully with scarification around all parts of the gum and be mindful of your strength so as not to tear it or leave a part broken, and return to the patient for the mischief to be greater than the initial pain.
And beware that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their stubbornness and audacity regarding the removal of them, which is not what we have recommended; for many times they bring upon men great illnesses which are more difficult to treat, and the roots of which remain hidden entirely, or some of those, or even extract it along with some bones of the jaw as we have often witnessed.
And then after the extraction, wash the mouth with hot wine or acidic wine with salt.
And if bleeding occurs because of this, just as it may happen occasionally, then sprinkle some amount of sage over the wound, and if the sage does not help, apply a cautery.
The form of the forceps and delicate tongs with which the tooth is extracted at the beginning should be long on the outer end, short in handle, and thick, so that they do not bend when you use them.
And they should be such that the thick handles ensure that when you grasp them tightly, they do not bend, and their outer ends should be short.
And they should be made of Indian iron, properly crafted with straight ends, and at the ends of these, there should be teeth that fit into each other and grip tightly through constriction. Sometimes, the ends of these should have the shape of the beak of a bird called a ciconia, which is a stork, and they are of strong constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.
For the eradication of teeth and extraction of the bones of the jaws that are trapped.
When you must extract a tooth that is broken and some root remains, then it is necessary for you to place a cotton ball over the area for one or two days until the spot is softened; and then insert tongs or forceps whose ends are shaped like the beak of a bird called stork or spoonbill, the form of the forceps:
The limbs should be treated within as if they were iron or wood.
And if it does not obey to you with these forceps or tongs, then you must cut over the root and peel off all the flesh and introduce the tool which is called an atale, which is a small lever of this shape:
And if it is a thick short extremity, make a small incision, and do not penetrate deeply so that it is not broken.
Therefore, if by this the incision is well-placed, it's good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular with an extremely sharp point, in which there should be some thickness:
The form of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a finer tip.
And already assisted with this instrument having two prongs, which has the following form: And with other instruments which I previously described for tooth scraping; because it is very useful to perform this with the instrument which resembles an onion's root, and this is its form:
From the twisted or shortened triangular extremity, which has some thickness, and should not be forced in such a way that it is not broken.
And you should know that the tools for the teeth are similar to other instruments.
May the skilled and subtle artisans find for themselves according to what the operation and diverse diseases signify to them; for there are diseases for which the ancients neither mentioned nor prescribed specific instruments, due to the forms of various types.
But if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are fractured, or if you can, then treat it by placing it in its proper position using what is suitable among the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots, and assist with the manipulation which has this form:
And let there be a small swelling that is reduced little by little, and it should be compressed or held with the mouth so that it does not spread or escape until the bone is fully set; then restore the area with appropriate medicines.
But if there is a small hole or decay in the bone, then clean that area of the decay and its darkness, and treat it until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxii.
Regarding the treatment of prominent teeth over others.
When the prominent teeth do not follow their natural course and the form is loose, especially when it happens to women, and particularly to those who are more venerable; therefore you must consider: if a tooth is close to another tooth and it is not possible to pull or file it down, then extract that one; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then cut it with this instrument of which this is the form; and it resembles a pig's snout, and should be made of Indian steel with an extremely sharp edge.
And let your incision be such that you cut it over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, and that none of the other teeth are infected.
And if a tooth is prominently exposed to filing, then file it with an Indian iron file, which has this form:
And if it is all made of Indian iron and the margin is also well-made; and it should be made with fine points like a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth should be filed little by little over several days with ease, so that no other tooth is damaged or falls out. And then sew that area at the end, and shave that place with sharp razors.
And if it is a tooth of which a part is broken and hurts the tongue, then you must file that inside so that the roughness of that fracture is removed and smoothed out, and fill it so that the tongue is not hurt and speech is not impaired.
Chapter .xxxiii.
For the restoration of bad teeth with gold or silver filings.
When you encounter front teeth that are loose due to concussion or displacement from impact or falling, and the patient cannot chew on what they eat, and you have treated it with astringent medicines but your treatment has not been effective, now in order for them not to fall out, it is recommended to bind them with gold thread rather than silver thread, because silver can corrode and will loosen over some days, whereas gold never changes.
And let the thread be of such subtlety and thickness that it can fit between the teeth; the method is to take the thread and place double its amount between two healthy teeth, then weave it with two twists of the thread around the loose tooth or teeth until the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. Then repeat the weaving from the side where you began, and hold your hand with ease and skill until it is secure.
And let your ligature be with which you tie the threads of the teeth that do not fit properly.
And then cut the excess bile ducts with forceps or scissors, and add those to each area carefully, and place them between the healthy tooth and the diseased tooth, so that they do not cause injury to the tongue. And then loosen that binding tightly as a rope.
And if it is loosened or broken, strengthen that or those with another thread in such a manner throughout its entire length.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the reaction of two healthy teeth and two diseased ones, just as you see these tied together:
And when it is necessary to return one or two teeth back to their proper places at the gum line, and they are grown back as we have described, and that they hold.
And this is not done by just any artisan but by a wise one.
And sometimes a piece of cow's bone is shaped like a tooth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is fastened as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the condition of the ligament that affects the tongue and prevents speech.
This ligament that affects the tongue sometimes is natural, with which a person is born, or it is accidental and occurs due to an injury that has already healed.
And the operation involves opening the mouth of the patient, with their head positioned in your lap; then lift their tongue, and next cut that nervous ligament according to the width within which the tongue is detached from its root.
But if there is any hardness or knotting in that area, and this is due to the healing of an injury, then you take some force and split that area along the width within which you have cut the ligament and dissolved the knot.
And be careful not to make a cut in the skin and that you do not split the artery here, causing blood to flow.
Then wash the remnants of the incision with wine or with vinegar or with cold water; then place a lint under the tongue; this is the method by which the patient should keep their tongue under a lint every night to prevent it from becoming solidified again.
Here is the translation of the given sentence: And then treat with the other causes so that he may be healed.
It seems like you've provided a section marker or heading from an old text, possibly a medieval manuscript or historical document. The ".xxxv." indicates that this is the 35th chapter or section (since "xxxv" in Roman numerals equals 35). Without any accompanying content, there isn't much to translate or explain further. If you have additional text from this section and would like it translated or explained, please provide it!
This line appears to be in an old form of a Romance language, similar to medieval Latin or early Italian/Spanish/French. It refers to the extraction of a ranula from the tongue. Here is the translation:
Here is the translation line by line:
And the operation on him is that you open the mouth of the patient facing the sun and examine the abscess.
And if you see it of dark or black color, hard, in which the patient does not feel any sensation, then do not touch that which is gangrenous.
And if it has turned white, where there is moisture, then you insert your finger into it and incise that with a fine spatula, and cut it entirely; and if blood begins to flow during the time of your operation, then you place over it thrice-ground vitriol until the bleeding stops.
Then return to your work until you have completely removed it, washing it with sweet wine and salt; and treat that area with the other cure prescribed until it is healed.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the extraction of abscesses from the ears and those that form in the throat, as well as other abscesses.
When they occur in the throat, they are glands that resemble small lumps, which appear externally and are called ears. When you treat them as we have said in the division and it does not heal, then consider if the abscess is hard, dark in color, with little sensation; in this case, do not touch it with metal.
And if it is of red color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron because of the blood flow; before you leave that to ripen within, and then either you will take it out or it will break open by itself.
And if it is of white color, like a root, and its stem is thin, then that is what needs to be cut open.
And the operation on it is that you consider, before your operation, if the abscess has already rested after being cauterized completely or if it has decreased somewhat; and then make the patient sit facing the sun, with their head in your lap, open their mouth, and the servant takes their tongue and holds it out using a noble instrument of this form:
And it should be made of silver or iron, and it should be sharp like a knife.
So as you press with that instrument on the tongue and the abscess is shown to you, spit over it with your saliva, then take some [ substance ] and insert it into the abscess, and pull it outwards as much as you can. And here is the translation of the given line:
And here is the translation of the given line: And it is similar to forceps, but the ends of it are curved, so that the opening of each one is in line with the other, sharp points, which are made of hardened iron.
But if this instrument is not available to you, then incise it with a spatula of which this is the form: It is sharp on one side, blunt on the other side.
And since you have incised one part, incise the other in the same manner of incision, and then the patient will be cleansed with cold water.
But if there is a flow of blood, cleanse with water decocted from pomegranate peel or myrtle leaves and similar astringents until the flow of blood is stopped, and then treat it until it is healed.
And sometimes abscesses form in the gums or on the other ears, and incise those in the same manner as I have described for incising two parts.
And I have already treated a woman with an abscess that had formed in her gums, which abscess tended to a brown color, was of little sensitivity, and had already closed her gums, causing her to breathe through a very narrow passage. She had been deprived of food and water, and she was nearing death if it had lasted for another day or two.
And the abscess had risen so much that there were two routes through which it would burst out from between two folds.
And I carefully cut into one of its openings and pulled it out, and a large portion was removed. Then I incised the other side from where I understood there was another route, then I closed the mouth of it, and held its tongue, then I placed the onion in that abscess.
And then I cut away a large part of it, and there was only a little bit of blood flowing from it. So the swelling of that woman is absolute, and she should start drinking water immediately, then eat food. So I did not stop incising that abscess many times for a long time, and another abscess would form in place of it, which I continued to incise until that period was prolonged.
So I took some material and cauterized the swelling of it, thus adding to the treatment; then I walked around and did not know what God would do about that situation near me.
Chapter XXXVII.
On the incision of a boil when it is abscessed.
When the catarrh affects the boil, and it becomes abscessed and elongated, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in a part that is thick and round, then it is called a bubo.
However, when it is treated with what we have said in the division and you do not trust your treatment, and you find that the abscess has already hardened and become subtle, then you must incise those parts that are round and aggregated. And if it extends to a certain length and is bloody, of dark or black color, and is not at the center, then you must attempt to incise it, for there is fear for the patient in such a condition.
And when you see that [the worm] according to the manner I have said about its whiteness and length, make the patient sit up and press their tongue with an instrument of which the shape protrudes, then insert the ounce into the new opening, and pull it down and cut it with one of two instruments which are mentioned in the incision of two halves.
And it is necessary that you do not incise beyond what is appropriate over the natural limit of its addition, for if you incise more, you will damage their speech.
And then for the incision, use what we have recommended in the incision of two melons, and treat it so that it may be healed.
If the patient is frightened by the incision of the cautery, it is necessary to use ingenuity in the cauterization due to their fear, and the method of the cautery on them is only with sharp water. You must place the head of the patient on your knee, then press their tongue with the instrument we have mentioned, then take the water we have described in the chapter on cauterization, warm it up with that live cause, and hold it neither too thick nor too thin, and with that fill the concavity of the instrument which has this shape:
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And then take the medicine in your hand and apply it to the uvula for a short period of time until you see it become darkened and soothed by the effect of the medicine.
And if you want, take a cloth and wrap it around the end of the ray, then submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the ray with the cloth into a tube until the cloth adheres to that tube, and do this as many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization process, and then let it dry out and fall off after about three or four days.
And if you need to reapply the medicine, do so, and then clean around the cauterized area with a cloth dipped in wine vinegar, modify that which is in the vicinity of it from the effects of the medicine, wash it with cold water, and treat it externally with an embrocation, and internally with decoctions until it is healed.
And this type of treatment is safer than incision and lasts longer in terms of protection.
During certain instances, the uvula is treated with something subtler than cautery and incision, for it is healed through sublimation in this manner: take candles, hyssop, origanum, rue, Arabian sage, camomile, fennel, and similar herbs; combine all these ingredients or some of them in a pot; they should be submerged in sour wine and boiled; the pot must be well sealed with an appropriate lid, and there should be a tube in the middle of the pot on which a concave instrument made of silver or iron is placed.
And the end should be inserted into the patient's mouth so that the vapor reaches the uvula over which the instrument is placed, so that the uvula becomes moist and obscured.
And then repeat this process several times until it is dry, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of an inflammation event, because it could excessively aggravate the inflammation. You should not do this but rather leave the treatment of the inflammation to cauterization.
But if you do not have this instrument, then take a reed and attach a hen's egg to one end of it, so that the patient's mouth is protected, because the eggshell prevents the vapor from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
It seems like you've provided a section indicator, "Capitul .xxxviii.", which translates to "Chapter XXXVIII" in English. This indicates the start of chapter thirty-eight in a text or document. If there is more content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, please provide it, and I'll be happy to help!
On the extraction of spines and of what adheres in the eyelid, and of other causes.
Motives seen adhering in the groin or spine of feet or some other cause.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And that which does not appear and is hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because by doing so, the cause attached to the throat will be forcefully expelled through vomiting; or let the patient swallow a piece of nap (a type of herb) or of chicory lettuce or a bit of dry bread; or take a piece of dry sea sponge, and moisten it strongly with honey, then give the patient to swallow that, because when it reaches the place where thorns are and is extracted, it will be forcefully expelled. And further, take an eel and bind it with honey, and place it inside, and gently extract it; or take a leek and gently insert it and gently draw it out.
And if it is not forcefully expelled by those means which we have mentioned, then use an instrument of lead according to this form:
And it should be thicker than a small tube, and at the end of it, there should be a cavity that you can easily insert into the patient's throat.
And raise his head up, and be careful not to touch the bones of his throat, so that you do not cause harm and avoid pushing against the bone or spine, or let the doctor use his hand for that.
And however, the patient should be involved more, by their knowledge of the place of the attached cause and pressing into it, and they pull their hand with the instrument onto it, all of this according to the quantity that is prepared for them internally before being plugged in.
The text provided is not a full sentence but rather a chapter or section heading. Here's how it would be translated:
From the extraction of the leech attached to the neck.
When treating a leech with the methods we have mentioned in the section on treatment with medicines and not compresses, consider placing the patient's neck under the sun, since you have moved its tongue with an instrument that we have recommended.
Therefore, if you use bloodletting, extract it with a small needle or with subtle and appropriate gestures.
And if it is not possible for you to extract with that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the throat of the patient, and then place in the concavity of the cannula a piece of ignited iron, and do this as many times (until the blood-sucking creature is dead and removed from the throat) and the patient must abstain from water for the entire day.
And then take a vessel full of cold water, and open the mouth of the patient in it, and wash the mouth with that; and do not let any part go unwashed and change the water every hour with your hand, for the blood-sucking leeches will immediately sense the water passing.
If it is not relieved by what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with camphor or asafoetida using the instrument we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, whichever may apply.
And here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And if it does not work, then you repeat the subfumigation several times, and abstain the patient from drinking, and eating salty and spicy foods, and do not drink water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen be strictly followed.
And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodsucking from the throat is treated when it is seen; and it resembles forceps in that way, though there is some curvature to it: Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Capitol .xl.
In this passage is the summary of the discourse concerning abscesses and their incision.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.
And in various ways there is a difference in puncturing and drying them by two methods, of which one is through the type of abscesses that you insert into; and by this we address the humors.
And the second method concerns the areas where bodily accidents occur, for an abscess in the head is different from an abscess in the buttocks; and an abscess occurring in a fleshy part is different from an abscess in a joint; and each of them requires its own treatment through surgery.
And regarding abscesses, some of them should not be punctured until the pus is fully matured or complete.
And other abscesses that need to be treated when they are still raw and have not yet fully matured according to their completeness, such as abscesses near joints. For an abscess that approaches a joint, its nature is prolonged until you can remove what is inside it; otherwise, the ligaments or nerves of that joint may become corrupted, causing contraction of that limb. Or if the abscess is near a principal limb and you delay piercing it until it matures on its own, it might affect the principal limb; or if it is near the buttocks, pierce it even if not fully matured. Do not puncture one that is raw and incomplete in digestion, but rather one close to the buttocks, so that its poison does not spread internally within the buttocks, leading to fistula formation, or that it might not heal properly at its site. And you must know the time of the abscess's puncture, and this is when it has matured.
And know that it is mature when there is the cessation of pain and the cessation of fever, then the reduction of heat and pulse, and the sharpness at the head of the abscess, and the other signs.
And you should know that the puncture must be made at the lowest point of the abscess, where the pus from the healing prominence will come out.
And the puncture should always be made along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in areas of the hands or feet, and in places of veins, tendons, nerves; and finally, in all similar places where there is no reflection; for in those that do reflect, use puncturing according to that member.
But when the abscess is in a fleshy area, it is better to delay the puncture until the digestion of the second stage is confirmed, as we have said; for if you pierce it before that, it prolongs the suffering of the poor patient and increases filth, and hardens the lips of it and deepens it.
However, some abscesses are punctured across the width of the flesh or body due to necessity, or according to what the affected limb requires.
And you must administer a small puncture for small abscesses, and in large abscesses, a large puncture or multiple incisions according to the size of the abscess.
And for those abscesses in which the skin must be depressed and cut open, when it is done thus like bread and becomes so that it remains stable, just as if you were dealing with clusters of boils and buboes.
And of those which are incised with a section having three angles; and of those in which it is incised like the shape of a miter leaf, such as the aphthous sores of the ankles.
And of those in which a round section and a lunar section are administered, and similar things to those.
And for those that are not like abscesses on the surface of the skin, you must pierce them with a superficial puncture or a flat incision only.
And when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, you should pierce it, not worrying about extracting all of the pus at that time; first extract some of it, then apply a poultice to the abscess on another day, then extract a larger portion, and continue doing this several times according to gradual progression until it is completely drained.
And especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old person in decline, because the animal spirit often dissolves with the discharge of pus, and the patient can die quickly, so you must operate carefully.
Pay close attention to this chapter with great caution, and when you perform the puncture on these abscesses, make sure to clean the wounds and then consider whether the wound of the abscess is small or flat; in such cases, apply ointments made from lime or old pitch. If the abscess is large and the fissures from the puncture are numerous, then you must place a bandage on each spot until they heal together.
And if in the abscess a part of the chain is severed or you have hollowed that out along the circumference, then you must pack it with old pitch or a cloth bandage made from lime-infused material, just as when you extract stones or roots, keeping them moist; strengthen that area by the third day; and then treat it further using appropriate ointments until it is healed.
And if blood flow occurs during your operation, then you should administer cold water and sweet wine in which you soak a cloth, and place that over the site of the bleeding multiple times.
But if the bleeding persists, then you must administer treatment and cure, and use powders which I have recommended in various places of this our book and division.
But if it is during the winter season, and the site of the swelling is an area with many nerves, then you should soak pillows in wine and heated oil, and place them over those areas.
And if it is during summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you should place pillows soaked in water and oil or in wine and oil, and all of this should be done repeatedly until the third day, as we have said, and then you must drain the swelling, clean it, and administer to its treatment whatever suits it until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary to know about the treatment of swellings generally, but according to the method of distinction, I have already spoken of each swelling individually in separate chapters regarding how it should be treated.
Capitol .xli.
Of the section of abscesses which come upon the nape of the neck.
On the nape of the neck, small abscesses appear, and they are similar to nodes that contain tunics in their formation; and their kinds are spots.
And among them are pustules, and those that contain moisture similar to lime. And among them are those that contain moisture similar to powder, and they resemble each other; and there are also those that are stony and hard.
And in the section of all, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, because the extraction of those does not cause any opposition or harm.
And the operation in the section of those is that you express them with an instrument whose form is appropriate for this, which is called a probe, until you know what it contains.
For if what it contains is moisture, then you should divide it by making a longitudinal section with a superficial incision in the following manner:
And you begin at the section of line B within line G. Then as the humidity is evacuated, you scar that skin which contains that moisture, and do not leave any cause behind, for the condition returns if any cause remains.
And then immerse a cloth in Egyptian ointment, if it is available, and if not, in water and salt; and fill the wound with that and leave it there for another day, because with this you corrode all that is rotten of that film.
And then apply the Egyptian ointment to that cloth a second and third time if necessary, until you are confident that there is no longer any rot caused by that film; then treat the wound with ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then you should incise it in the following manner: using a section having the shape of a cross, and insert your fingers between the two edges of the incision and spread it out in all directions, and exert your strength in extracting the membrane which contains that.
But if your bow (tool or method) causes difficulties, then do what I have first described to you.
And similarly treat the calcified abscess with incision and cure as I have told you; the incision on a calcified abscess is lighter, because it has little blood and little moisture.
And sometimes there are some swellings on the heads of some men in which it is not all moisture; the cause of this was that I dissected an abscess on the head of an old woman and found the abscess as hard, rough, white, which could not be crushed, and if someone were to strike with that, it would hurt.
But in the other swellings or accidents in the head, which are not covered by this chapter, such as the swellings that occur on children's heads and around the earlobes, these sections are all considered to be superficial.
And stop the perforation of those from the lower part so that the body is relieved of the discharge in the lower areas.
And then treat those with whatever is appropriate for healing.
Chapter XLII.
On the incision of scrofula which occurs in the neck.
Moisture and cold often cause these swellings in the neck and armpits; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck are formed by moisture that develops between them, and all of these scrofula are within their own specific layer, just as in the knots and swellings of the head, as we have mentioned.
And the types of these scrofula are diverse, for some are stone-like, some contain moisture, and others are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, in the case where you find it to be of good disposition upon touch, wherein the color that is visible is close to the color of the swelling, and it is soft throughout, and not attached to the neck's nerves, veins, or arteries, and is not hard, you should incise it with a sharp superficial cut from above down along the line G within the B line, and scrape it thoroughly, and extend both sides of the swelling with forceps, or with multiple forceps if needed, as we have said for swellings in the head, and extract it bit by bit.
And it is more cautious that the vein or nerves not be cut.
And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that it does not cause you to cut with your hand or disturb the patient, and cut only what is necessary; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and prevent your operation, then apply ground vitriol or other powders that stop blood flow, and constrict the wound, and leave within what alleviates the sharpness of the abscess so that the wound may soften and begin to become pus-filled. When the blood is congealed.
Then return to your operation before you have completed it.
And then examine with your index finger if there is any cause of the other small swellings, and then incise those and clean them.
And if it is near the main vein of the large swelling, you should not incise that swelling at its root. Before that, you must wrap it with a strong double bandage and leave it in such a way that it falls by itself without harm.
And then fill the wound with old cataplasm that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then treat it.
And if you incise that swelling entirely, then you must bring the two edges of the wound together and suture them immediately so that there is no remaining excess material.
But if you see that there is excess material due to the size of the swelling, you must understand how to incise its root, remove it, and administer sutures as mentioned.
And for those swellings that contain moisture, puncture it with a superficial incision where you see the site of maturation, and make an incision to drain the pus from the base of the swelling, as we have said.
And then administer a puncture, using cantharides with ointment and similar substances, so that it corrodes what remains of the corruption. And then when you see the wound already cleaned, now you treat it with a poultice of generative flesh until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.
From the section about the incision of the pus pocket occurring within the throat.
The ancients used to call this section the epiglottis, and I have not seen anyone in our land perform such a procedure.
And this is the inscription of the speech of those [individuals].
And in men with hernias, the extraction of the epididymis must be avoided, as this would not bring benefit because all the veins and major ones of the patient are here.
And in those who have abscesses caused in the mouth or throat or both ears, when the disease is not in the bone, one must operate on the section of the gland to avoid the destruction that is caused by perforation.
Therefore, when we want to do this, we must incise the eyelid leaving three circles of the eyelid, or four small sections across its width between two circles in quantity, so that the cut is on the tarsus, not on the cartilage, and this location is suitable for cutting because it lacks flesh and the blood vessels there are sparse.
And if the doctor is inexperienced, it is necessary that he stretches out the tendon of the ankle with his thumb, and then cuts the tendon until it reaches the channel, but avoids the blood vessels if any are seen.
And then incise the hernia as we have recommended; it is indicated on the section of the canal by the flame which is of that kind when it is disrupted and by the separation of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
So when the hour is suspected in which the perforation is feared, add two threads to the chain of the wound, and use that single one for the cartilage.
And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow where it needs to be healed.
And Albucasis says that the summary of the speech we have recounted is not an exposition but rather that some of these abscesses have obstructed the windpipe of the patient, and the patient has come close to death, and their breath is cut off, and some proceed to incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe through the site of the wound by some respiration and be saved from death.
And by this, you should leave the wound open until the harmfulness of the disease is consumed; and it takes three days for the harmfulness to pass; and then after that, you should close the wound, and care for it until it is healed.
And what I have seen in my practice is that a servant took a knife and inserted it into her throat and with that, incised a part of the windpipe, and I was called for her treatment, and I found the sound just as it sounds when one is dying, and uncovered the wound and found blood that had seeped from the small wound.
Therefore, I must confess that she had not cut any vein or artery, and the air came out of the wound, and she bandaged it until it healed.
And it does not affect the servant if there is no hoarseness in their voice, and then after some days they return to the improvement of their conditions.
And now I say that in the section of the hernia there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.
Of sectioning over an abscess that you encounter on the groin externally, and it is called a groin hernia.
This abscess called a groin hernia is a large abscess according to the body's color, and it occurs frequently in women.
And it happens in two ways, for either it is natural or accidental.
And in the natural case, there is no need to cure.
And the accidental occurs in two ways, one of which resembles fatty knots, and the other way is similar to an abscess, which is caused by arterial obstruction, and fear is associated with it. And it is not necessary to apply pressure with iron except in the case where it is small. And you should probe that area and investigate it with your finger. If you find something resembling fatty knots, and it is not suspended by any veins, then incise it as you would for knots, and extract it using what contains the flesh and bursa; otherwise, thoroughly examine its entire being, and then treat the area with whatever cure is necessary until it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
On the section of types of knots or nodules.
About the various types of knots, I have already described all their types in the division [or classification].
And it is necessary that I recount thus the difference between a knot and a hernia as if there were doubt.
So I say that with a hernia, there is heat and fever and intense pain until the swelling of the excess subsides; and complete putrefaction occurs at which point the fever, pain, and heat cease.
But with a knot, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a solid mass which is like a lion's paw in its own sack.
And it depends on the color of the body, and its beginning is like a seed and forms in such a way, whether larger or smaller, and they are of two types: dry or fatty, containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are spots, as I have said in the division.
So it is necessary, when you reach the treatment of a knot, that you extract it and seek to address it at its origin using a method called intromission, the form of which will be described in the upcoming chapter.
And it is the method of investigating abscesses and all knots, which involves taking this instrument and inserting it into the most moist area you find in the abscess. You will stir the said areas little by little with that instrument until you know that the instrument has penetrated the core.
And then finish placing your hand according to the measurement of the size of the abscess, and then extract the foreign matter and examine what has been left in the wound.
And if the current humidity, of whatever color it may be, is expelled, then you incise it with a superficial section as I have said in the case of other abscesses.
And if there is no humidity left in the wound from the foreign matter, then you know that it is pus.
And dry it with a section in the shape of a cross as follows: Do as you have been taught, suspend it with weights, and unroll the bandage easily from all sides, and cover the skin or sack, if you can, over that and extract the scab with the knot.
But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract that scab, and sometimes this happens, and then you must remove it in pieces to ensure nothing remains.
For if any part of it remains, whether little or much, the scab will return as before.
And if you see that some small part remains from it, then complete the wound with some sharp and strong corrosive powders and bind up the wound, and place over that which is about to become an abscess a cautery, and treat that with another form of cure until it is healed.
And if the swelling is large, then you cut the two sides of it and treat that with something that promotes flesh growth.
But if the pulse is contrary, or non-pulsating, then you cut and fill the area with something like triturated vitriol and leave that in place for two or three days until the wound becomes pus-filled and the blood's swelling subsides; then return to excising what remains of the node.
Chapter XLVI.
On the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
Regarding the forms of the instruments used for insertion, they come in three sizes: some are large, some are medium, and some are small.
The form of the large instrument is as follows:
The form of introducing something small is as follows:
Here is the translation of the given line:
And these are the forms of the experts, and they are called herbs, and one of those is called birch.
And from three spices, for among them are grain, wheat, and a little [of something else].
The form of great experience, form of it:
The form of experienced midwife, form of it:
The form of the small intestine, as follows:
It seems that the text is written in a form of medieval or old Romance language, which shares similarities with Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Given this context, here's an attempt to translate the provided sentence into English:
And you make them round, thick, like large needles with which leather is sewn together, and they are made of citrus wood, or wood, or iron, or silver, and the best ones are those made of citrus wood.
And the practice is to use black feathers, with which they remember that by those the fistulas are opened in the cavity where they are reflected, and are illuminated with their light with those reflections.
And of three types, for some are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the stricture of it.
Forma del experient gran de plom:
Form of the experienced midwife with lead:
Form of the small lead pipe:
The forms of the tumors are of various types, for some are simple ones, which have only one curvature, and they are of three types: large, small, and medium.
And from these are formed hooks, and they are of three kinds.
And of those hooks having two curves, and of three types.
And since they have three curvatures, and they are of three types.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Form of a simple small unit, the form being as follows:
Form of a large unit having two curvatures: Form of a half unit having two curvatures: Form of a small unit having two curvatures:
Form of a large unit having three curvatures:
Forma de unci migier havent tres curvaturas:
And these are the forms of the scalpels with which nodules and abscesses are cut and squeezed, and they come in three types, for there is a large one, a medium one, and a small one.
Form of the large scalpel:
Forma del scapel migier:
Forma de scapel pauc:
The extremities with which a section is made are sharp, and the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a manner as to cause harm during the lancing of nodes; this is done to avoid the risk of incision into a vein or nerve, so that through these actions the patient may be healed and find some tranquility from the heat which comes from the lancing of the abscess.
And these are the forms of almagidas, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
They should be made from wheat and have the appearance of grains with which alcohol is made.
And it is on the smooth extremity that is punctured with a hidden spatula and in that area, you can access both the internal and external parts as you see fit.
The forms of spatimis, which are hidden between the fingers causing the puncture of the abscesses and the patients do not feel them, and they come in three types: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of cups with which the blood flow is interrupted, and it comes in three types: large, medium, and small; the shapes are as follows:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut, e sian subtils.
And it is necessary that these types of cupping glasses be large, medium, and small, so that through those you can quickly draw off blood flow when needed, and at the times when first aid medicine is not available.
However, do not use them to cut the blood throughout the entire body, but only in fleshy areas, such as on the creases of the chest and thighs, and at the creases of the arms, and from the breasts and the belly and the knees, and similar fleshy moist creases.
And sometimes other small instruments resembling scars of vipers in this form are made; with which the blood is cut off when performing phlebotomy or proper incision of a vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round in this form:
Chapter XLVII.
On the treatment of men's breasts that resemble those of women.
Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen due to the pressure of sleep as they start to become flaccid, and then the breasts swell and resemble those of women, becoming pendulous and full of abscesses.
And for the one who wishes to treat this condition, you must incise those areas with a lunar section in this form, from line B inward to line G, and then remove all the swelling, and then apply a flesh-growing medication to the wound, and then sew together the two lips of the wound, and care for it until it is healed.
Here is the translation of the given text line by line into English:
And if you do not complete the incision of that which needs to be cut due to the restlessness of the patient and blood flow, then you must fill the wound with a cloth soaked in a corrosive ointment and leave it there until it corrodes the fat tissues, and then treat it so that it may heal.
It seems like you've provided a section or chapter title from an old text, specifically "Capitul .xlviii." which translates to "Chapter XLVIII" in English. This indicates that the following content is part of the 48th chapter of whatever work it belongs to. If you have more text from this chapter and need help translating or understanding it, feel free to share!
This line appears to be describing the treatment of abscesses that occur under the armpit. Here is the translation:
These swellings that come from a kind of scrofula, which are hard and contain a kind of sac.
And of those that contain humidity; and those that contain humidity must be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line G to the line B. And when all is evacuated which is in the abscess of the pus, then fill it with old wool and clean the inside on the next day.
And then the wound should be left alone and treated with an appropriate ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess is from the glands and the scrophulas, then you should incise it in the same manner as we have described in the section about scrophulas.
And if the plague has spread to the point of putrefaction, then apply a cautery as we have previously described.
Chapter XLIX.
On the section of abscesses that occur due to arteries or veins.
When an artery is ruptured and the chain that lies over it becomes hardened, then a spotted abscess may occur. The signs by which one can recognize whether inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or vein: for when the abscess is from an artery, it extends lengthwise along the course of the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a rustling sound within it.
And that which is due to a vein appears round on the surface of the body.
And lancing this swelling is an error, and especially so in those areas near the armpits, and at the elbows, and on the neck, and in many places of the body; and it is very dangerous, therefore the treatment with a knife should be avoided, and for those located in the extremities or head, it must be prevented.
And for those who suffer from the inflation of the artery orifice, make a longitudinal incision along the cord; then widen the incision with hooks and expose the artery, removing the tunics so that it is uncovered.
Then place the needle and make it penetrate to the other side, and tie the artery with double thread in two places—this method is what I have taught you for the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
Then widen the area between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood is drained out, and thus the swelling is dissolved.
Then apply a treatment that promotes drying so that the ligaments heal; and subsequently treat it with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
And if the abscess is due to venous dryness, then you must hold as much of the abscess as possible with your hand and then insert the needle in the place where you have held it; make that penetrate; and let it go through so that you extract from the other side, and then tie up the abscess tightly according to what I have told you about binding with a double thread from both sides using the two ends of the thread.
And if you fear that the thread might be pulled out, then insert the needle with the thread throughout the abscess from the beginning of the needle, and secure the threads at four points.
Then dry the abscess in its middle so that when what is inside has been removed, you cut away the excess of the skin, and leave what remains tied.
Then place upon it a pillow that you have soaked in wine and oil, and then administer the treatment which is made with plasters and ointments until it is healed.
Chapter on the abscess that occurs due to nerve twisting.
Here is the translation of the provided line:
And the operation is performed in the areas of the instep or the ankle, or in any area where the joints are painful.
And it is a severe abscess, and its color resembles that of the rest of the body, and it occurs in the major parts of the body where such conditions are predisposed to, and when it tightens with intensity, the patient appears stupefied.
And if it is not an abscess that has aggregated in the front of the body, and for this reason, the chain is left as is, and it is spread out throughout all parts and does not move to the anterior or posterior sections.
Therefore, of those that are in the joints, it is not necessary to cover them with iron, for fear that they might result in contraction.
And if it is in the head or on the forehead, bind it with a spatula. But if the abscess is small, then take that with forceps and excise it from the root.
And if it is large, then suspend it with a hook, and drain it, and then remove it; and close the wound with stitches, and care for it until it heals.
Chapter II.
Of the incision of an abscess that occurs on the cheek or occurs in the abdomen.
Sometimes in some men, small growths appear on the abdomen of those and on other parts of the body of those same individuals, which are called fungal-like due to their similarity to fungi; the root of these is fine and the head of those is large. And often the lips of these are turned outward, and they can be small or greatly enlarged.
And I have seen one [case] where there were two growths on his abdomen that resembled fungi more closely, and there was no difference between them in terms of being white with a fine root.
And the lips of those [growth(s)] were inverted and split open, and moisture continuously flowed from them.
So I incised those [growths] and found in one of them about eighteen ounces, and in the other about six ounces.
The procedure for incising them is that you should consider whether the patient is moist and if the color of the growth is white, moist, and has a fine root. When you incise it with a broad spatula, have cautery instruments ready at hand because sometimes when the incision is made, much blood is expelled; if blood flows, cauterize it.
And if you find the patient pale and fearful, beware of cutting with iron; but instead take freshly made lead foil, and strengthen it with that material, in the manner we have described; and leave that for two days.
And then adjust in the constriction with the lead thread; thus, do not stop pulling the large piece of lead until it is severed and falls off by itself.
And if the stone is large in size, then at the beginning of the procedure there is cause for fear and terror, especially in those within the abdomen.
And it is possible that you can cut away half of it, and then cauterize the area so that it does not return.
And then treat the area inside so that the wound may heal.
And be careful that you do not presume to cut a stone which is of dark color, has little sensation, and appears fixed, for that is truly cancerous.
And bring with you a remedy for inflammation for this purpose.
Chapter II.
On the treatment of a protrusion in the navel.
A protrusion in the navel can be caused by various reasons; it may be due to fractures in the spine that is above the abdomen, and you should remove the tissue or intestine as you would in other ruptures; or it may be due to blood flowing from a vein or artery as previously mentioned, or due to trapped air within it.
Here is the translation of the given sentence line by line: And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then its situation differs more violently from what we have recounted. As you press that area with your fingers, it becomes hidden, and then returns; and strongly it remains there, and the movement greatly magnifies at the entrance of bath and violent work.
And if it is due to moisture, then it is a swelling that does not hide when you press with your hand, nor is it hardened, nor creased.
And if it is due to blood, then with these signs the abscess appears in a declining blackness.
But if it is due to soft flesh, then it is a severe abscess, large and hard, and is implanted according to a certain amount.
But if it is due to flatulence, then the touch of it is lion-like (meaning fierce or violent).
And the operation on it is that you should consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to arterial blood, or venous blood, or flatulence; therefore, one must abstain from treating it, for there is fear and dread as I have taught in the chapter where I discussed abscesses caused by arteries and veins.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or the membrane, then you must command the patient to have his belly bare, and lie extended; then probe around the entire circumference of the navel with a tent; then command him to lie on his back between your hands; then circle around the navel's circumference with a spatula where you probed with the tent; then extend half of the abscess upwards with a large clamp; then bind around the circumference with strong plaster or cerate and apply the binding method properly.
And then press the center of the extended abscess over the ligament and insert your finger into that area to find the intestine; and if you have found or noticed it through the ligament, now you cut open and push the intestine towards the parts inside the abdomen.
And if you have found the wound, then take that with your thumb; and cut away the excess parts of it.
And if it is contrary to your artery or vein, then circle that area, and then return to your operation; take two needles and put in them two strong threads and insert the two needles into the circuit which you have made around the abscess in a crosswise manner, making them penetrate; then stretch the abscess into four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and allow the area between to heal the extended flesh that will fall off on its own; or incise that which is thinning out and can be removed, then treat it with whatever ointment is needed for it to heal.
And if the prominence of the navel is made of soft flesh or due to moisture, then you must hollow out the abscess as we have said and drain the blood or moisture that you find in it, and then treat it with what is necessary so that the area consolidates.
It seems like you've provided a section heading or chapter title, "Capitul .liii." which translates to "Chapter LIII" (or Chapter 53 in Arabic numerals). This indicates the start of the fifty-third chapter in a text. If you have more content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to share it!
The phrase "De curacio de cranc" can be translated as:
We have already said, in the division, about the type of hernia and in what manner it is treated with medicines, and that it is advisable to treat it with iron so that it does not become ulcerated; and we have mentioned a hernia generated in the thigh and precautions for its treatment.
And the ancients said that sometimes a hernia can be surgically removed, just as in the case of a hernia located in the breasts or in the thigh, and they recommended extracting it entirely, especially when it starts small.
However, when it is old and large, it is not advisable to approach it, for I have not been able to cure any of these, nor have I seen others do so, nor has it been achieved in this manner.
And the operation on it is when it should be done as we have said, which is that you precede by leaving the patient to purge of black bile several times, and then incise it if a noticeable swelling is found.
Then prepare the patient with preparations in which they are placed for the operation, and then probe the area with hooks that are necessary for it; then hollow out from all sides with a good catheter to remove any remaining roots or causes of the condition. And let the blood flow, and do not cut that lightly, and squeeze the areas, and wipe off the thick blood completely with your hand or with an instrument with which it is possible for you among the instruments.
And if it causes thick blood to clot in veins or arteries, then cauterize until the flow of blood stops, and then treat that area with another form of treatment until it is healed.
Capitol .liv.
For the treatment of dropsy.
We have already discussed, in the division, of the types of water-related dropsy, and the signs of each type, as well as the treatment with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is only the type of althitas alone, and it is not treated with iron for the type of timpanists nor for the type of yposarcha, because that would be fatal.
And when you have already treated this type of water-related dropsy in timpanists with medicines and your treatment does not improve the condition, then consider, for if the patient has already become weakened, or is suffering from another illness that resembles other types of dropsy, such as those affecting the lungs or abdomen and similar areas, then be cautious and do not treat them with iron, for there is fear over this.
But if you see that the patient has abundant strength, and they are not suffering from any other illness except for dropsy alone, and the patient is neither a child nor an elderly person, then the method of the operation is as follows: you lift the patient between your hands, and another assistant near them presses the abdomen with their hand, forcing the water towards the region below the navel, and then take a sharp spatula according to this form:
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And then consider if the generation of dropsy is from the intestines, for when you make the incision, you must move away from the navel by the length of three fingers to the sides, on the right side towards the pelvis.
And if the generation of dropsy is due to a disease of the liver, then your incision should be three fingers to the left of the navel.
And if the generation of it [the ailment] is from the liver, then your incision should be on the right side.
And it is not necessary for your incision to be on the side on which the patient wishes to lie because the superfluities will not flow to that place freely.
And then pierce the entire wound with the instrument, and insert into that section, and lift your hand with the spatula between the wound and the sphincter, and you dilate that part; and it should be about the size of a fingernail or thereabouts.
And then pierce the bladder until the spatula reaches the empty space, which is where the water [fluid] is located. And then extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the form: And it resembles a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or iron or lion tin, at the lower part of which there is a small hole, and on the sides of it are three holes: two from one side and one from the other side; and its extremity is incised in the manner of a pen, just as you often see.
And at the upper extremity is a ring, for when the instrument reaches the fluid, then that ring immediately goes over the instrument, thus allowing a moderate amount of fluid to be evacuated, for if you evacuate more than what is necessary in an hour, the patient may die due to the resolution of their animal spirit, or you may cause them to approach death.
But evacuate according to the quantity of the strength of the fluid and according to what is indicated to you by the condition of the patient, the strength of their pulse, and their overall well-being.
And then remove the instrument, and retain the fluid which is held back by the chain that catches the hole on top of the tip, reminding you to perforate it in that manner.
And then repeat the procedure on another day if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days in succession, and be careful to avoid mistakes until only a little water remains.
And if you fear for the patient and leave a large quantity of water remaining, then treat that with burial in hot sand, induce sweating in a bath, and expose to the sun for a long time; and treat that with drying medicines until healed.
And apply cautery to the stomach, and the spleen and the liver before the extraction of the water, as I have recounted in what precedes.
Chapter V.
On the treatment of children who are born with unperforated urinary openings.
Sometimes some of the children are born from their mother's womb with their urinary opening not perforated (or it is very narrow or not in its proper place).
Therefore, it is necessary to treat with puncture as soon as it is born using a fine and subtle spatula in the following manner:
And then place in the wound a fine lead clamp and tie it there, and leave it for three days or four.
And when he wants to urinate, he should be undressed and allowed to do so; then return him to his previous state.
And if you do not stop the flow, it is possible that the urine passing over the area will not clear this spot.
But for those whose passage is narrow, it should be treated with a lead dilator, as we have said, for several days until it is widened.
But for those in whom the passage is not in its proper place, as mentioned, the cause is that from birth, the opening of the urethra is at the end of the penis, so he cannot urinate normally without lifting his penis with his hand to direct it upwards; and this does not allow for normal generation, because the sperm cannot reach the uterus correctly, which is a significant ailment.
And the method of the operation is that the patient should be placed face down on his back, and then extend the head of the penis with your left hand using strong traction, and incise the tip of the penis at the location of the perforation with a sharp spatula, much like the cutting of a quill, or shave off some part so that the middle becomes similar to the head of the penis and the passage falls into its proper place as needed.
And be careful in your operation of blood flow, for you often encounter this; and hold the area where you stop the blood, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.
Of a condition that occurs on the foreskin at the head of the penis, and of corruption, blackening, and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
White spots occur with this condition on the penis, and it is an elevation of soft flesh.
And of those, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
For non-malignant cases, you must suspend it with a fine thread and cut within so that the entire area is separated; then apply a poultice submerged in Egyptian ointment; afterwards, treat it with a diluting ointment until it heals.
And if the condition is malignant and of a leprous color, then you must apply a cautery near its beginning and its root.
But if the condition is on the foreskin at the head of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the condition is inside the foreskin while the other part is outside, then you must remove the part of the condition that is inside at its beginning until it is consolidated; afterwards, treat the external part, because when you treat both at the same time with the foreskin intact, it is not certain that it will not be torn.
And we have examined accidents in the genitals and on the foreskin showing blackening and corruption; therefore, you must return everything that has already turned black and what is about to corrupt or has already corrupted to its cavity; then apply over this a dressing with honey, which should be mixed with flour from crushed pomegranate peel and finely ground ashes.
Then treat that with another cure until it is healed.
But if there is a flow of blood, then apply a lunar cautery in the following manner:
For a beneficial cautery serves two purposes at once, that is, for blood flow and for a plague when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed, then you must insert a lead catheter into the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion only occurs in those whose foreskin is tight, and circumcision is not typically required; when adhesion occurs due to infection or abscess), you must gently separate them using a dull spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely freed.
And if it is difficult to distinguish those exquisitely, then you must scrape with a spatula some of the cause from the head of the penis and from the foreskin, and this is where the foreskin, when it is thin, is lightly perforated by its thinness easily.
And then separate between the foreskin and the head of the penis using a thin probe, which has already been soaked in cold water so that they do not adhere again.
And then it should be treated with styptic wine until it is healed.
Chapter LVII.
Of the purification of children and the treatment for what happens to those who undergo circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution to the discontinuity like other afflictions; rather, since it is of our doing and by our will, and those for whom it is properly children, it is necessary that we perform this better operation in the easiest way possible without causing harm to their health.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books because they did not use it in their laws. This is only because we have acquired it through experience. The reason I have found most artisans and surgeons to use circumcision and purification with a lancet and forceps is that they apply salves with honey and perform anointing with ointment.
And I have already examined all these methods and did not find a better purification using scissors and salves with honey than purification with ointment. Often, the former method leaves part of the foreskin above because the foreskin has two layers, and the lower layer remains, which requires another anointment and causes certain pain. And with the cleansing which is performed by scarifications, and is digital, of which barbers use, the incision at the end of the male member is not safeguarded, for fear it enters too deeply.
But in an operation with a nail, if you force it, you will ruin your operation. And the umbilical cord of the child is short by nature, and many times it is born in such a way that no modification is needed, and I have seen this.
And here is the translation line by line based on your example:
And the method of the first operation is that you should keep the child mostly still if it belongs to those who understand a little, and you only need to tie the foreskin on its penis just so, and leave it until the next day.
And then make him feel joyful in every way that is possible for you so that he receives the understanding. And then have that person lie between your hands properly prepared, and let there be no carelessness; and hide the scissors in your hand or under your foot, so that the child does not see those nor any other of the instruments.
And then insert your hand into the penis and blow into the tube, and pull it inside so that the head of the penis is set, and then clean it from whatever filth is attached to it.
The form of the scissors for modification is as follows:
When the extremities are not cut and others are cut, it is important that the key's branch is not used, and the length of both acute ends should be equal to the length of two handles equally.
And the error in purification is that you should completely or partially remove the intrinsic chain through incision.
Therefore, you must stretch that area of the wound with your nail before the inflammation occurs at that location and incise it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then extract that with a hook and incise that.
And if three days have passed and the swelling remains under the foreskin as an abscess, then you should wait until the abscess ripens, and then easily lance it, and incise it according to what is prepared for you.
And be careful of the head of the penis, for it should not be harmed by this.
And then treat it with what consolidates the wound, using the powders that we have mentioned in the section on powders.
And if it is incised too much on the chain (likely referring to a surgical instrument or a specific part of the body), and you follow the divided parts above, this will not harm the patient.
And instead, treat it with what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LVIII.
On the treatment of retained urine in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction made by stones or frozen blood, or pus or flesh growths, and similar to those we have mentioned regarding the methods of treatment in the division.
And if it is not dissolved by what we have said and the cause is strongly present in the patient, then you must administer extraction with an instrument called a syringe, which has the following form: It should be made of silver and have a thin hollow body, similar to a bird's quill with a thickness of about one and a half palms, and it should have a fine tube at its tip.
And the method of urine extraction is as follows: take the folded cloth and tie it tightly at one end with thread or cord; insert the free ends of the cloth into the opening left by the catheter, and cut off any excess part of the cloth with scissors if necessary, but insert it forcefully into the tube. Then pull the catheter out gently while using egg white.
And place the patient on the sheet, and anoint the bladder and the penis with moist oils, olive oil, and rose water.
And then insert the catheter easily so that it reaches the tip of the penis; and then bend the penis upwards to the area of the pubic bone; and then push the catheter further in there; and then continue pushing until it reaches the bladder, and this should be perceived by the patient as having reached the void space, and if it is not done according to this order, but the meat (tissue) through which it goes is twisted.
And then extend the bile with the wool little by little, for the urine wets the wool.
Then extract it and use the urine for treatment, apply a catheter, do not stop doing this and use a catheter until the bladder is emptied and the patient finds relief.
Chapter .59.
Of the quality of cyst irrigation using clamped instruments and similar tools which are appropriate for this procedure.
When you encounter ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood within it, or if pus is obstructed there, and you wish to distill water and medicines into it, then an instrument called a clampcedra should be used, and this is its form:
And here is the translation of the provided line: And in that place three wounds: two from one side, thus as it were.
At the beginning is the concave area in which something is inserted, and it depends on the quantity that obstructs it; without addition, when any cause draws out the moisture, it is drawn out, and when expelled, it is drawn out with it, and when expelled long-term, according to how it acts like clampcedra [possibly a misspelling or archaic term], in which naphtha is mixed for naval battles.
Therefore, if you want to remove moisture from the bladder, insert the end of a tube into the moisture, and pull with that what is pushed up into the parts above, for the moisture is drawn into the hollow of the tube.
And then insert the tip of the catheter into the penis as we have described in the circumcision; and then expel the moisture with what you use to do so, for that moisture reaches the bladder immediately, and the patient feels it.
The form of the catheter used to catheterize the bladder is as follows:
And it should be made of silver or brass, with the tip resembling a small feather, and leave a hollow canal inside.
And then take a bladder of an animal, and place the moisture you want to introduce into the bladder inside it, and then tie both ends tightly with double thread, and warm that moisture over fire.
And then insert the tip of the catheter into the penis.
And then press your hand on the bladder containing the moisture with moderate force so that the patient feels that the moisture has reached the bladder.
But if a bladder is not available, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle out of it; pierce it all around its circumference; then insert strong thread into those holes so that it is woven through; then add the circle in such a way that it is attached to form a pouch, and place inside it the moisture, oils, and waters that you wish to use.
And then you place it on the instrument and do so in the same way as you did with the bladder, expressing with your hand inside so that the moisture reaches the bladder.
It appears you've provided a section or chapter marker, likely from an older text or document, formatted as ".lx." which in Roman numerals translates to 60. Without additional context or content that follows this marker, I can't provide further translation or explanation. If you have more text or need clarification on what might follow such a marker, please feel free to share!
On the extraction of stones.
We have already discussed in the division the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and the signs of each.
And we have discussed the stone for which surgery and incision are performed.
And the stone properly formed in the bladder is that which is lodged in the bladder.
And I will narrate that with clear exposition and abbreviation.
Thus, it is said that stones formed in the bladder predominantly affect children; and among the signs of this condition is that the urine excreted from the bladder is similar to water in its fineness, and sand appears in it; and the patient rubs his penis, often feels pain, and then urination occurs; and with this, you understand the cause of these symptoms.
And it is the rule for the treatment of children who have reached fourteen years; and it is a difficult cure in the elderly. However, in young people it may occur because it is among those [who are susceptible].
And for that one in which the stone is larger and the cure is more difficult; And if it is small, it is contrary to that one.
Therefore, when we come to the treatment of this, we begin by cleansing the patient with a catheter that extracts all the slit which is in their intestines; for that slit sometimes prevents the discovery of the stone during the examination.
And then the patient should be lifted by their feet and shaken gently so that the stone descends into the neck of the bladder, or jumps to another place several times.
And then prepare that poultice between your hands, and the patient's hands should be placed on their abdomen, so that the bladder is entirely directed downwards towards the lower parts.
And then wash it and clean it all outside.
Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then you should immediately proceed with surgery on it.
And if you do not reach all the way with your touch, then you must anoint your left index finger with oil, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if they are a mature adult, and insert it into their anus. And wash the stone inside while your finger is still there. And gently guide that small stone little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And then press on that area with your finger, and push it out towards the outer parts from the location of the section.
And command the attendant to press the bladder with their hand; and command another attendant to extend the testicles upward with their right hand, and with their other hand hold back the scrotum which is below the testicles, in the area where the incision will be made.
And then insert a spatula bent at an angle, which has the following form: And you split in him what is between the buttocks and the thighs, not at the middle spot, but rather towards the side of the left thigh; and make the incision on that stone with your finger inside the buttock, and let the incision be transverse so that the outer part of the incision is wide and the inner part narrow according to how much the stone protrudes from him as possible, and not more, for you strongly compress your finger which is in the buttock, the stone should be cut off by force.
And know that there are some stones which have angles and edges, making the extraction difficult because of this.
And of those, some resemble a grain, being round, and their extraction is easier.
Therefore, if it has angles and edges, apply [an instrument] into the fissure.
And if it is not removed by force, then you must attach a tool to it, or press on it properly with an edge that is like a file used to scrape over the stone without slipping off; or introduce beneath it a subtle instrument with a curved end.
And if you cannot do that, then widen the wound slightly, and if you see blood flow, cut it off strongly with ground glass.
And if the stone is more than one, at the beginning you press your hand to the mouth of the bladder, and then incise upon it; and then push a small one out near there; and similarly do so if they are more than two stones.
And if the stone is very large, then it is unwise to incise with a large cut, for you cause one of two things to happen to the patient: either they die or they become subject to continuous urinary dribbling, because the area does not fully heal.
But administer the expulsion of what is embedded inside, or extract in the fracture with scissors what needs to be removed in pieces.
Therefore, once you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with pieces of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it thus. And place over it a cloth soaked in oil and wine, or in rose oil and warm water, so that the swelling may be allowed to subside.
And then recline the patient on their side, and do not loosen the bandage until the third day.
And when you have loosened that area, wash the spot with water and some oil, then treat it with diafinikon ointment and abazilicon ointment until it is healed.
More if in the wound an accident of abscess occurs that is hot and corrosive, and it resembles blood congealed in the bladder, causing urination to be obstructed (and this is known by the discharge of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains, it provokes corruption and putrefaction of the bladder.
Then wash the wound with sweet wine, water, and salt, and apply an opposing treatment to all kinds, using what is appropriate for the healing until it is cured.
And throughout the entire healing process, you must keep both thighs open and apply the medicines that are placed on the area.
And if the stone is small and is in the meat of the penis, embedded within it, and urination is obstructed, then treat this with what I recommend before resorting to surgery, for many times this condition is accused of requiring surgery; and now I have explained this, which is that you should take an oiled iron probe, of which this is the form:
from the triangular extremity, sharp, inserted into wood.
And then take honey, and apply it with that to the penis after removing the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the instrument into the penis, penetrating easily until the perforator reaches the stone. And rotate the perforator with your hand on that stone little by little, and you will pierce through until the other end penetrates; for the urine will then be released.
And then press your hand on the part where the stone is broken outside of the penis, because that area is constricted and will be cleaned out with urine, and the patient will be healed.
But if this treatment is not suitable for you due to some reason that prevents you from doing so, then apply honey below the stone and more honey above the stone. And then incise over the stone on that penis between two bindings. And then extract it. And then loosen the bandage and modify the clotted blood that has formed in the wound.
And it is not necessary to keep the bandage of the stone in place with wax so that it does not return to the bladder, and the other bandage above it for when the wax near the protrusion of the stone is loosened, the chain returns to its place and covers the wound.
And for this reason, when you remove the wax above, you must lift the chain to the parts above, or return it in its proper position, and cover the wound as we have said.
Chapter LXI.
On the extraction of stones from women.
Stones in women rarely form.
But if a stone does occur in any of them, then the cure is difficult, and it is prohibited by many methods.
One reason is that the woman's body is often delicate.
And the second is that you do not find a woman who is well knowledgeable to describe herself to the doctor when she is chaste, or is among women having husbands.
The third is that you will not find a woman well versed in this art, especially in this operation by hand.
And the fourth is that the location of the incision above the stone in women is further from the location of the stone, for which you need a deeper incision, and there is fear in that.
But if necessity forces you to do so, then you must take a female doctor who is well knowledgeable, though she is rarely found.
But if you are deprived of that, then seek someone who is quite skilled and subtle, or present a female midwife well experienced in women's affairs, or a woman who has some knowledge of this art.
Therefore, have that person present, and command them to do everything you instruct, starting with the examination of the hymen; this is done to check if the woman is a virgin, then they must insert their finger into her vagina and feel the hymen.
Therefore, if you find it, press on it with your finger, and then command her to sit down on it.
But if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the patient's vagina and examine the area where the hymen should be, placing her left hand on the bladder and compressing it with good pressure.
Therefore, if you find it, then you must gradually pull it from the opening of the bladder towards the area near the thigh using all your strength until you reach the root of the thigh.
And then incise at that spot in the middle of the thigh where you feel the resistance of the bone from any side, and insert the stone into that part, and do not let the stone be removed from there.
And the incision should be small at the beginning; then insert the probe into that incision, and if you feel the stone, now adjust the incision according to the amount you know the stone will be expelled from there.
And know that there are different kinds of stones: some of them are small and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and having ridges.
Therefore, you should know the various types of it by what you mean concerning what you want.
And if you see blood flow, apply powdered vitriol to the location and leave it there for an hour until the bleeding stops, and then return to your operation once the stone is expelled.
And have you prepare the instruments that are used in the extraction of stone from men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood and know that the bleeding comes from the artery that has been cut, then apply powder to the area and press it with pillows and tight binding, but do not repeat this; leave the stone and do not extract it, for fear that the patient may die. Then treat the wound.
When the sharpness of the blood has subsided over several days and the area has dried, then return to your operation before the stone becomes embedded.
Chapter LXII.
On the section for treating an incarcerated hernia.
An incarcerated hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white membrane that lies beneath the spermatic cord containing the testicle, and this membrane is called the tunica vaginalis.
Here is the translation of the given sentence line by line:
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which affects the testicles, because this material is infused into those areas, and sometimes it occurs due to percussion made upon the testicles.
And this humidity has various colors, for the color of it may incline to yellow or bloody, or red, or be black and feculent, or be clear white, and these are what exist.
And the signs by which it is known where this water accumulation is are these: for if it is in the white cippus that we have mentioned, then the swelling is round, slightly elongated longitudinally like an egg shape, and the genetius appears, because the humidity contains all around.
And if the humidity is in the proper pan nicol [likely referring to a specific anatomical area or organ], then the abscess is round with a part of the egg, and for this reason it is thought to be another egg.
And if the moisture is between the testicles and the white skin, then apply a poultice there.
And when you want to know the color of the humor, then you expose the color of the humor in the abscess by inserting a probe whose form is previously prepared; and according to what is seen on the tip of the probe, judge of what is inside it.
And when we come to the treatment with iron, then it is necessary to command the patient to be in a sweat if that is possible for you, and turn the body of the patient completely.
And then lay him down on his back on some kind of support slightly elevated, and place a soft cloth underneath.
And then sit on the left side of him, and command the assistant to stand on his right side, who should extend their arm from one of the two sides to the groin area and to the part near the navel.
And then take a wide spatula and split the groin along the middle length towards the penis.
And make the incision exactly equally distant from the line where you should cut the skin of the groin until you reach the white membrane.
And pull on that area, observe carefully, and be cautious so that you do not penetrate it; and when you are pulling, make sure it is suspended with the most delicate touch, and examine it thoroughly with your pulling to the extent possible.
And then pierce the swollen area full of water with a wide incision, and extract all the water.
And then separate the two lips of the incision with hooks, and extend the foreskin over the parts above; do not touch the chain of the spermatic cords, and cut the foreskin in such a manner as is possible for you. And cut that part entirely or in pieces, especially its thin layer, because if you do not examine the incision thoroughly, there is no guarantee that the fluid will not return.
However, if during the operation you process it from outside its chain, then after you have completed the incision of the foreskin, return it inside, and then suture the two lips of the spermatic cords together, and then treat it as you would other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the testicle corrupted by another disease, then you must tie off the vessels that are on the suspensory ligament, remove the testicle, and then treat it as we have said.
However, if the fluid is accumulated in two separate parts, then know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part similarly to how you did in the other one; and if it appears to you that an operation is necessary, then perform it.
And then you clean the blood, and insert into the incisions wool soaked in oil or oiled wool; and place on top another piece of wool that you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread that over both groins and the navel area; and place above folded cloths and pillows, and bind those with a bandage according to this form:
And then two cloths are taken and filled with carded wool according to this shape; and the ends are made with which pressure is applied using a cloth or wet wool, and they are attached with ties in the waistband of the pants, and one end should go from the buttocks between the two, and the second should attach at the crotch area, and two ends over each thigh and two ends on both knees, and all the bindings should be adjusted in the waistband of the pants.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with cautery instead of surgical incision with a knife; and you should take a delicate scalpel-like cautery and use it to incise the chain of the groins, and ignite it as we have recommended between which the white membrane containing the fluid is exposed, and then you take a cautery according to this form: And it is similar to Greek lettering.
And then pierce with that instrument, and heat it so that all the moisture is expelled.
And then extend the instrument with hooks, and squeeze with hooks, and cauterize with a subtly heated cautery; and cut as much of it as you can until you remove all of it; and be careful of the area so that the fire does not touch it.
And know that this operation is safer and causes less bleeding, and is better than an operation with incision.
But if during the operation or during the cautery or bleeding, some complication arises that opposes you, then you must treat whatever complication arises for you with the appropriate treatment as mentioned.
But if the patient is weak and does not tolerate a second operation due to its horror, then administer piercing as I recommend here; this is when you are certain, based on what we have said about the signs, that the hernia is acute.
Then you must have the patient sit on some raised stool, then pierce the abscess at its lowest part with a blunt spatula, and leave the puncture open according to the length of the body.
And let the opening be wide through which all the water flows out.
And then place your hand over the area tightly and press it, so that the remaining water flows out. And then treat it until the plague is healed.
But if there is an obstruction to the discharge of water at that time, you pierce it: this is done only when the white membrane in the opening of the wound causes an obstacle and prevents the流出，此时你需要将探针或提取水液的工具放入伤口中，其形状如前所述；或者在伤口的压力处放置一个小装置。
And know that the water returns, and it is added again after about six months or around that time; and when it is added again, then it should be punctured according to the same method, for thus the patient will spend their days.
Chapter LXIII.
Of sectioning over a fleshy hernia and its cure.
Know that in the sectioning of this hernia, there is fear of causing fatal harm in major procedures; therefore, in my view, it is better to dismiss it and be saved by that better option.
And I am recalling the operation on that and the specifics of the abscesses.
Therefore, I say that abscesses form in bodies where the veins are involved, and this happens for various reasons: either due to an acute bitter excess that is poured into the veins, or due to percussion.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it is not accompanied by pain, and it is a severe abscess.
And often the abscess is calcified, of which the color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
And sometimes it is caused by the constriction of arteries, and by the inflammation of those areas as already mentioned in the recall of it, or by the inflammation of veins.
And what is caused by the inflammation of arteries is known through the dispersion of the abscess when you compress it with your fingers; and it does not need to be touched.
And what is caused by the swelling of a vein should not be dispersed; rather, it must be compressed with the aforementioned method.
And it is possible that on this kind of case a section may be made and on the other flesh; and you incise the cord of the genitals, then stretch the scrotum upwards, and extract what is in the white sac, release the suspensorium of the vessels, ligature them, and you incise the suspensorium after you have freed that from all parts of the scrotum.
And if the scrotum is already consolidated with those fleshy parts, then you must extract the scrotum and incise it.
And if there is adhesion due to some cause within the sac, or between the vessels, then you must free all of that adhesion and incise it with a circular incision.
But if there is a growth of flesh in the area of the adhesion that is behind, then you must incise all of that which belongs to it and extract the scrotum as we have said.
And when your operation is completed, then fill the wound with wool infused in oiled wine; and afterward care for it with other treatments until it is healed.
Capitol .lxiv.
For the given sentence:
Vit es apostema envolut per alcuna envolucio semblant a broto am mollificacio dels testiculs, e es fayt dificil movement exercitiu e deambulacio sobre le malaute.
And in the treatment of this illness, it is done out of fear of that which is preceded by memory.
However, we must describe the operation that they perform first.
And it is said that you must place the patient on an elevated chair; then pull up the suspensorium of the testicles to their proper places; and then tie the ligaments of the genitals with your fingers using cloths that are prepared for this purpose; and let those other assistants who are with you, extend them with a strong extension.
And then incise with a sharp, flat spatula through a transverse section in the right place where the vessels are exposed.
And then squeeze from all sides as we have said in the extraction of artery worms, which are in the temples.
And then insert into those an needle on which is doubled thread, and tie that at the first of the places where you encounter veins, and tie that another time at the end of them. And then incise those in the middle part with a straight cut according to the length of the body, and extract what has been added by the foul and corrupted humors.
And then treat the wound with a treatment for other wounds in which you want pus to be generated so that the vessels fall out from which you will bleed one of two veins, for it is not harmful by doing so.
But if you accidentally cut all the vessels, then it is necessary to remove the testicles or for the testicles to wither due to the vessels, because they are deprived of all nourishment by the cutting of the vessels, and that they be made infertile, or to wither so that they do not function properly.
Chapter 65.
On the treatment of intestinal hernias.
The occurrence of this hernia is due to a tear that extends from the spine over the abdomen towards the inguinal region of the belly, so that the intestines come out through that rupture and affect some of the intestines.
And this rupture is either of the spine or due to an exertion by the patient, and these two types occur for various reasons: by impact, by jumping, by shouting, by lifting something heavy, or by similar causes.
And the sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the hernia, is that it occurs gradually over a long period of time, and does not happen suddenly, and it is an abscess of equal size within which the prepuce compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it is when there is a sectioning of the spleen, for at the beginning it causes sudden severe pain; and there appears an abscess that looks different from the usual appearance around the area, and this is due to the protrusion of the intestine, and its body extends beyond the spleen.
And sometimes the intestine protrudes through the membrane, and this type of intestinal hernia is called zirbal.
And sometimes it is caused by gas, and sometimes the intestine splits open, and here it becomes trapped, causing great distress to the patient, and at times it leads to a severe and significantly worse pain when pressed.
And in the treatment of this kind of illness with iron, there is fear, for which reason it must be avoided in that case.
And the method of the operation for this is that you command the patient to push the intestine back into its cavity with their hand; if it obeys and returns, then have them lie on their back between your hands, and lift their chest.
And then place the cord which secures the cord of the testicles above, and cut the cord of the testicles entirely along its length; then insert two hooks into the edges of the incision according to what is needed to open the incision with those.
And if the section is according to the quantity that it is possible for you to remove from it so that the pus may be evacuated.
And then stretch that sac in which the cord of the testicles is placed, until the hard white part of each side is uncovered.
And then you insert your finger into the area where the testicle is located, between the white sac that is beneath the spermatic cord and the second sac, separating them from the adhesion that is behind the scrotum.
Then grasp the spermatic cord with your hand towards the outer parts, and with this action extend the white sac upwards using your left hand, and lift the scrotum with the sac to the section area; and command the assistant to stretch the scrotum upwards while you dissolve the adhesion behind it completely.
And examine with your fingers to ensure there is no cause for the intestine being enclosed in the hard white sac. But if you find any cause for it, then you push that part back into the abdomen below.
And then make an incision below the scrotum where blood and pus will flow, as we have described in what we have said.
And then apply wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound; administer the ligature that we have described (and sometimes the white cord is cauterized, which we mentioned at the beginning of the section on blood flow, as this often occurs); leave the ligature until it falls off by itself.
But if the removal of it is delayed, then warm water should be poured over it and placed on it until it falls off as we have said.
And then treat the wound with another method of treating wounds until it is healed.
Chapter LXVI.
From the text provided and its context, it seems like the language is an archaic form of Romance language, likely influenced by medieval Latin or Old French. The phrase "De hernia ventosa" can be translated as:
In this hernia, no one has been bold enough to attempt its cure with iron.
And the first ones said that it is done as we have recounted in the hernia case with thread; which means that you tie the vessels near the section where it can be done easily for him; and then dry in the middle area around the abscess, using this to open that, so that the vessels fall into place.
And treat the plague as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII.
Of the disruption that is made in the ankles.
Sometimes, as we have said, a rupture occurs in the ankles, and you should examine the area.
And do not attribute any cause of the hernias to the groin; and if you do attribute a cause, it is minimal; and it returns at all times.
But if the time with this condition is prolonged, there is a tight fissure in the groin through which the hernia descends into the groin; and this happens due to the extension of the groin, as we have said, which occurs when the groin is stretched, then softened, and the area becomes inflamed, and you should examine it.
And the treatment of it is with cautery, as was mentioned earlier in the description of it.
And sometimes it is treated with fire according to this method: the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then you dry the area of the rupture where there are inflammations by examining and drying it along its width according to the length of three fingers.
And then stretch the white cloth that is under the belt so that it is uncovered.
And then take the probe and place it over the prominent part of the spine, and press that against the front of the abdomen.
And then mark the two prominent points at the ends of the spine's segment, and align them with each other using a suture.
And then extract the extremity of the vein, and do not incise the entire circumference, nor extend the wound, nor cause any other damage as I will teach you in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And then treat that with the treatment of wounds, and when you incise the abscesses, cleanse that area and restore the wound before it solidifies; for the skin contracts and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted.
And cautery is better in this area, for it is more conducive to healing.
Chapter LXVIII.
On the softening of the spermatic cord.
Often, the spermatic cord is softened in some men because the flesh between them is softened, and it is beneficial for their condition.
Therefore, it is necessary for the one who is engaged in the treatment to make the patient lie on their back, and incise the entire softened cord over the natural cord; then sew the two edges together with stitches.
And if you wish, at the beginning soften the excess of the loosened ligament with three or four boiling treatments and a firm suture.
And then cut between the sutures; and then treat for the healing of other wounds until it is healed and the pus has drained.
Capitol .lxix.
From the context provided and the structure of the sentences, it seems that the text is a medieval medical treatise describing various treatments and diagnoses. Here's my translation for the given sentence:
Know that according to our law, castration is excommunicated, but for a reason it is legitimate for me to remind you of this in this book; and there is no need to remember it except in two ways, one of which is so that doctors may have knowledge when they are asked about it, knowing the cure for those to whom it happens; and the other way is that we often need to castrate other animals for our benefit from them, such as horses, bulls, pigs, and similar animals.
And thus I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by atrophy or by incision and severing.
But in the one that is done by atrophy, the method of the operation is to make the animal soak in hot water until its genitals are softened and become limp and hang down. Then take them with your hand while they are still dissolved and do not let them appear to the touch.
But in castration performed by incision and severing, you must hold the animal and press the cord of its testicles with your left hand.
And then apply the suspension device, and make an incision on each bone with a cut between two joints.
And then incise those pus pockets that you have squeezed out. And do not leave any cause on those with gout except the subtle gout that is on the veins.
And this method of castration is better, which is done by atrophy, because atrophy leaves no cause from the testicles for the animal to desire mating.
And then treat the wound until it is healed.
Chapter LXX.
On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one is when it appears in the space along the spermatic cord, between two testicles, where a female genitalia-like figure appears, complete with hair.
And sometimes urine flows from that spot along the spermatic cord.
In women, it is of one kind: the female genitalia above the vagina appears as two male testicles slightly to the right side, resembling the foreskin and two testicles of a man.
And the cure is of three types: two for men and one type for women. And it is necessary that you incise those tight tissues so that the swelling of that area escapes, and then treat them with the cure for other ailments.
And in the second type for men, where you urinate from an area in the region of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for it.
Chapter XXI.
On swelling and protruding flesh caused by conditions in women.
Swelling appears tightly due to natural causes, within which it is compressed and requires careful attention; and sometimes it is enlarged in some women to such an extent that it spreads similarly as in men and can even affect intercourse.
Then it is necessary that you remove the excess swelling with your hand or with scissors and incise it.
And do not delay in making the incision, especially near the area of the vulva, so that it does not result in a flow of blood.
And then treat that with the treatment for the sores until it is healed.
New flesh is flesh that grows in the wound of the mother until it fills that space, and often it appears on the outer parts resembling a tail (and for this reason some early physicians called it “tail disease”); therefore, we must incise it as we would slowly cut a lint, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter LXXII.
On the treatment of arthritis.
Arthritis is when the joint of the female is not perforated, or the passage is small. And it is either natural or accidental.
And accidental is due to illness that has preceded it, and this is caused either by improperly adjusted flesh or by a subtle or thick foreign body.
And it is caused either in the womb of the mother, or on its sides, or on its upper pus area, or on its lower pus area, and you prohibit coitus, pregnancy, and childbirth, and strictly forbid menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is gained by observing the midwife, if the obstruction is visible, treat it directly; but if it is not visible, then you search for it with your fingers or with a probe.
And if the obstruction is by subtle wind and it is located near the two lips, then you should puncture and break that area.
And you place pillows under both lips (likely referring to the labia), and then place your index fingers of both hands inside.
And the woman is on her back, her thighs spread apart, and then spread the two lips with force so that that subtle barrier is broken and the obstruction is opened.
And then take wool and soak it in oil, place that on the area, and guard the person for a day so that the incised area does not become stiff.
And if the swelling is large and thick, then you must incise it with a broad scalpel or with a myrtle leaf.
But if the obstruction is due to flesh, then suspend it with a hook and incise it.
And use the medicines that stop blood flow from bites, such as agaric, dragon's blood, and enses, applied with egg white.
And then administer a wide lead cannula so that the affected area does not become stiff slightly.
And keep it for several days and administer an ointment of ash.
And then it should be treated with the other method of consolidation until it is healed.
And sometimes it happens in the natural formation of other flesh, and then you must incise it according to this method. And if this is due to chronic abscesses, the chronic abscesses which are in the breast should not be treated with iron in any manner.
Chapter LXXIII.
For the given sentence:
When hemorrhoids are recognized as the openings of small veins through which blood continuously flows; and when these hemorrhoids become old, they harden.
And I have already said in the division the types of those and the signs of those, and to say thus those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Therefore, I say that for hemorrhoids and tumors when they are in the lower part of the rectum and do not appear to the senses, then surgery should not be performed on them.
But those which are in the openings of the mother where one feels pain, are those that are treated.
And it is necessary that you place the woman in cold water and then extend the thighs with scissors or with a rough cloth, and incise them with the knives.
And then sprinkle on those areas the flow of blood with one of the masticatory astringent powders, such as oak and similar to these.
And then cover their feet for an hour, and then place them in cold water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then soak her in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate peels and walnuts and similar items.
And then take flour of oats and mix it with honey and sweet wine and make a plaster with that on his back.
And if the blood is congealed, it is good; otherwise, attach two cupping glasses and perform scarification on the nipples.
And then take wool and soak it in the juice of coriander or in the juice of figs or in the juice of plantain with fermented wine and apply it to the area; then treat the area with ointments until it is healed.
And treat that which is inside so it may be healed.
It seems like you've provided a chapter or section heading from an ancient text, specifically "Capitol .lxxiv." which translates to "Chapter Seventy-Four" in English. This indicates the start of Chapter Seventy-Four in whatever treatise or document it belongs to. If you have more content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to provide it!
This line appears to be in an archaic form of a Romance language, likely related to medieval Latin or Old French. Here is the translation into English:
Here is the translation of the provided sentence: And I have already mentioned these diseases and the types of them and the signs of them, and their treatments in the division.
And I must speak in this treatise about an abscess that appears in the breast when it is one of those abscesses that collect pus, and if you want to know how the operation with iron is performed.
Then you must consider whether the pain of the abscess in its beginning is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and sometimes it reddens and if you press on it, then do not treat it with puncture, and cure it with that which aids maturation until the acuteness of the symptoms subsides.
And now you must place the woman on a bench that has two supports; she should recline on her back and position her feet toward the lower part of the abdomen, with her thighs spread apart, and place her arms under her head, and bind them together with a suitable bandage.
Then the midwife should follow the correct method and administer the instrument with which the opening of the mother is widened, the form of which will be detailed in the following sections.
And when you wish to administer this instrument, you must insert it gently into the entrance of the mother's womb, ensuring that the part of the instrument inserted into the mother does not exceed the entrance of the womb and causes discomfort to the patient. But if the instrument is larger than the opening of the womb, then you must place pillows on the fabric covering the opening of the womb so that no instrument can enter the opening of the womb.
And you must place the thread that runs through the instrument above and have the assistant hold the instrument and rotate the thread until the opening of the womb is open.
And when the inflammation appears, and it is touched with the hand, and it is swollen and moist, then you must dry that area by cauterizing it with a spatula.
And when the pus is drained, then you must apply to the wound a cloth soaked in oiled rue or oil with some astringency; and place a compress on the incision at the opening of the womb.
And place outside the womb and on the perineum clean wool soaked in water in which mallows have been boiled.
Then it should be treated for about two days with an ointment that you should apply until it is healed.
And sometimes the wound and the affected area are washed with water and honey, and then with water in which root of lily or long Solomon's seal is boiled, and then return to the ointment.
And if the disease is inside the large intestine, then you must abstain from treating it with iron, instead curing it with what we have said in the division.
Capitol .lxxv.
To teach the midwives in what manner the unwell embryos are treated when they present a non-natural figure.
It is necessary that the midwife recognize at the beginning the figure of a natural childbirth by its signs, and this is when you see the woman expressing herself through her expressions and desiring to smell the air, and upon this she is illuminated by what is happening during the birth, and hastens the emergence of the embryo. At this time, you know that this birth follows the natural figure, and it is the emergence of it on its head, and secondly with the navel either suspended or hanging down.
Therefore, when you see those signs, then it is necessary that the belly be compressed so that the embryo descends easily, for when they descend on their head, they come out secondly, and are cleansed of those excesses with a good cleansing.
However, that which differs from this birth is unnatural and not praiseworthy, for when the embryo is born on its feet and its body comes out before its head and its feet, or one of its hands, or its foot, or its head and its hand, or to its belly, and it is quickly turned on its neck, resembling those unpraiseworthy figures.
When there is a necessary cause, it is essential that the midwife be wise and subtle in all those matters, and that she guard against error and deception.
And I am showing all the figures of those [conditions], and what nature is in them so that they are signified by this and stand upon this.
When the seed is expelled upon his head by natural exercise, and if it strongly affects the woman and occurs in a difficult part, and sometimes the power of it is already weakened, then this substance should be applied, or that women have it, and the seed should be evaporated with fenugreek juice and with moist herbs.
And then insert the midwife between the shoulder blades and split it with that second tool, or scrape it with her nail until you remove what is inside of it from moisture. And press the woman’s abdomen until the fetus descends.
And if it does not descend, then the woman should be treated with a mixture of psyllium mucilage and fenugreek mucilage.
Then command the one attending her to compress her and induce sneezing with pepper; and hold her mouth and nose for about an hour, for the fetus will be expelled soon.
And if the two hands of the fetus come out first at the beginning, then you must reduce them back little by little with ease. But if it does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a stool and lift her feet up, and then drop the stool onto the ground; and the woman should be held so that she does not fall due to the jolt.
And if the hands are not returned inside and the fetus dies, then cut those [hands] and extract the remains of the fetus or tie the body of the fetus to its hand with a cloth and pull it out gently, for it will come out easily.
When you are on top of the patient's feet, then you must push them down, and then reduce the fold little by little, and then equalize that area, and then take one foot and stretch it little by little.
When you have entered between the thighs, then you command the patient to strain, and induce that expulsion with caution, for it will be forcefully expelled if God wills it.
And if it is not forcefully expelled by what we have recommended, then you slowly return the fold until you place it back in its natural position, for it will be forcefully expelled with a gentle insertion.
And if it is prevented by everything we have recommended, then take some alum and dissolved gum, and pound all of it in the mortar with good pounding, and then line the woman’s womb with this mixture, at the lowest part of her abdomen. And then make the patient sit in tepid water until it reaches the hypochondria (the area on either side of the upper abdomen below the ribs).
And when you see that the parts of him are softened, then perform fumigation with myrtle and place it under him. And when you have the sub-fumigation for an hour, then make them sit on a chair, and then cause that person to sneeze and open their mouth wide, and lift them up from there, and press the lower part of their abdomen with gentle compression, because the substance will be expelled quickly.
Extract the fetus longitudinally while holding one of its limbs. Attempt to reduce the dislocation of his hand, but if you cannot do so, then raise the woman and let her go [in the sense of allowing her to move or be repositioned].
And if they cannot go, then make the patient lie on the ground, and shake their thighs with a strong shaking, and then administer plasters which are made from and consist of mucilages.
And if the childbirth has begun, then let her sit on a chair, and immediately focus on the reduction of the hand, aligning the child according to its natural position, and make the woman sneeze and command her to compress herself inward until she is exhausted.
Exuding from the wound on his neck, spreading its fluids and the surface of it is toward his mother's side. It is necessary that the midwife hold the hand of the child and then turn it little by little, so that it may come out easily.
And when it is ready and has been mixed equally, then place on the wound what we have recommended of oil and poultices.
Then command him to vomit little by little, and once you have done that, place the mixture in a pot and instruct him to lean over the right side, then command him to compress himself; and make him sneeze with the condition. The prepared fetus is placed on the side.
When dealing with horrors from the mother according to this method, be cautious, and then incise the second layer with your fingernail until the moisture is drained.
And if the fetus is suspended by its face and neck, then you should incise the umbilical area so that it is not retained and dies.
Then push the fetus inward towards the parts until you place it in the position that is needed, and instruct the woman to compress herself several times, and it will be expelled gently with effusion, if God so wills.
Exitus geminorum aut foetuum multorum. Here is the translation of the given line:
And among those, even if they are multiplied, a second is counted, and they are separated by a siphon, distinguishing them within the ligament at the navel of each of these; and sometimes they are expelled as though it were done by a light natural secretion, and sometimes they come out due to an unhealthy expulsion, just as we have recounted.
And if some births are difficult and you assist in the childbirth leading to what we have mentioned about unnatural positions, then treat those cases as we have recounted.
And if the midwife is skilled and does this with ease and subtlety, and with patience, and is inventive according to every shape according to what is prepared of the instrument leading to health.
Remembrance of that which is formed in the womb from embryos and are aborted.
Here is the translation of the given text line by line into English:
And all of this must be known by the midwife who has that small resemblance to this, and thus applies herself to it with what is necessary.
Capitol .lxxvi.
For the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you treat a dead fetus using what we have said in the section on medication and it is not expelled, and you are forced to use manual operation, then you must consider whether the woman is of sound health and not suffering from any conditions that could lead to her harm.
And now it is necessary that the woman be placed face down on the bed on her back, and that her head be inclined to one side and her thighs be elevated.
And the minister should hold it from both sides or bind it with a bandage so that the body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
Then you moisten the mouth of the mother with humid oils and with a mucilage of fennel, fenugreek, and its seeds.
Then anoint the midwife's hand with those oils and mucilages, then gently insert her hand into the mother, and then search with her hand for the place where she can grasp the fetus with her fingers.
And here is what to do: then you consider if the fetus is positioned to descend head-first, and then you place your fingers in its ears, or in its neck, or in its mouth, or in its palate, or under its chin, or in its armpit, or near its ribs, or below its hypochondrium.
But if it is descending feet-first, then [you should grasp] in the ankles or in the middle of the legs.
And it is necessary to hold the hook with the right hand, and place its curvature in the area between the fingers of the left hand, then gently insert the hand so that the hook can be placed in one of those areas we have mentioned, until you reach the cause of obstruction.
And then place and keep in the appropriate position another pillow, or a third if necessary, so that the traction is equal, and not just according to its straightness.
And it should be wrapped entirely so that the excretion from it is eased just as is done in dental procedures for the extraction of it.
And it is necessary to introduce into it what is between them so that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then it must be that the midwife anoints some of her fingers with oil and carefully inserts those and twists with them what is retained.
So if part of the fetus is stuck, then the pillows should be adjusted to a more suitable position; do this until the entire fetus is delivered.
And if one hand is dislocated in front of the other and cannot be reduced due to the contraction of the limb, then a cloth must be wrapped around it; then extract that part until everything is protruded, and incise either at the joint of the hand or at the elbow.
And thus you must do the same on the other hand and on both feet.
And if the head of the boil is large, or you encounter constriction during exudation, or if there is water tightly bound in the head, then you must insert between the fingers a pointed instrument and split the head to drain the water, or use an instrument called “alundat,” the form of which will be shown with the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
And similarly, if the boil has a large head by nature, then you must incise it with a scalpel, or take hold of it with an alundat as we have said; and then extract the bones with forceps.
And if the head has exuded and is constricted, you should split it open so that the moisture within the feet may be released.
But if it is not complicated and does not require exudation, then you should incise the head as soon as possible according to what is feasible for you.
And if the lower part of the abdomen is abscessed or is dropsical, then you must pierce it to allow the moisture within to drain out.
And if the swelling is on their feet, then its attraction is slight and its direction towards the mouth of the vein is also slight.
If the abdomen and feet are constricted, then you must extract that which is wrapped around your hand with cloth, and cut into the abdomen and feet so that what is inside may flow out.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And if the opening of the womb is constricted by an abscess that has occurred at the mouth of it, then it should not be disturbed; first, you must administer a effusion of greasy and moist substances. And administer plasters; and continue treating the patient with waters that soften and moisturize.
And if the puncture is on the patient's side, then if possible, it should be drained; and administer what we have said to the fresh wound.
And if this is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces and extracted.
And it is necessary that you do not leave any cause within the second layer.
And when you have completed all of your operation, then administer what we have said about the treatment for the swellings that occurred from the wound.
And if bleeding occurs, then immerse in styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
And I have seen a woman whose fetus in the womb was dead, and then she became pregnant again, and another fetus died in her. It happened to someone after a long time that a swelling occurred in their groin; and it swelled inside where a cut was made, and they began to discharge pus.
And I was called to his care, and treated him for a long time, but the plague did not subside.
Then I placed some strongly adhesive plasters on him, and drew out a bone from him, and after several days, I drew out another bone; and I was very amazed because there were no bones in his belly.
And then I thought that they were the bones of a dead fetus.
Then I treated the plague, and extracted many bones from him; the woman existed in her own dispositions within, and lived in such a way for a long time, occasionally moving slightly.
And I do not intend to be strange, but rather because in this lies knowledge and assistance for the doctor who administers treatment with their hands.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form of an instrument with which the mother is cut open:
This is the form of a stretcher on which the ribs are joined, where the joining consists of two hinges at the two ends of two poles. However, this hinge must be more delicate than the stretcher and should be made either of iron or wood.
And the width of each pole should be two fingers, and the edge of each should be one finger wide, and the length of each is one and a half palms; and in the middle of the two poles there are two joints made from the same material, which are already fixed, each of which has a length of half a palm plus a little more, and the width of each is two fingers or slightly more.
And these two additives should be inserted into the mother's mouth so that it is opened with them when you rotate the two prescribed instruments.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:
Sia fayta de fustz de eba o de boys segon la semblansa de forceps. And however at the extremity of his two additions thus as sometimes happens, and the length of those additions is each one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the womb with those methods, then you make the woman lie down on the bed with her feet hanging off, and open what is between her thighs. And then open your hand with the instrument just as you would with scissors, cutting according to the amount you desire of the opening of the mouth of the wound until the midwife does what she wants.
The form of dizziness that the ancients called:
Forma of pushing with which the fetus is pushed:
Forma de amisidat am le qual es conterit le cap gran.
And it resembles forceps which have teeth at the end, just like tweezers, and sometimes it is made long like forceps according to this form, just like tweezers, which have teeth like saw teeth with which it is incised and contorted. Forma de amesidat pauc:
Forma de unci havent una spina:
Form of an ounce having two spines:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:
Forma de dos espatums latz:
All those instruments are exercised, and when more of their kinds are multiplied and prepared by the artisans, it is lighter for their operation and better for humans due to their quantity.
And you should not use those instruments at all, for the necessity of them is not excusable.
From the extraction of the second molar.
When the second stage of labor is delayed in childbirth, then you must command the patient to hold their breath, and then make them sneeze with spices, and press your hand over their mouth and nose, and if by this the expulsion occurs, it is good.
And if not, then you take an egg and pierce the shell with a hole and place it on herbs that have been burned, such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, Arabian safflower, and cinnamon stick, and mugwort. All these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the pot, and place that over the fire.
And then place a reed tube in the mother's mouth, and keep it there so that the vapor comes to the cavity of the mother.
And then make that person sneeze as we have said, and the second one will be expelled with velocity.
And if this treatment is to continue and has not been completed, then you command the midwife to submerge her left hand in olive oil or in marjoram lotion, and then insert that into the vagina and search with that for the second twin, and once you have found it, slowly pull it out little by little. And if it is attached to the placenta of the firstborn, then insert your hand as we have described, and when you find the second twin, gently extract it bit by bit so that the mother does not suffer a violent traction. Before anything is done, make sure that the right and left sides are manipulated easily.
And if the birth canal of the mother is narrowed, we have already described the treatment with sneezing and with medication using herbs.
But if it does not come out using all the methods we have recommended, then be careful not to strain too much in repeated attempts at extraction. However, what has emerged from him towards the birth canal should lie on the woman's thigh, and then anoint it with unguent and a four-part medicine; for this will cause it to ripen within a few days and become dissolved and expelled.
When the patient is weak, raise their head and stomach to an elevated position, which alleviates the illness; then it becomes necessary to administer fumigations and appropriate treatments for this condition.
However, some of the Ancients have expressed that fumigation with juniper and dried figs is effective.
The method of the instrument used to fumigate a woman for the retention of menses and the secundines is as follows:
It should be made of brass or bronze.
And place the finer end into the vagina and the wider end over the fire, so that the fumigation is directed over the embers of the fire.
And keep it in place until that fumigation is finished and then repeat with another one.
On the treatment of an infant's unperforated anus.
Some infants are born with their anus unperforated, which is a fine and obstructed closure. Then it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that swelling with her finger; and if not, pierce it with a sharp spatula, and be careful not to touch the membrane.
Then place over it wool soaked in wine and oil; then treat it with an ointment until it is healed.
But if you fear it is blocked, then place a catheter in the tract for several days, and remove it when the child wants to digest properly.
And it may happen that the anus is blocked by the consolidation of a plague or an abscess; then it is necessary to incise that consolidation and then treat it with what we have said about the treatment and the use of lead.
On the treatment of fistulas that occur below.
The fistulas that occur in the lower part below are narrow and thick, most of which appear near the anus externally or in the space of that part.
And it is a fistula or multiple fistulas.
And when that swelling is old and comes from moist white phlegm or subtle corruption, and sometimes these fistulas are penetrating.
And those penetrating are known by what is excreted from them through excretion and flatulence; and sometimes the patient experiences excretion, and worms are expelled from them.
And of those fistulas some observed in the space penetrate into the bladder, and into the shaft of the penis; and of those that penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the buttocks.
And in what is known as a penetrating and non-penetrating fistula, it is that you insert your index finger into the anus, and introduce a thin probe of reed or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
And if there is tortuosity in that area, then introduce a thin probe of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or the hair with your finger.
And if you do not feel anything at all and do not find any cause of discharge, worms, or gas during the procedure, as we have said, then you know that it is non-penetrating, and thus you should attend to its treatment.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the urethra of the penis, then its significance is that urine flows from it and prevents the area from being healed with medicine.
But if it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the area, then the sign of this is that the probe goes through there without tortuosity into the bone, causing pain in the affected area; and that pus continuously flows from it; and that medicine does not work on it, nor can it be healed with ointment.
And in all those fistulas not everything is a complete cure, and the treatment of these relies on the hard work and vanity of the young doctors upon whom they depend.
And in that which is not penetrating and not ancient, healing with iron is hoped for according to what I will recount to you, and this which has already been stated.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands on their back and raises their legs upwards, with the thighs inclined towards their abdomen, and then insert a lead probe, or an iron one if it is in a tortuous fistula, to where you know the probe reaches.
And if the patient feels pain around the neck, then you must insert your index finger into the neck.
And if you feel in your hand the attempt already by itself to penetrate uncovered, or what you feel between your hand and that skin or flesh, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that, for it is not a healing there, as we have said.
However, some say it is healthy in some men later.
And for the treatment by which improvement is hoped in him, you make a fine cautery according to the size of the fistula, as previously mentioned, and insert that ignited cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; then repeat this two or three times until you know that all those fistulized tissues resembling feather quills have adhered together.
Then treat it with warm poultices wrapped in cloth until all the adhered tissues come out, and then treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate flesh. If it is healed, that is good; if not, it will never be cured by any other treatment.
And if you insert a probe inside, and it does not penetrate into your finger which is in the anus, and between that finger and the probe, there is a layer of flesh or membrane, and twist the fistula so that it aligns with the surface of the cord. Then dry the cord from the beginning of the fistula, and you will see it drying with the probe, and place the probe inside until the drying reaches the point where the tip of the probe comes out, and through the probe, it is released and cut.
And then clean those fistulated flesh which resembles a bird feather quill tube and do not break any of them for any reason.
And if a flow of blood should come between you and your operation when you are cutting those flesh areas, then the best thing to do is use the lightest instrument for cauterization with fire or sharp medicine, because cautery with fire brings about two good effects: it ensures the adhesion of those pieces of flesh that have been brought together, and it stops the bleeding through the drying of the moistures.
And then treat that area with cloths wrapped in fat or in finely ground herbs placed within the affected spot on the arm, and then treat the wound with ointments made from hardening and strengthening flesh.
And with medicines that have astringent and drying properties; when these are restored, the ailment is healed and there's no fear of recurrence.
And if the fistula has already penetrated into the rectal area and extends from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the anus and investigate with it.
And thus if you feel resistance and between you and it there is a membrane of tissue or flesh, and it impedes penetration, then it is not an operation on it except by way of trust and hope.
The treatment can be administered in one of three ways: either cauterize it as we have said; or dry out that area until you achieve the cavity so that you can insert instruments and proceed with the cure; do not cut excessively to avoid piercing the duct containing pus, and apply without causing harm to the patient’s will; then treat it with what we have mentioned for a full recovery; or extend that membrane and clean the pus by drying out the area near the anus as previously stated, using your hand or another sharp instrument, and then cleanse those fistula-infected tissues within the cut area through percussion; finally, strive to restore the entire wound by cutting, and if the opening above is not consolidated and the fistula remains open in part of the anus, the pus will flow lightly from the patient. And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: it is when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is on the side of the buttocks around the surface of the body with the chain and at the edge of the buttocks, then take a probe with a perforated tip, which is thus like a needle used for preparing the cores in this way:
And insert into that area wrapped with five leaves or around it; then insert and try with the leaf into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
Here is the translation line by line:
And then treat the wound while it is still consolidating and healing.
And if the openings of the fistula are not penetrating, then make them penetrate in whatever way you prepare, but not so deep as to reach the vein, for it is not for you to do this so as not to injure the tendon; and then treat it until it is healed.
The method of using a spiked spatula with which the fistula is cut open: the curvature of which should be sharply pointed and the other part blunt, so as not to injure what is not necessary, just as is often done.
On sewing hemorrhoids in which blood flows at the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids are treated in two ways, for they either resemble charcoal-like lumps near the anus, or they may appear fatty like pieces of grease. And of those, some are small and some are large, and blood flows continuously from them; they are numerous, and they appear outside the anus, and at its extremities.
And yet those that are affected by the buttocks according to months of little moisture, from which yellow water or a little blood with continuous pus flows, and according to the color of the body.
And the treatment for what is inside the anus is that you command the patient to sit and to strain so that the anus opens and the hemorrhoids appear before you. Then you take care and suspend them with hooks or hold them with your fingernail, and then cut those veins at their roots.
If the wounds are not held together by their moisture and softness, then take them with a rough cloth or with charcoal or a beating of wool, and extract them with your fingers, and then incise them and sprinkle over them certain powdered substances near the incision, so that they may serve as a substitute for cautery; or cauterize them according to what is described in the chapter on cauterization. And then treat them with other treatments until they are healed.
And if the stool does not come out easily, then use an enema on the patient with a nozzle that has a small bite, and wash it with the water in which chicory has been soaked, so that it facilitates a gentle evacuation when the patient is squeezed.
And if the hemorrhoids are outside the anus, then their cause is light, and you should take them with your fingernail, or take them with a hook, and incise them, and then treat them with what we have said until they are healed.
And for the incision that you will perform, you must suture them in this manner: take thread wrapped and insert it into a needle and then pull the hemorrhoids to the points above, and make that penetrate with the needle into the base of the other side, and wrap both ends of the thread at the point farthest from the needle, and do so latitudinally; tighten the hemorrhoid with strong pressure, and then tie off the thread and remove the needle.
And do this to all of them, but leave one of them open and do not sew it up, so that the excess blood can flow out from that one.
And then place over the anus a cloth soaked in rose oil or ointment; put that over it and instruct the patient to rest. And then place that inside the cavity; and when it is heated, treat those areas with ointments or other treatments until they are healed.
And when they are old and no longer respond to that medicine, then you must scrape those areas with the tip of a spatula or your nail until they become moist and remove the scabbed pus on top, which prevents them from healing; then treat those areas until they have healed.
Then you must remove those areas with more vigorous scraping than the first until blood comes out and they are raw; then treat those areas until they are healed.
Know that alamermar, which is crucial, appears as round spots similar to the color of a clove, and it occurs all over the body but mostly on the feet and hands, and often causes pain.
And then it is necessary to incise what is around the nail, and hold it with scissors or tweezers, and remove it from its root; then treat that area.
And if you want, cauterize the wound that is described in the preceding chapter.
And a wart is a small, rough, tubular, round prominence on the surface of the body, and they often appear on the hands of children.
And the cure for it is that you extend and incise that area, or that you bind it with a bandage or with cloth inside which something falls (likely meaning to provide support or cushioning). And if you wish, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
And a "formica" is a small, furry or fistular swelling on the surface of the body that moves slightly under the skin, and when cold reaches it, it causes a sensation similar to an ant bite, and it appears around the body.
And the cure for it is that you take a quill from an owl or a vulture, and let it be strong, and place that over the ant-like swelling so that it fits within the circle of the quill; then rotate your hand with the quill until you cut out what is within the circumference of the ant-like swelling, and insert it into the flesh's skin, so that you root out the ant-like growth from its base.
And if you wish, do this with a reed or iron tube according to this method:
The part above the tube should taper to a fine point, closed (that is, not perforated), and wrapped in such a way that when placed on the finger, its grip is secure and it can be rotated easily.
And if you want to cauterize the ant as was mentioned earlier in the section on cautery of the armpit in the chapter on cauteries.
Of the shape of the instruments that are used to give christeri.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
The form of large and small blisters:
The head of the cannula above, which is tied to the bag, should be wide according to this manner; and it should be at such a distance where the bag is tied just so.
And the extremity of the pus that has entered into the anus is closed (that is not open) to the lion; withdrawing due to subtlety; and on one side there are two tracks, and on the other side one track, and the width of the track should be according to the thickness of the rays, making it slightly thicker.
And let the bag in which animal bladder or sheepskin medicines are placed be one palm in size.
And it should be pierced with thick threads in such a way as it is twisted; and the space between the threads should be as thick as a finger.
And then introduce into those passages strong honey of raw honey which is made from ten hives, or around those; and adjust with that the bag; and when the bag is placed on him, it should be tight at the head of the catheter between two distinct points with strong compression, and then catheterize each passage: However, the quality of catheterizing with that is that you fill the bag with the medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity tolerated by the patient; and beware lest it be too hot or too cold.
And then the patient should be placed supine on their back, and raise their legs up and place them on a pillow or a cushion on which there are cloths or a sheet; and then anoint the tip of the catheter with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or something similar; and then insert that into the rectum easily, and then the minister should take the bag and squeeze it with both hands and sometimes with force until everything in the catheter is evacuated into the intestine; and then remove the catheter and the patient raises their legs to the wall.
And if the medicine causes an expulsion, let it be as much as possible; and if one sleeps with that for an entire night, it is more beneficial for healing.
And if you treat that person for intestinal disorders and the painful discharge from them, then you should repeatedly apply the cautery until it is healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a gentle and lion's chrism (ointment), of the kind with which children are anointed.
Of the treatment of the plagues.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Therefore, it says that plagues are diversified according to how the plagues are caused and according to the place where the plagues fall.
And the causes for which many times plagues are caused are thus: the throwing of stones, or cutting with a sword or knife, or striking with a lance, or with clubs, or with arrows, or similar to those many causes.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And I am recommending the treatment of some diseases for which you should apply that reasoning and rule to other ailments.
And I will begin with the simple headaches, for the memory of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Thus, when you encounter a simple headache in the head and it is not a fracture, then consider: if it is due to a stone or similar cause, and it has already constricted the vein so much that it is a severe headache and you fear an abscess may develop, then you should be cautious and perform venesection of the cephalic vein immediately, and do not delay this; extract blood according to the amount of strength of the patient unless there is any prohibiting cause for venesection, especially if the blood that comes out due to the headache is minimal.
And let the venesection be performed on the opposite side of the affected area; and protect the patient from cold and from heavy foods.
But if any contraindication prohibits [venesection], then reduce the food intake and avoid meat and wine.
And place on the affected area, if an abscess has developed, some wool soaked in olive oil or in wine that has been stypticized.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And if the air has already changed that condition, then apply ointments in between until it is healed.
And if the wound is large or caused by a sharp and similar instrument, and the edges of it cannot be brought together with pillows, then bring those edges together with sutures as I will describe regarding the suturing of them.
But if the wound has already exposed the bone and sinew, and there is no retention of it but only a small suspensorium, then incise that area and subsequently treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh by suturing in place. Command the patient to abstain from food that is greasy: meats and forms like them until it is composed (healed).
And if you find putrefaction in the wound that does not adhere to the bone, then you should incise all of that rotten part and remove it, and subsequently treat it.
But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which bleeding can occur and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then you should probe the artery. If you find that it has not been cut, then incise it with a spatula or ligate it. And if necessity forces you such that what we have said does not work, then cauterize until the blood is stopped.
And if these sores are simple and small, then their cause is light; therefore, you powder over those this powder, which solidifies before the air changes them.
And the method of the powder is this: take oil of asses one part, dragon's blood two parts, fresh cow-dung three parts; let it all be finely ground and sieved, and with it fill the wound, and apply a good compression until it adheres well to that area, and let it clot with the blood.
And then bind that area above with pillows and leave it like that, and do not loosen it while it is thus, until the inflammation subsides, because the medicine within has not been fully absorbed until it is healed.
And sometimes this alone is sufficient as treatment, when you do not have access to ashes and dragon's blood.
And this operation is performed in large wounds when it is necessary to place them tightly and thus treat fresh wounds with their blood, which has not been altered by the air.
And if the air has altered them, especially when it is in summer time, then it is not intended for the position of this powder, but rather treat those with what we have said, such that you place upon those areas poultices mixed with these things, or that you place upon those places flour of bran with water and honey to prevent putrefaction; and then treat those with the other cure until they are healed.
But if the wound causes a fracture in the bone, and it is small, then you extract it with care.
And I will speak of the treatment for fractures of the skull in cases where there is danger of poisoning.
Of the wounds of the neck.
But if the wound occurs in the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, compared to a simple wound on the head.
But if the nerves or arteries of the neck are cut, then if it is a nerve, there should be no treatment other than avoiding any action that causes strong astringency, such as using substances like zinc sulfate and vitriol, which bind and constrict those nerves. And do not place anything cold on the wound at all, for the substance of the nerves is sensitive to cold and their continuation reaches the brain, which is the most important part of all the members.
And if it is necessary to treat with mild medications, such as washing with warm water, sometimes infused in olive oil whether rubbed or not rubbed, and thyme when washed with warm water and the other small stones according to this method, and then apply moist ointment.
And if the wound is large, then administer sutures, or close its edges, and then treat it with poultices until it heals.
If there is depth to the wound or you encounter putrefaction in its lower part, then pierce it at the deepest point.
But if in the wound an artery is already cut and bleeding occurs, then separate or dry it out, tie it off, or cauterize it if the situation necessitates such action.
But if the vertebrae of the neck have already been cut through entirely and the veins of the neck are saved, then you should bring together the edges of the wound with sutures over the bone of the neck without touching it; first equalize it and reduce it to its natural form, then strengthen it with appropriate binding, and leave it for several days; afterwards treat it with ointments that have astringent and stimulating properties until it is healed.
But if the wound has caused protrusion in the bone, then pound it down, and if there are fragments of bone within it, extract all that you can; leave what cannot be removed until the wound putrefies, and let it separate so that the protrusion is reduced.
And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle over it the powder that has been recommended to you. And if an ulcer forms in the wound, then treat it with that which the remedy will be discussed later in its respective chapter.
If it is a puncture from a lance or sword, and you measure the depth of the wound, then consider whether gas escapes from the wound when the patient breathes; if so, know that the wound is mortal.
And if there is no deep penetration and the wound is recent with its own blood, then you should apply powder to it within the first hour, but do not keep it covered so that the blood is not retained in the depth of the wound and returns to the heart, harming the patient; instead, apply an attractive unguent to it, and change that twice a day.
And if the unguent is not available to you, then apply a piece of cloth to the wound's opening so that it draws out the moisture; and have the patient lie in such a way that the wound is positioned to allow whatever is inside to drain out.
And if three days or more have passed since the onset of the plague and you do not observe spasms, heart palpitations, or constriction of the lungs in the patient, and other good signs appear, then know that the plague is survivable; and then treat it with poultices and with other treatments until it is healed.
And if the healing of it is unnecessary, and it has been open for a long time, then know that a fistula has formed; therefore, treat it according to its chapter [meaning, treat it using the methods described for such a condition].
And if the wound is caused by a cut from a sword or knife and is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with stitching if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
And if the bone has already become infected and parts of it are affected, then you should turn the wound and use forceps to extract those pieces, if they are separated. And if they are not separated, then leave them inside until the wound becomes pus-filled, which will make their extraction easier.
And for other accidental plagues in other members, the aid in cure is the aid of what we have said.
Of the ailments of the belly.
The discomfort that occurs in the belly is either severe, slight, or moderate.
And a small disruption is made difficult by another method, and it is known that their reduction is more difficult if you do not pay attention to their insertion into their proper place immediately, because they swell and become thicker, making the intervention difficult.
And therefore the best disruption is moderate, because in that case, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, just as it is difficult in the two previously mentioned types.
And know that the suturing of the belly is done in four ways, but two methods are common and similar to the suturing of other ailments of the body.
And two other specific methods of suturing are similar to those used for other ailments, but they are more specifically applied in the suturing of the belly.
And I recommend to you each with explanation and declaration.
So it is said that when the hernia is small and some part of the intestine has protruded through it, and it becomes difficult to reduce it back, then it is one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the opening as we have said, or when the intestine swells due to the coldness of the air.
And so when it is thus, then you must warm that area by submerging a sponge or cloth soaked in warm water alone, or boiled in vinegar, and cyperus, and cloves, and apply that to the intestine until the swelling is resolved.
And sometimes it is done in the way that has astringency, and it is better than plain water alone for reducing the swelling.
And so when you see the swelling resolved, then moisten the intestine with water in which yarrow and mallows have been boiled, for this alleviates the internal part of it without much harm.
If surgical intervention is necessary for this treatment, then incise the disruption slightly with an instrument used to cut hemorrhoids.
And the first treatment is better when it is appropriate that there be no drying out, and there should not be an effort to dry near necessity and deficiency.
From the instrument, if it is of such form:
One part of the sharp wound, and the other part not-sharp, and the extremity subtle, and not be as subtle as a spatum, before it is slightly blunt.
And so when the swelling has increased and you have removed the intestine, now it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form, in its proper place, if possible over this, for it is better.
And when the disruption is wide and is in the lower part of the abdomen, then it is necessary that you make the patient lie on their back, and raise their thighs higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the abdomen, then you raise the head and feet higher than the other parts.
And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the abdomen, then always keep your attention and consideration focused on this so that the part where the swelling is becomes higher than the other.
And thus you must administer this in large swellings and in medium-sized swellings.
And in small swellings, apply what you have prepared, then have the minister place it between your compassionate hands, who will hold the disruption entirely with their hand and adjust its edges, then suture it from one side to the other as closely as possible.
And this is the common method of suturing: first you take the needle, or a bundle of needles according to the quantity of the wound's width; and then leave at the end of the disruption of the ring finger, and tighten the needle once, ensuring that you do not place thread at both ends of the chain; with both ends of the clip which is left on the chain from inside, until you make it penetrate through that part; and you have already added both ends of the chain and both ends of the clip, and so four layers are made.
And then strengthen with double thread around the circumference of the needle, and sometimes on both sides together, and then bring together the two edges and the wound by a neat approximation; and then leave the thickness of a finger and insert another needle there, and then tie that with thread as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if it is necessary to use needles until you have completed the entire closure of the wound.
And let the needles be of moderate thickness between coarseness and fineness, for fine needles lightly penetrate the flesh; and thick ones are difficult to insert into the wound, and therefore it is necessary that they be of moderate fineness and thickness.
And it is not necessary to insert the needle at both ends of the wound immediately, so that the flesh is not lightly cut and the wound can close before its consolidation.
And let the stitches not be too long so that the wound is not prevented from consolidating.
And then sharpen the ends of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient during their sleep; and place over the stitches small pieces of cloth from all sides, which cover the ends of the needles; and leave them until you know that the wound is already consolidated.
And these types of stitching with needles in this manner are more suitable for small wounds, where only one or two needles suffice for the stitching or around them.
And the second suture is communal: it is that you administer with a suture the four extremities, of the chain and two extremities of the spine, at once, with a needle on which the thread should be wrapped equally in fineness and thickness.
And then when you have penetrated these four extremities with the needle, withdraw the needle from that same part where you began, so that the thread pulls out any pus from the underlying part to the wound, so that the suture is like a fabric suture with which fabrics are sewn together.
And pause between each suture the width of a little finger.
And this suture is known to men.
And with such a suture, I sewed the wound which was inflicted on a man in his belly which had been wounded by a knife, and it was a disruption of the wound measuring more than one palm, and there were intestines hanging out around two palms from the center location and the rupture was in the middle of the member; and then I returned the intestine after it had protruded for 24 hours.
And the wound was healed within about fifteen days, and I treated it, and it healed; and then he lived for many years, and his condition improved.
And the other doctors had judged that it could not be healed; and yet it was healed by a miracle, for I did not treat it with ointment, for there was no place where ointment or any medicine could be found, but instead placed on the wound an old cloth twice a day and washed it frequently with honey water until it healed.
But I want to describe two types of suture specific to the narration of Paraula.
And you begin with a chain suture, and insert the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
And so when the needle pierces into the spine and in those specific places according to the straightness and length of the whole body, and leaves the extremity of the chipac into which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from inside out at the other end on the opposite side of the wound.
And when you have made that penetration, then penetrate again in the same extremity of the cloth from the outside part to the inside part; and leave the extremity of the needle that is on this side, and pierce the needle into the other extremity from the inner part to the outer part.
And use that to penetrate with your penetration with which you make that penetrate into the anus at the end of the instrument which is in the part inside so that all of it penetrates.
And then begin from this side of the wound and sew that up to the extremity which is on the opposite side, and remove the needle from the thread which has penetrated, and then return it into that thread and stitch the extremity of the wound which is on the other side with this external part of the mirror; and remove it from the thread which belongs to him.
And do this once and another time, and do this once then again in between as you sew everything that is on the outside according to that example.
And the sum of this method of suturing is that you sew with a skin suture with which I sew skins, in such a way that you sew the flap once from the end of the chain, and that you leave that other side until you have completed it.
Here is the translation of the provided medieval medical text line by line into English:
You should place the needle at the end of the thread near you from the outside part, and make that penetrate to the inside part in the same spot, and leave both ends of the suture; then turn the needle and make it penetrate from the outside to the inside through both ends of the suture.
Then rotate those sutures, and make each one penetrate from the inside part to the outside part through both ends of the thread on the opposite side.
And this method of suturing is better than the common superficial suturing, and it is a type of suturing that promotes healing.
This is the sermon of Gaul.
And more specifically, for repairing the abdominal sutures, two needles are used, each with a thread. Begin by inserting one needle from your side and make it penetrate to the other side following the suturing method where the threads equally secure the wound.
And know that when the disruption is in the middle of the abdomen, then suturing it is more difficult than suturing other areas of the abdomen.
But the treatment of plague medicine is judgment of other plagues.
The sentence provided is a mix of medieval medical terminology and a Romance language structure similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here's an attempted translation based on the given context:
And if the air has already altered the wound, then place on that area unguents which you have at hand before they turn into hard stone and discharge bile, and consolidate them with care and attention; then treat it in the same way as other wounds until it is healed.
And if you do not have the medicines at hand, then place something on that area immediately, as it starts to discharge pus and become inflamed. Change this treatment twice a day, as you are taught, until it is healed, for you would not need any other medication in most cases when the wounds are simple.
But if you fear that the wound may spread to the major limbs, then you must soak lion's wool in high-quality tempered oil or in anointed oil, and place it around the areas between the joints and leave them there.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestines, for it often occurs this way, then treat it with black theban styptic vinegar, especially if the corruption has reached the intestine and has penetrated into its cavity.
And know that the one that is of the large intestine has a lighter healing than the one that is in the small intestines.
And it is difficult to heal when the intestine called "inguinal" does not receive relief from all sides of the plague that falls upon it; and this is due to the great number of veins within it, as well as its significant size in those veins, and by the subtlety of its structure, and because of its closeness to the nature of nerves.
And if what you process from the plague is the membrane, and you obtain it fresh, reduce it according to your prescription with which you treat intestines similarly.
But if it has passed into the space and is already turned green or black, then when you stretch that with a needle over the area that is discolored, to cause bleeding, because in the membrane there are veins and arteries.
And then cut what is another ligament, and place the two ends of the needle hanging from the part removed from the plague outside it, so that you may alleviate the traction of it by lifting the membrane and releasing the arm of the plague.
Remembering the plagues when they occur in the intestine.
When there is a rupture in the intestine and it is small, then it can be restored in some people; for this reason I saw one who was injured in his abdomen by a lance thrust, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had become fistula, and thus gas and air passed from him.
Then I considered the treatment of him already knowing that he was not stuck in his recovery, but stopped delving into what healed and where the area is consolidated.
And I put that you see the area already stabilized, worry about the patient lest they suffer an accident of evil in their belly; and not to suffer any misfortune from this bad accident, they should follow carefully all their dietary arrangements eating and drinking, then take a bath and exercise as directed.
And already some experienced ones have said that when there is a small ulcer on the intestine, then it must be tied in this manner: you take ants with large heads; and then you adjust the two lips of the ulcer and place an ant from those which have their mouth open over the two lips of the ulcer; thus when it bites onto them and tightens its mouth, cut off the head of the ant, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
And then place another ant next to the first one, and do not cease to do this with ants placed next to each other according to the quantity of the entire ulcer.
And then close the ulcer and sew it up; let those heads remain attached inside the intestine until the intestine is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
And it is possible that the intestine be tied with fine thread made from the intestines of animals attached to it, as it is finer than regular thread; you take the end of this intestinal thread, which should be stripped of its membrane, and then tie the end of it with thread wrapped around it, and then insert that thread into needles and sew the intestine with it, and return it to the disruption.
And this method of缝合使用蚂蚁not only是一种信任和希望的次要方式。
And if the wound is large and extensive, especially if it is in one of the delicate intestines, then it cannot be healed with mere subtlety, and it is not a complete cure.
Of the treatment for hemorrhoids and fistulas.
Know that any plague or abscess when it becomes corrupted and grows old, and turns into an ulcer, and if it is not consolidated and continuously discharges pus without being separated, then, in whichever part of the body it may be, it is universally called a fistula, and we call that condition azukem.
And a fistula, according to the truth, is a furrowed, hard, white swelling in which there is no pain and which has a cavity like that of a bird's feather quill; therefore, we call that kind of swelling rizatz, which means quill.
And in some people, there is moisture that discharges pus; and quickly, this moisture is severed within a few hours. And at times this moisture is thick, and it is scanty, and it is coarse, and it is fine.
And all those causes have been shown, and the signs of those and their cure through medicines in this section.
And it is necessary that I make you understand the treatment of fistula, which is done through surgical means with my hand.
And know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; for among these are those that affect the large veins and arteries, or the nerves, or the spine, or the intestines, or the bladder, or some of the ribs, or some of the vertebrae of the back, or any of the compound joints such as those of the hand and foot; and these are the ones that extend to the proximity of the main limb and similar areas.
And therefore, among these fistulas that follow this manner, they are among the illnesses difficult to heal, and do not receive proper treatment, and the handling of them is laborious and ignorant.
And if among these fistulas there is one whose depth does not reach the locations mentioned, and you hope for and trust in its treatment, and wish to understand it better, then take a thread of wool or iron, and if the fistula runs straight, probe it with that.
But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a thin lead wire, for lead, because of the lightness of its body, is flexible and can follow the twists.
And if the fistula has horrible swellings, it is not possible for you to determine its nature by feeling.
Then cleanse the openings through their own passages, for the moisture with which you cleanse that area should come out of the other openings and flow from them.
Then inquire carefully, according to the method by which you can know if there are bones or nerves here, whether the cavity of the fistula is deep or shallow, or whether it is a fistula with multiple openings and lies throughout all this with the full strength of your examination, with which you examine the patient, and the discovery of the pain should be compressed with your hand over the area, and similar to the symptoms and accidental causes of the abscess.
And when you have stood over all those causes with true understanding, then proceed to the treatment according to confidence: and it is that you now consider whether it is an apparent fistula near or in a salty place, far from a joint, or from a nerve, or from an artery, or from a vein, or from one of the places which you know and mention.
Now you dry the fistula according to what was said before about its opening, and remove what is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what has grown in the openings of the flesh, or of bone and similar, and care for that inside so that it may be healed.
And if the fistula is of deep length and runs straight, then you must incise it as much as possible, and then clean all its corrupted flesh; and then apply poultices wrapped in sharp medicines, and insert them into the cavity of the fistula which you have grasped with an instrument.
And do this several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula from the corruption.
And then restore it with ointments that will generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
And if it is not healed by this method, then you must cauterize it as we have recommended.
And if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must be certain of this, then you should investigate it and dry it out as we have recommended, provided that you do not interfere with any vein or nerve or major limb as we have said.
And if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackening in it, then you must scrape it until all the corruption is removed; and then treat it with something that will cause it to heal until it is cured.
And if the arm is not healed and thrown away just as it was before, then you know that you have not fully reached the eradication of the corruption; and then you uncover it again and thoroughly examine it and cleanse it with your final strength, and then restore it.
And if it is healed, that is good; and if not, then you know that the corruption is in the distant depths of the body, which has not been reached, and then there can be nothing done but to leave that alone.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is possible for you to remove it, then you should extract it with delicate forceps that are suitable for this purpose.
And if there are multiple bones affected, then thoroughly perform the extraction of all of them, and do not leave any behind for any reason with your strength.
But if any impediment arises from the humors, and at its beginning there is neither fear nor error, then incise those ligaments or flesh if they are present, and free the bones.
And if you are not prepared to set the bones of your patient, then apply something that can reduce the inflammation over the wound, and leave it there until what is around those bones of flesh and ligaments is softened, and guard the wound so that it does not become hardened, and constrain the section which you have incised in your operation.
If you fear so, apply a cloth soaked in crushed and oiled herbs, or a cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment, or any of the green ointments, for when those ligaments soften and the bones are separated from their extraction, that tension is relieved.
But if it is a large bone such as the thigh bone or the hip bone or similar ones, and only the surface of it is corrupted, then scrape that area gently only behind where the blackness and corruption are removed, and then restore the wound.
But if the corrupted part is large, and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that area and completely incise in the location where the corruption has spread, and then treat it until it is consolidated.
And I recommend to you that which happens to a man in his thigh so that you may use this as an example and aid for your operation.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And then extend the time with that by mistake of doctors until the abscess is opened, and pus will come out from it, and its healing will be slowly completed until the chest becomes fistulized, and many holes are made in it which all discharge pus and the body's moisture.
And then many doctors attended to the patient for about two years, but none of them knew much about the art until I was called.
And see the chest of him and the materials that were flowing from those orifices in large amounts; and already the body of that man was entirely swollen, and its color was yellowish.
And then I insert the probe into one of those orifices and bring the probe to the bone.
Then I carefully examined all the orifices and found those that lead to the chest from all sides.
And then I prepared and made an incision on one of those orifices where I discovered a part of the bone, which was corrupted; it had already become brittle, corrupted, and darkened; and a part of the chest that had been penetrated was already corrupted, extending into the marrow.
And then I treated what was discovered and prepared of the exposed bone.
And I ensured that only the corruption in the bone was what I cut out and treated, which I had already identified.
Then I applied the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
Then I repeated the procedure and re-examined the bone beyond the initial exposure, and found continued corruption with the bone.
And search for what appears to me from that corruption, and then I was pierced doing the cure of it and restoration, and it is not restored.
And then I uncover the other side and do not stop dissecting the bone little by little, carefully performing its restoration, and it is not restored until I cut around about a palm's width of it, and that part is extracted with its marrow, and then restore it with medicines, and it is slightly consolidated and healed.
And iteration in the operation and section of it is not necessary unless due to the disposition of its frailty and the lack of tolerance and fear of death, for accidents happen at all times because of the excess of evacuation causing fainting spells.
And thus, it is completely healed by thorough healing, and where there was bone, now there is hard flesh; its condition is well established in its body, and its strength returns; its conditions are improved, and it does not suffer any contradiction while moving nor harm in any way.
However, if there is a protruding bone in an already injured part of the body, then you must proceed as follows: take a ligament and tie it tightly at the end of the protruding bone, and command someone to hold it taut; use a thicker woolen bandage than the first one; then bind it over the flesh that is below the bone, and stretch the extremity so that you pull the flesh apart; and you uncover the flesh over the area where you wish to saw so that the saw does not touch the flesh.
And place a stick or board under the bone properly, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to use the saw without drying out the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary that the incision be made gradually over the corrupted area, because if corruption is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear on its visible surface, and may require another incision later.
And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, before it was one part connected to the other, and the corruption is at the middle or in a part of it, then you uncover the flesh from all sides completely; then place wood underneath it, and then bind that first part where the corruption is until the suturing of the other part continues.
And let the binding be according to the place of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and bind the bone where it continues from the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation of two joints, then it is not reasonable to proceed but to remove [the affected part].
And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, you must examine how the corruption appears to you, and cut away that part, and cleanse it according to whichever method is possible for you, and in all cases, correction should be made by you, unless there is a vein or nerve that would oppose this.
And know what are the incisors and the saws to cut these bones vary according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the thickness of those, and the fineness and the size and the smallness of those, and the hardness and their rarity; therefore it is necessary that you prepare every kind of operation with an instrument suitable for that operation.
And know that this operation means for you to understand the type of instrument you would need; when you have great study and long experience and knowledge of the methods of this art, and are a witness to the methods of diseases, because now you can apply what is suitable from the instruments to every disease.
And I am forming for you at the end of this chapter the number of instruments which you will use as simples with which you will proceed to your prohibition, which you will experiment on others. Forma de serra:
Forma de autra serra:
Forma de autra serra gran:
Forma de ray: Make the head of this vein in the shape of a star-shaped nail head, and the points on it should be according to the shape of the raised points.
And it is not appropriate that only the ends of the joints be rubbed when they are corrupted, or if there is a large wide opening.
Forma de razori menor:
It seems that the provided text is in an archaic or constructed language that draws elements from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Given this context, here's a translation of the given sentence:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt. The phrase "Forma de lu:" seems incomplete or could be part of a larger sentence. It might mean something like "Shape of it:" or "Form of it:". However, without additional context, it's challenging to provide an accurate and meaningful translation. Could you provide the complete sentence or more context?
Form of the razor in which there is a concavity:
Form of razor or subtle method:
Form of another reason of curved extremity:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:
Forma de inscisori autra minor:
Form of another incisor; this resembles a ray, and the end of it is like a saw, and it is applied in multiple places along the line of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio dequel que es perforat dels osses:
And the end of it is triangular and with a sharp point.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly it is necessary that all the causes we have mentioned for razors and scissors and saws [are considered].
Of the incision of extremities and of the suturing of the bones.
The extremities may become corrupt either due to intrinsic or extrinsic causes. If you have treated that corruption with medicines and the cure does not bring relief, or if the corruption progresses to the member without any perceivable cause, then you must incise that member in such a way that the corruption is cut off, so that the patient can be saved from death or further malevolence which is a greater deficiency of the limb.
And the sign of the one to whom this happens is that the member turns black before it falls off, as if fire had already burned it, or you may see approaching the blackness which spreads into that member affecting him and taking over the whole body; therefore be cautious and proceed with incision on that area.
And similarly, if the cause of the corruption is due to some venomous causes, such as from a sea scorpion or viper or rattlesnake and the like.
And if the corruption or the affliction is in the extremity of the finger, then you must incise the finger and do not give space for the corruption to spread into the hand.
And similarly if you access the hand, then you incise it at the base of the finger, and do not give space for corruption to enter into the arm of the wrist.
And if you need to do so, then incise the arm between the elbow and the joint.
And if the corruption passes further and extends around the thigh, then in that case it is the death of the patient; and to administer another cause for this in treatment is an excess of virtue.
And similarly treat the foot when corruption overtakes the toe of the foot, then you incise it between one of the joints.
And if you take hold of the instep of the foot, then you incise the entire foot. And if it enters into the knee, then you incise the thigh between the joint of the knee.
And if the corruption has already spread over the knee, then there is no remedy but resignation, and leave the patient to death.
And the method of incising or amputating the limb is that you tighten a ligature at the part just below where you wish to incise, and tighten another ligature above the area; and have an assistant extend a ligature to the parts below, and another assistant extend a ligature above it; and you separate the flesh between the two ligatures with a spatula so that all the flesh is exposed; then proceed to incise or amputate.
And it is necessary that cloth be placed from all sides so that the area does not come into contact with it, and that the patient receives a precise lesion and an abscess is prevented.
And if you encounter blood flow while working, then you should cauterize the area appropriately, or apply some powder to stop the bleeding; and then return to your treatment until it is completed.
And then bind the affected limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
And I recommend to you what happened to a man in his foot, this accident which I and you recommend, which is that the man's foot turned black due to burning, similar to combustion from fire.
And that corruption began first in his toe and then spread to the entire foot.
And then that man prepared himself for various pus to come out as part of the treatment due to the intensity of the pain and burning he experienced, and he cut off that foot up to the joint, and it was healed.
For a long time, that same corruption occurred in the index finger of his hand.
And then he came to me, and I performed the procedure to remove that excess using some of the medicines that I applied to his hand, followed by cleansing his body; but the excess did not subside and began to spread to another finger until it reached his entire hand.
And the urge led me to incise his hand, but I did not want to do so, hoping against the reaction of that excess, and more because I feared the incision of his hand once dead, for the strength of the patient was fading.
And since he departed from me, he returned to his land and it came to me that that man prepared and cut his hand entirely, and was healed.
And I have added this narrative only to be helpful regarding what can be done for this illness, and its meaning by which it should be understood and according to which it should be treated.
About the treatment of the sinuses and the quality of enemas with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in fleshy limbs and the space of the abscess is prolonged to the point that it collects pus, and then it bursts and perforates, and the pus is discharged from it, leaving the area empty like a vessel, and the skin over it appears thin like fine cloth, and no severe corruption has occurred, and it does not affect the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and it is not referred to as a fistula.
However, if the space is prolonged to the point that corruption affects any limb, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
And the treatment of it is to incise that skin entirely as it has formed, especially when it has become thin like cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And when you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm that you use should have a fragrant odor, then cleanse it with an Egyptian medicine which consists of olive oil, vinegar, and honey in equal parts, and they are mixed together in one vessel, and heated over fire until the medicine becomes warm and reaches the consistency of honey.
And then you take what is necessary from it and dissolve it with water and honey; and administer it as an enema to the intestine, tighten the openings of it, and leave the medicine in there for a quantity of two hours.
And then extract that with a scraper; and do this for so many days until the intestine is cleansed and the swelling is reduced.
And sometimes it is administered as an enema with ashes water when this medicine is not available to you; and that you take the ash of vines, and put it in the water; then mix that and use it to administer an enema until you are convinced that the intestine is now clean.
And if the patient does not tolerate Egyptian medicine or ashes water, then administer it as an enema with water and honey, and mix in ground zingiber (ginger), and also administer it as an enema with wine and honey mixed together, for the property of honey is to cleanse and wash, and the wine makes the intestine adhere more, especially when the wine has an excess of astringency and dryness.
And when you do this several times and are satisfied that the sinus is already cleansed, then irrigate it with something that promotes flesh growth.
And it is that you take some unguent of diaphoretic and dissolve that with rose oil and styptic wine; or you can perform an enema with certain medicines and use other ointments that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the sinus opening is narrow where the enema tube cannot be received, then you should gradually enlarge it with a small instrument, and place linen cloth wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment until it is enlarged.
And similarly, if the opening is wide, then you should sew the edges together and leave a quantity through which the enema can enter additionally.
And if the opening from which the fluid flows is raised towards the upper parts, then dry it at the lowest point of it so that the fluid can flow down. For when the fluid is constricted in the depth of the sinus, the flesh is generated within it.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus around the lowest part of the bone as you wish, then you must prepare the limb with a treatment that allows the fluid to flow out easily according to what is suitable for you and ensure that there is no obstruction causing the fluid to be retained within it.
And the one that is over the opening of the sinus should be changed frequently so that what comes out from the arm can be collected. And so that you may know whether what flows from the arm is much or little, or if it is digested or undigested.
And with this, you should consider the location of that sinus, whether the patient feels pain there or not, and if there is an abscess in it.
And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the material that was placed over the sinus opening has already adhered or is about to adhere, then change it every three days. When you remove the dressing, change the cloth to another one and renew the ointment.
And if within the sinus close to that space there are subtle viruses, then do not despair about its adhesion, for its healing is approaching, for some people take a long time for flesh to regenerate in their wounds, and others experience the opposite effect.
And if within the sinus for many days there is undigested matter, then you know that the sinus does not adhere; and if the adhesion of the sinus is delayed and becomes prolonged, then you adjust with drying medicines, and if the medicines are moist in their substance and virtue, they should be as dry as diafrenicon, which is adjusted to remove excess addition.
And the most recent method used for treatment is to take diafrenicon ointment and dissolve it in rose oil, and apply it over the area continuously as an ointment in its substance, then warm that area with it, and use it accordingly.
And it appears in that action, when there is no undigested matter, to use diafrenicon ointment, honey which is boiled until it is thickened, and apply it; or take myrrh and aloe and resin, grind all of them together, powder them over the honey while it is on the fire, then spread this mixture on cloth and bind it over the sinus; or spread that with the honey which you have boiled until it is thickened, powder it over the cloth, and bind it.
And at times they are administered with long aristologia and roots of the celestial lily (and it is the celestial lily) and flour of iron and centaury, and use of those simples or compounds, crush those and sieve and powder over the honey which has been cooked; and use that.
And if the swelling is prolonged and does not heal with this treatment, then you know that the corruption is in the joint of it, and already investigate in the bones or in other hard members or in the ligaments; then cure it with fistula treatment, as was said above.
On the treatment of abscesses and inflamed nails, and the addition of finger incisions and amputations.
An abscess is a swelling that occurs below the nail of the fingers or toes, and it can also appear on other fingers. As it prolongs and its treatment is neglected, it becomes a more severe infection or corruption, and it begins to rot at the root of the nail, eventually corrupting the entire area. Its corruption spreads inward to the bone, causing a foul odor, and it deforms the tip of the finger, turning its color dark.
And therefore when you have that condition which we have described in the division and do not agree with your treatment, then you must incise with iron all the superfluous part that remains of the nail and then cauterize the wound near it, for a hot cautery is helpful in this.
If the bone is safe and the nail is healthy, but the edges of the nail are already pressing into the flesh inside, and they begin to pierce and cause pain, then you must place a thin rod under the angle of the nail that is piercing the flesh, and push it up; then cut that part of the flesh with ease, and apply cauterizing corrosive medicines over what remains until it is all removed; and then treat it with ointments until it heals.
But if the corruption has already penetrated into the bone, then you must cut into the bone and extract it, for it will never heal as long as the corrupted bone remains inside.
And if the corruption and decay spread to the finger, then you should cut it at one of the joints where its removal is necessary, and then treat it until it heals.
But if the nail has suffered an impact or friction and there is severe pain, then at the beginning you should bleed the patient, and then dry the nail with a sharp spatula using a transverse section from top to bottom. Be careful that the cut does not go into the flesh under the nail, for you would cause the patient severe pain and may result in the excessive growth of skin around the area; then treat the area with something that relieves pain.
But said adjustment, which is born in the hands of many men, it is very fleshy all over, and very solid in the bones, or very strong in the nails.
And some of them are born in the region of the joint, or its birthplace is in certain nodes of those [joints]. But he who is born with this condition in some nodes does not suffer, and he who is born with strong joints in it is worse off.
And of those that are born fleshy, the incision is superficial, and it is such that you should cut through the root of it with a spatula.
More difficult is the cure of that which is born at the root of the joint; and thus beware of amputating it.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
More consolidation which occurs between the bones, either through heredity of the person born thusly, or due to consolidation from disease or combustion by fire, or by similarity, then it is necessary to dry out that consolidation before the bones return to their natural form.
And then place between the layers of the infused oil-soaked cloth to prevent them from lightly adhering, and separate between those, or place between those a thin sheet of lead until they are properly consolidated.
And similarly, if there is consolidation in some of the palms, then you dry out that consolidation according to how it is prepared and adapted to the shape of the limb.
From the inception of vices, these are varicose veins.
Varicose veins are enlarged, twisted veins filled with excessive melancholic humors that appear in the limbs of the body, and they most commonly occur in the legs, especially in the legs of travelers, laborers, and those who carry heavy loads.
Then it is necessary that you administer a purge of black bile several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
The treatment of these conditions with iron is in two ways: one is to incise and draw out the black blood, and the other way is to elevate the vein and extract it entirely.
The procedure is as follows: first, apply hot water to the leg at the beginning so that the thick blood, which is feculent in the leg, can be resolved. Then, tightly bind the patient's leg from the highest part of the thigh down to just below the knee with a bandage. Next, dry the vein in one place, or two, or three places with an incision, and then draw out the black blood with your hand from below the leg upwards and downwards until the desired quantity of blood is extracted, which the patient's strength can tolerate.
And then apply water to it, and command him to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
And repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and inform the patient.
And the elevation of them is according to this method: you who shave the chest of the patient, if it has much hair, then put him in a bath and anoint his chest with warm water until it reddens and the veins are engorged; or exercise him vigorously, if a bath is not available, until the limb is warmed.
And then dry the chain along the vein by making an incision in the leg or in the rear of the limb near the knee, or at the lowest part near the ankle.
And then grasp the chain with forceps and milk the vein from all sides until it appears to the touch, and you should appreciate the appearance of what you are doing as the area turns slightly black.
And thus, when you remove the chain, you will see that white substance which is like a string.
And then place it in such a way that it is elevated and separated from the chain, and suspend it with an ounce of lion's fat.
And then make another incision near that incision by three fingers, and then stretch the skin of the area above the vein where it appears.
And then lift that part and cut it at the rear incision below the talus, and then extract that part and lift it until it is pulled out through the second incision, and then remove it from the incision above.
And do this until you extract that part from the highest or uppermost incision of all the incisions, until it is completely pulled out; and then cut that part.
And if you cannot extract and lift it, then insert a needle with a strong double thread and tie it and pull it out, or insert the probe and rotate your hand in all directions until it is removed. And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to lift it out and it may harm the patient.
And once you have completely removed it, then place on the wound site wool soaked in wine and oiled olive and un-oiled olive, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted with a twisting that involves its segments, and it is not straight as we have said it should be, then you must incise along all parts of its twisting and at the points where it twists around itself, and then suspend it with hooks until you lift it entirely.
And be careful with your incision so that you do not cut into the vein and damage it, for it will be difficult for you to raise it back up; and use caution in this matter.
Forma del inscident am le qual es seccada vit:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.
From the extraction of the vein from the leg.
This vein is generated in the chests of people in hot lands, just as in Al-Andalus in the land of Arabs and in the hot and dry lands of India with little moisture, where there is no grass or tree.
And often it is generated in other parts of the body besides the lungs.
And the generation of it is from putrefaction that comes from the chain thus as serpents, worms, lice, and maggots are generated between the chain and the flesh.
And the sign of the susceptibility to the occurrence is this vein where you find inflammation in the chest very strong; then the area is blistered; and then the vein starts to emerge from that blistery place which resembles a plant rash.
And when the limb appears, then it is necessary that you wrap around it a piece of lead which weighs one drachm within two drachms, and secure that and leave the lead hanging from the beam.
And as many times as you move it away from him due to some external cause, wrap that in lead and secure it. And if the swelling is prolonged, then you cut a part of it and wrap up the remainder; and do not cut that which is tightly constricted within until it has been brought out, for if you cut that which is contracted, it will go into the flesh and cause an abscess, pus formation in the area, and a bad ulceration.
Because it is necessary that it be treated gently and extracted bit by bit until it is completely removed from the body and no part of it remains in the body.
And from this vein, it extends in some men to a length of five palms and ten, and I have even heard of one reaching twenty palms.
And if it is to be cut during the time of its treatment, then insert the needle into the channel and pierce that area with a long channel through the flesh until all the material inside is evacuated. Administer putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; then treat it according to the cure for abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has branches, especially when it approaches the joint of the foot or within the foot, and it comes out through multiple openings, with a branch extending from each opening.
And therefore, treat that as we have said in the division and with what has been said above.
On the section concerning worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine disease.
This disease is called in some regions the bovine disease because small white spots appear on the belly, and it is a kind of worm that originates between the skin and the flesh, and moves throughout the body up and down, and is felt moving from one member to another until it breaks through the skin and comes out.
And its generation is due to the putrefaction of certain humors, just as worms, serpents, and worms like earthworms and roundworms are generated in the stomach.
And it is feared for its malice, because when it moves through the body and reaches the head, and gets to the eye, it then causes a strong infection in it and enters and destroys the eye, which results in white spots appearing.
And therefore, when you want to treat and extract it, do so only according to its movement and appearance as felt. Then you must tighten what is above it and below it with binding and strong compression, and then dry it out and extract it.
And if it is embedded in the flesh and you do not find it, then place a heated cautery over the area where it lies, and the greatest danger feared is corruption of the area, which corrupts the location as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.
Of the incision for the illness nafir.
This disease is called nafir in our land, and it is pain that comes to some members, and then moves from member to member.
And I have already seen that second thing which I will recount to you. I was called to see a sick woman in a village, and after uncovering her arm, I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm. After staying there for about an hour, I observed that swelling moving up the arm like a worm, though more lightly, as if it were quicksilver flowing from one place to another.
And then it moved to the pain in that area and entered the muscle, and then it stayed there for about an hour.
And then it moved to the other arm before reaching the other side of the body.
And then it returned to me, moving throughout her body as I observed; and I was greatly amazed by its transformation and the speed at which it moved from one member to another. And I had seen this before in my other patients in the same manner; however, I have seen many cases where the pain is transferred from one limb to another. But do not see this with the eyes as in a woman.
And I did not think it was anything else but that it is because the woman was of old age, or of dry body and exposed veins, and in this condition feels this altered wind.
And it is necessary that this reverse cure does not appear in those who are delicate and have a moist body with engorged veins.
And when you wish to treat him and the patient feels that pain, then it is not apparent to you as we have said, then you press on that area lightly and cut into it where that constricted wind has settled, and cauterize the spot.
But if you do not find it with your hands, then cure that by means of a body purge and by expelling windiness, and treat those with foul pills and pills of senna and the like.
From the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diverse according to their types, and according to the places in the body where they strike, for their diversity is such that some have large points, and small ones, and concave ones, and blunt ones; and there are those with three prongs, and those which have barbs; and there are also those with blades.
And the signs of injury to the skull are when an arrow strikes it, pierces the bone, and reaches the dura mater which is over the brain; for there follows severe headache, blindness, dizziness, inflammation and heat in the eyes, inflammation and heat of the tongue, spasms, confusion of mind, vomiting of bile, sudden loss of speech, destruction of voice, and a white, powdery moisture similar to flour oozing from the wound site, and the appearance of the face changes as if the flesh were moistened.
And therefore if these signs appear to you, then abstain from the treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
And the signs of the arrow when it is shot into the heart, so that it is near the left nipple, and you feel that it is fixed in a hard place, not a soft one; and the movement of the arrow is similar to the pulse's movement, and black blood flows from the wound, and there is coldness in the extremities, and cold sweat, and fainting; therefore you know that death descends swiftly.
And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are spitting out frothy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the neck are inflamed, and the color of the patient changes, and they expire a great spirit, and they seek a draft of fresh air.
And if the arrow strikes the membrane that is in the feet, and the pain is near the small bones, and there is great swelling with intense pain and sighing, and not all the muscles of the limbs are affected.
And if you find an arrow in the stomach, then remove it from the infected food that is undigested.
And if the arrow is embedded in the abdomen and has entered it, make an incision at the wound site, or through the skin, to access the intestine that has been ruptured; there is no hope for recovery if the extraction of the arrow is not performed.
And if the arrow hits the bladder and urine comes out from it, and some process causes something to move outward from within, and there is great pain on the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
And the other parts as well, such as the face, neck, jaw, shoulders, arms, vertebrae of the back, clavicle, thigh, chest, and similar members, are saved according to the major dispositions when the arrow does not hit a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
And I will recount to you what I have observed about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand this in relation to your treatment.
The cause is that in one instance, an arrowhead was embedded in the lacrimal duct of the eye near the base of the nose, and I extracted it from the other side, leaving the earwax untouched, and he was healed, without any harm to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew who had been struck in the gray area of his eye, leaving the eyelid somewhat untouched. The arrow was already hidden, and only a small part of it could be reached to which the shaft adhered. It was a large sharp arrow of the Turks, with a lion-shaped iron head that had no fletching.
And it is beneficial for the patient, and not accidental that a bad accident happens to him in his health.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had been shot in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, which is the kind with ears; and then I incised around it between two cartilages, and it was already submerged in his throat; and then I delicately manipulated it with that, and then I extracted it, and the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man that had been shot in his abdomen, and it was thought he would die because of it; and thus, after thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition due to any treatment, I incised around the arrow and worked on it, and he was healed, and no further adverse incident occurred to him.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow had lodged in his back, and the wound had solidified over it; and after about seven years, the arrow was embedded in the root of his spine.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had lodged in her abdomen, and the wound had solidified around it; and there was no change in her condition, and the woman did not suffer any harm in any of her natural functions.
And you see another man in whom an arrowhead is embedded in his face and the wound has healed solidly and break the arrowhead, not finding any pain here, and similar cases are seen with this.
And extract the arrow from the man who was one of the king's chief men, which had been shot into the middle of his nose and had slightly deflected to the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden inside.
And I was called for the treatment near the arrow wound within three days.
And then I found the arrow wound very narrow; and then I searched for it with a fine probe, but did not feel it; however, he felt a pricking near his right ear, and then I suspected that this pricking was due to the tip of the arrow.
And I treated the area with a plaster that has attractive and digestive properties, believing that the area will become inflamed so that the location of the arrowhead becomes apparent, drawing it out.
And there was no significant accident in the area where the arrow had reached; and I continued with the plaster on it for many days, and no accident occurred; the wound healed during this time, and the patient recovered from the injury for about many days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and reported this to me.
And then I applied an acute corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it opened up, and with a probe, I examined it, and found the tip of the arrowhead, which was adhered to the bone.
And then I adjust in the incision of the wound with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrowhead becomes visibly apparent to me, and I proceed with this method for a period of time between four months.
And then increase the fire to amplify it, and it is possible for me to insert the scissors into it, and remain there, and not be deterred by any emission, because I did not cease to refine and ingeniously devise methods concerning this in various ways, until one day I managed to grasp it with forceps that were carefully crafted, according to how the design of those will be shown at the end of the chapter, until I extracted it; and then restored that wound.
And some doctors judged that the nasal cartilage could not be restored, but I restored it and the wound was consolidated, and the patient was healed completely, without any recurrence in any way.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting some arrows for which you should pause and consider the rules and significance regarding what I have not mentioned, because the parts of this art and the definitions thereof are not understood through mere narration nor comprehended by merely reading the book.
And the wise artisans compare a little with much; and that which is present with that which is absent; and they find new operations and new instruments by tracing back to the foreign causes of the art when such occurrences happen.
And therefore I say that arrows are not removed from the limbs in which they are embedded, but according to two methods: either by attraction of the place where they enter; or by the opposite side from the other part.
And that which is removed from the place where it entered is an arrow that proceeds into a fleshy area, and is pulled out from there.
And if you do not obey the suggestion of the time at which to remove it, then you should leave it inside for several days until the flesh around it rots and the attraction of it is lessened and its exit becomes easier.
And similarly, if it is embedded in bone and you do not follow the suggestion, then leave it inside for several days and repeatedly move it with attraction and motion each day, and it will be removed.
And if you do not follow the suggestion for several days, then you must drill around the circumference of the arrow in that bone from all sides with a fine tool until the area around the arrow is widened, and then extract it.
But if the arrow is already hidden in the part of the body and is not felt, then you should probe for it; and if you feel it, then pull it out with several manipulations that are appropriate for its extraction.
And if you cannot do it because of the constriction of the wound and the length of the arrow, and there are no bones or nerves or veins here, then you operate on the wound until it is widened and it becomes possible to extract the arrow.
And if it is attached to the ears with which it is held, then you free the flesh in which it is embedded from all sides with every means you can; and devise a method for this, if you cannot remove the flesh in cases of ear fractures and twisting of those areas where it is necessary.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in whatever location it is, then you use your hand's torque with forceps on all sides until it obeys; and be subtle with the greatest subtlety so that the arrow does not break and to make the extraction easy for you.
And if you cannot do it at that moment, then you wait for several days until the areas around it can soften, and then repeat the procedure when it has become easier. But if there is an adverse flow of blood, then you administer the treatment we have mentioned in the appropriate chapter.
And observe the source of the incision, whether it is from a vein or nerve, or tendon, and administer treatment in every possible way to stop the arrow's penetration; and do this with ease, tranquility, slowness, and firmness as I have taught you.
And therefore make the arrow contract so that the patient is according to the figure in which you should focus the point of the arrow on them, for it is more beneficial. But if this is not possible for you, then administer what is possible for you according to the figures.
But the arrows that are thrown off by the opposite side, or if you have already processed some part to the outer parts, or make the tip of the arrow sticky due to the sensation from the part above the prescribed chain and sometimes elevate that prominence; then cauterize over that area; and let the cautery be according to the amount taken by the forceps; then pull it out, for it is made lighter in this way.
But if it is retained in the bone, then twist it in the opposite direction until the arrowhead penetrates the bone, and widen it as you go, and then extract it.
And if not, leave it there for several days, and then try to remove it again before it adheres.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in there, then push it out with it.
But if the shaft has fallen off and you wish to administer an impulse, then insert something into it, if it is deaf (blunt), use a spoon-shaped instrument so that its concavity enters under the arrowhead and then push it out with it.
And if the arrow is concave, then you forcefully push it in, because the arrow is lightened by that.
And if the arrow is embedded, then you must suction out all the flesh in which it is lodged, if that is within your ability to do so, and then treat it with whatever is appropriate.
And if the arrow strikes in the feet, or in the abdomen, or in the bladder, or in the side, and it is close enough that you can touch it with your hand, and it is possible for you to cut around it, then cut around it and be careful of veins or nerves, and extract it, and then treat the wound if needed, and care for it until it is healed.
Form of forceps with which arrows are extracted:
Let the ends of them be like a bird's beak, which are made like scissors to grasp the arrow so that they do not let it go.
And of those, various special sizes are made, large, small, and medium, according to the size of the arrow's thickness and thinness, and the width of the wound, and the constriction of it.
And in this way, so that the instrument within is lightened in the concave socket and is pushed by it.
From the text provided, it seems like we are dealing with a medieval medical treatise that blends elements from several Romance
Here is the translation of the provided text, line by line into English: Here is the translation of the provided text line by line:
And in the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of those is placed at the curvature of the wild thorn bush root; and the second is sophena, and its location is below the domestic side of the thigh; and the sciatic vein, whose location is below the wild side of the thigh; and in the thigh, there are other veins similar to those.
The treatment of veins near the ears is for ancient and migratory catarrhs, and for old and ulcerous conditions of the head.
And the method of bleeding them is as I recommend to you: shave the head of the patient, and rub the head of the patient at the back in the area where both veins are with a wide cloth using good friction; then hold the patient's neck with a band so that both spots and their locations are close to the ears at two points near the top of the head; seek those places with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those veins with your finger there, this is an indication by touch.
Then take the lancet, which is the appropriate tool, and insert it into the vein in the neck until the bloodletting reaches the bone. Then raise your hand with the vein and the neck towards the upper parts and incise the vein with an appropriate incision. And the length of the incision should be about two fingers joined together or around that amount; and let as much blood flow as you desire.
Then press with pillows and leave it until it is healed.
And it has been preceded at the beginning of the book with the inscription of those and their cautery.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And the quality of performing phlebotomy on them is as I recommend to you: constrain the patient's neck with motion until the two veins appear clearly by touch and their pulse is evident, and then place your finger on it; and now you can proceed with testing.
And then you raise the chain above the vein to the parts above with your index finger, and insert the flebotomi (phlebotomy instrument) at an angle, and elevate the vein upwards; and incise it in this way as you have done with the other two veins; and let blood according to the quantity of your need.
And then loosen the compression on the patient, and place your finger on the vein for an hour, and then apply a cloth and poultice over it and tighten it up with strong pressure, and leave it until it is healed.
And already preceded is the recollection of them, and from those, the incision, and the attraction at the beginning of the book.
And thus the treatment of phlebotomy of the frontal vein is close to the phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for ancient diseases of the face and migraine and fever and foul-smelling ulcers.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is as I recommend to you: so that the patient holds their arm with a bandage in which the vein appears; and then take the instrument called a fleam, of which this is the form:
Place the tip of the instrument that is at the head of the probe on top of that vein and strike it with a peg or another tool in the manner described, and let the blood flow according to the amount you wish; then close the puncture wound of the patient and ensure that it heals properly.
And sometimes it is opened with a vein cutter, but the vein cutter should not have an acute end like other vein cutters; rather, its end should be flat, and you must cut across that area transversely because the bone is close and strong, and it would break if the vein cutter were fine.
However, the treatment of the two veins that are near the tear ducts of both eyes for eye ailments due to inflammation and pus in the eyes, and for facial illnesses.
The procedure for bloodletting is that the patient should hold their head steady with a bandage, and then perform the bloodletting on those veins, while you stand above the patient's head.
And the bloodletting should be done transversely and slightly along the length with a small vein cutter, because there is no flesh in that area; if the vein cutter is thin, its end will easily break.
And then let blood flow as much as is necessary for you, and place bandages over those areas, and keep them tight for one night, and then loosen them.
And the bleeding from the nasal vein is suitable for acute fever and violent heat, and for diseases of the face and migraine and inflammation that occur in the face, especially when they are chronic.
And the quality of the bloodletting is that the patient holds their head and then you place your left hand on their nose, and take a fine long bloodletting instrument and insert it into the middle part of the nasal tip according to straightness, for the vein does not appear to the touch here, and the blood begins to flow immediately.
You must slowly withdraw your hand with the small bloodletting instrument and let the blood flow according to your need; then bandage that area for one night, for it heals quickly.
However, bloodletting from the two carpal areas is beneficial for alleviating swelling and the onset of leprosy and various other diseases, impetigo, and severe corrosive ulcers, as well as herpes.
And the quality of the phlebotomy for them is that the patient should hold each one in their own arm with a bandage; and the practitioner stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a chair.
And then perform venesection on the vein with a wide-bore lancet little by little; and then extract blood in a moderate amount or according to what you deem necessary for this case; and then do the same with the other vein.
And then loosen the ligature and tighten the two veins with a moderate constriction so that the patient is not suffocated, and leave it in place until the plague is healed.
And the benefit of venesection from the larger veins is that it helps with small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, bad ulcers and cracks, and also with bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
And the procedure for venesection is as follows: have the patient sit in front of you, and tie a band around their neck. Then spread the lips apart and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; each can be identified by their darkness, particularly where smaller dark veins surround them. Then incise each vein with an appropriate incision.
And if you have doubt, and do not know which one of them it is, then you should proceed to the incision of the larger one, and from that, the pus will clearly manifest.
And make the appearance of the two veins that are on the lips above.
But for the two veins that are below the tongue, the treatment is to perform phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for premonitory signs in the throat, disease of the uvula, and diseases of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomizing those veins is such that you should place the patient between your hands before the sun, lift their tongue, and look below the tongue where on one side there is a vein and on the other side another vein, and the color of each tends towards blackness.
And then phlebotomize each one; be careful not to linger with your hand while phlebotomizing those veins, because below them are arteries.
And the veins that are bled in the calf are those where it is customary to bleed all men, and their bleeding is done in two ways: either by applying a lancet with a fine point; or by using a knife-like instrument for cutting, which is called alnessil, and this is its form:
And you should use the thin instrument in this way, and it is necessary to open the concave veins that are full and appear thick, and those that contain thick, clotted blood.
And this flebotomi is of lesser width and has a more delicate tip, and it is suitable for the flebotomy of fine veins that contain subtle blood.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And it is necessary for the phlebotomist, when bleeding that area, to be very careful and have great fear in doing so, because there lies an artery. And if he makes a mistake and pierces with the phlebotomy needle where there should not be piercing, he will cut that artery and cause a flow of blood; therefore, one must not bleed that area with a pricking phlebotomy needle, but rather with a cutting instrument first.
And if the basilic vein does not appear by clear manifestation, then you must leave that area and move to another, or seek some other vein; or bleed at the end of the arm where it is visible; and perform that bleeding with a cutting phlebotomy as we have said.
But if you wish to perform phlebotomy on the patient, then before binding the arm, touch the area between where you know the pulse is located, and then press on it with your thumb; then extend the arm and cut the vein with a concave incision using a cutting instrument as we have said; and be careful that you do not hit the artery by mistake in this location.
And when you see, as you tighten the bandage, swelling in the place where you have touched with your hand, then that swelling is arterial swelling, and therefore it should be treated accordingly.
And if you see the blood flow during phlebotomy as thin and red like a child's urine, then you know it is arterial blood; and then you wait and place your finger on that spot for a long time; and then remove your finger, and if the blood comes out in drops, which repeatedly stops and starts, then you strengthen the arm and leave that.
And protect the patient from his own discharge, and keep a close watch over him and do not let that condition persist for many days until he is healed.
And if the blood flow is not interrupted, and sometimes when proper medicine is not available for this condition, then you should incise the artery, if it appears to you; for the extremity is contracted, and the blood flow is cut off; or take a piece of fig bark, and prepare that, and take one half and bind that over the site of the vein with tight bandaging and with poultices until the next day.
And if the blood flow is interrupted, that is good; and if not, then treat it by recalling the location of the powders used to stop the bleeding.
And the bleeding from him is difficult in many conditions because of the small space of the wound and the possibility of arm movement.
Mays de la vena fusca la fleubotomia es juvament que extratz lo sanc de la partida subirana del cap e a la partida dejos del cors; per aquo quar es composta de ram de la basilica e de ram de cephalica, ayssi cum havem dit.
And it is necessary for the phlebotomist to know which one is over the artery during bloodletting, because that is a nerve; and if they puncture in this spot, they will hit the nerve, causing stupor, making the healing difficult, and often not curing completely. This nerve sometimes appears sensitive; and if it is hidden from some people and is subtle and not apparent, then you must hold the phlebotomy instrument with which you bleed using a section of linen, and avoid the nerve with your strength.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you cut the vein along its length.
The benefit of performing phlebotomy on the cephalic vein is that it attracts blood from the head and alleviates illnesses of the eyes.
And it is important in this case, if you want the phlebotomy to be performed with an olive lancet or a myrtle lancet; for it is the safest method for all veins, as neither arteries nor nerves are hit.
However, in some individuals, a hematoma may form when phlebotomy is not performed during the first attempt. Do not puncture in the same spot where the hematoma has formed.
The first sentence is about the conditions and timing for performing phlebotomy (bloodletting), which was a common practice in medieval medicine. Here's an attempt at translating it line by line into English:
And if phlebotomy is performed on the third day or at the earliest pus that appears, let three hours of the day have passed.
More phlebotomy which is administered, more when it causes convenience and necessity for this, whether at night or during the day, at any hour and in all times.
And it is necessary that a child not be circumcised until they have reached the age of fourteen years, and a pregnant woman should not be circumcised except between the fourth month and the seventh month, and elderly women who have already passed sixty years should not be circumcised.
And when someone wishes to be circumcised by any method, it is necessary to cleanse their intestines before the circumcision with a lion's cathartic, if there are retained fecal masses within them, so that the veins do not expel excesses into the circumcised intestines, which are purified, and do not harm the principal limbs.
And patients should not be circumcised if they are suffering from sacred diseases or drunkenness, nor if they have recently recovered from illness or intoxication, nor if they are afflicted with dropsy. Moreover, circumcision should be avoided near colic attacks and vomiting, and during abdominal swelling, and also after frequent intercourse, labor, exercise, fasting, or sleepless nights, or any cause that weakens the body’s strength, whether physical or mental.
And also consider the refinement of humors before this if the blood is thick, through foods and drinks, and through medications if it is possible to do so.
And then immerse in a bath if nothing prohibits it, or let it be exercised by some exercise so that the blood may be refined.
And perform phlebotomy on him in the morning around the hour of terce, as we have said.
And it is necessary that the foot of that person be protected on that day from all evil accidents of the soul, such as distress, anger, fear, and from all physical accidents, such as excessive work, unnecessary labor, sorrow, and similar things.
And in his chamber, let there be present the causes according to the use of which it is customary for people with aromatics and fragrances and with balms and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
And follow the phlebotomist onto a cushion that is higher than the cushion of the one who is to be bled.
And then pull out his arm, and the surgeon should rub that area with their hand two or three times; then tightly bind the limb with a strap and wrap it around twice.
And if the constriction is timely, for a constriction that is not equal, or a constriction with an excess, then prohibit blood flow; or use moistening, and then prevent the escape of blood from the body.
And then, before the constriction, the person who is to undergo bloodletting should rub their hands together until the veins are swollen and can be distinctly felt.
And then the surgeon should anoint their lancet properly with a little olive oil; and then place their index finger of the left hand on that vein, just before the spot where they intend to perform the bloodletting, so that the vein protrudes slightly, and percussion can determine which veins are taut like cords and thus suitable for bloodletting, and those which are full of air and when pressed with the lancet contract, should be avoided; and the lancet does not open the vein if it is contracted.
And therefore, for this reason, the phlebotomist must be firm and diligent in all these matters.
And then place the flebotomi [likely referring to a bloodletting instrument], but if the vein is opened in one go, that's it; and if not, you repeat this another time after leaving that spot a little, or over it with a compress, if the area is not inflamed.
And if the area is inflamed or the patient becomes frightened, then you leave it for one or two days, and do not tighten the bandage, for fear that it might attract more inflammation quickly, nor should they enter into a bath.
And then repeat the bloodletting if necessary.
And if the opening is small and blood flows subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will come out as desired, then you repeat the bloodletting in that area slightly adjusted from the original opening, and do this with a compress before the area becomes inflamed, for in many cases, an inflamed area requires a smaller opening.
But if you find that area already inflamed, then do not repeat the bloodletting there, for it does not help in any way; and place some part of an oil-soaked cloth over it, for it alleviates the body from blood. And it is better in this place to use oil and the other ointments.
And similarly, administer a mixture of oil in all phlebotomies with which you puncture the veins to prevent the flow of blood from the body, and use theriac, aloes, and sage when placed on the area where the blood has been made thinner and is coagulated when it becomes thick.
And if a large abscess is generated at the phlebotomy site, which often happens repeatedly, especially in someone who has not been bled except for that one time, or near the weak vein, then you should cover it and place a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly warmed, on the area for about an hour, as it dissolves [the abscess].
And it is necessary to do this near the emergence of blood from that vein with the completion of the bleeding or from another vein.
And if some blackening or greenish tint remains in the area for several days, do not worry about it; and if you wish, place on that area some mixture of aloe and myrrh dissolved, or some mixture of juice from mint or calamint or something similar.
And various types of swellings and prominences should be treated with bloodletting from the basilic vein.
And then place your hand on that area, and if you find softness, apply pressure to that spot, because that prominence is bad and harmful; and then be careful not to press on that for any reason we have mentioned, for fear that blood will flow from the artery.
And make a poultice with something that is styptic, so the area may be hardened, and then treat it with another cure until it is healed.
And it is necessary to draw blood from every person according to the quantity of their strength and according to the prevailing color over the blood as it appears.
For if the blood is black, then you let it flow until it becomes red; and similarly, if you find it thick, then you let it flow until it becomes thin; and similarly, if it is sharp, until the sharpness of it is removed.
And it is necessary for those who are full and strong and have a need for blood extraction in one session that the venesection of the vein be enlarged and the incision be wide.
And for those who are weak, the opposite should be done; blood should be extracted in multiple sessions, and the incision should be narrow.
And the best practice in venesection is that the incision should be transverse, not a puncture.
And this method of phlebotomy is safe from blood flow and nerve injury, and is more praiseworthy and safer than phlebotomy according to latitude and longitude.
And to those who are accustomed to experience fainting during bloodletting, you must treat them before the bloodletting with a small amount of bread infused in pomegranate juice or simply heated honey water; and extract some of the blood in three or four stages.
And if it is a complication due to cold, then take before bloodletting an infusion in myrrh syrup or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like, or in an aromatic and fragrant syrup.
And if you happen to faint due to bloodletting, which is caused by the loss of much blood, then one must drink water mixed with meat broth and an aromatic and subtle syrup; and use aromatics like aleppo sage, and anoint their feet with it.
And consider the other causes that we have mentioned in the section on fainting due to evacuation.
And for those who wish to purify their blood and dissolve it gradually, it is suitable for someone for whom bloodletting is a major evacuation, and the virtue of which is to cool, thus evacuating the blood little by little, according to the quantity of the virtue over several continuous days.
And for those who wish to purify their blood and withdraw it a second time, and whose body is strong, this should be done approximately seven or nine hours after the first bloodletting.
And if one wants to draw blood from the body opposite to the side where it declines, it must be bled on the second or third day.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And it is not necessary when you want to unbind the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, as soon as the vein's orifices are already closed and it has become difficult for the blood to flow out, that you press on it with vehemence and slightly extend it by bending, because this is too harmful.
They have the vein between them such that it is slit longitudinally; or they maintain this with the sharpness of the flebotomi [bloodletting instrument] which coagulates the blood in the opening of the vein; or place upon that some theriac alfarach, or sage, and compress that with a light compression until the blood has been fully let out.
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
And if the need arises to perform secondary bloodletting, and there is no excuse not to, then you should bleed at that location or in the other arm in another vein.
And the vein called the "sinew of the arm" is incised at the site of the fossa or the basilic vein, when those are not found or are hidden, as it is composed of those veins.
And the quality of the bloodletting is such that the patient should dip their hand in warm water until the vein becomes reddened and appears clearly.
And then apply moderate tension on that area with a bandage; and then perform the bloodletting transversely, not longitudinally or latitudinally.
And let the incision be wide, and make your bloodletting such that you perform it slightly above the joint of the hand.
And if the flow of blood is stopped, then you should wet your hand in warm water and let the blood run into the water until you obtain what you need.
And if you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from the repetition of wetting your hand in warm water, and instead, the body should be placed in warm water during the winter time.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, for there is neither pulsating vein nor nerve here.
And the phlebotomy of the vein in the right hand is relevant to diseases of the liver.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that you stretch your hand with a ligature or with your hand, after having placed it in hot water, until the vein is swollen and clearly visible to the eye; then perform the phlebotomy transversely; and if you cut through without damaging it too much, this is well done.
And be careful not to move your hand during the phlebotomy, because doing so may expose the nerves of the fingers without skin.
Then dip your hand in hot water and let the blood flow into it, because if you do not dip it in hot water, the blood will clot at the opening of the vein, hindering the flow.
And when the necessary amount of blood has been drawn, then apply oil and salt over the vein so that it does not close immediately; similarly, you should do this at every incision made.
However, the benefit of performing phlebotomy on the left hand is that it is beneficial for illnesses of the brain.
And similarly in the phlebotomy of the same as you have done in the other.
And the treatment of the saphenous vein through phlebotomy is for illnesses that are in the lower part of the body, such as ailments of the uterus, and for the retention of menses, and for diseases of the hemorrhoids and ulcers on the thighs and ancient sores on the buttocks, and similar kinds of illnesses.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is such that the patient should dip their foot in warm water and rub it until the veins become visible; then tie a bandage around the ankle; and where the vein becomes clearly visible, mark it with your finger, for from there it branches out in multiple strands across the surface of the foot.
And then perform phlebotomy on the largest branch below the buttock near the ankle where the swelling is, as this is better and more beneficial.
And if you perform phlebotomy on the surface of the foot, be careful of the nerves that are below and on the surface of the foot, and perform your incision in such a way that you do it across, as if you were going to cut it transversely.
And let the bloodletting begin.
And if bleeding is prohibited, then you should soak the foot in hot water and let the blood flow out so that it may be evacuated.
And if the phlebotomist makes a mistake on the first attempt, then repeat with phlebotomy slightly further, for the area is salty; and do not fear malice, but rather be careful of the nerves as we have said.
And similarly, apply the treatment to the other foot in the same manner.
And regarding the sciatic vein, the location, as we have said, is below the heel, beneath the outer ankle bone.
And the relief from phlebotomy is for hip pain when it is caused by blood.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is such that the patient should enter a bath, and then stretch and extend the thigh on the side of the hip above the heel using four fingers with a long thin bandage, for it appears only in this way.
And therefore when it appears, then you perform arteriotomy on that according to each instrument that is at your disposal and according to the transverse, and it is better; or incise that by incision or cut that by section, for the place of it is free.
And it is in many people moderately attached; and if you find that one, and it does not appear to the full sense, then incise some branch of it, which appears on the back of the foot instead of the area near the little toe and the ring toe.
And be careful of the nerves, and let as much blood flow as you wish.
Then loosen the constriction and place something over the area of the phlebotomy, compressing the area, because it is quickly healed.
Regarding ventilation and the qualities of using them.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, o de veyre.
And bleeding is performed in two ways: one of them is by incision and extraction of blood, and the other is bleeding without incision.
And this bleeding that is without incision is performed in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
And the bleeding sites that are administered by incision and extraction of blood are fourteen places on the body, of which one place where bleeding is performed is alnocrati, and it is the back part of the head; and another location is from both sides of the neck together; and bleeding of the chin below the mandible away from the mouth; and bleeding of both cheeks; and bleeding of alohoster, and it is at the end of the spine; and bleeding of two armpits, which are on both arms; and bleeding of both temples; and bleeding of both thighs.
And bleeding does not extract blood from the small scattered veins in the flesh, and by this means you do not diminish their strength as is done with arteriotomy; nor should bleeding be performed with or without fire in any disease caused by internal excess until the whole body has been purged.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And thus when dealing with any of those causes, and particularly if it is in the third month or a bit later, then I command that ventosuction be performed more than two or three hours after the day has passed.
And the benefit of ventosuction from the neck is that when you confer gravity to the head and cause it to sink into the pillows; but it must be done close to the evacuation of the whole body.
And this cupping is applied at the site of the cephalic vein incision.
And it is not good that one of cold complexion should use it, or in cases where there is a catarrh, for it brings great harm to such.
And by this, there is no need for the use of those old methods, and in the heads of which fresh illnesses occur.
More to the one who is continuing on top of that, oblivion is being done; and because of this, you must command the cupper to pause his hand slightly from the cupping at those areas, fearing the generation of oblivion.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And it is necessary that the suction cup be slightly heated with alcohol, for if it is placed on bare skin, it generates weakness in the body and in the stomach.
And the suctioning method from alhagdahan (likely a specific technique or substance) provides relief to accidental pains in the head and to ophthalmia, and migraine, and suffocation, and to pains in the roots of the teeth; and it is used instead of bloodletting from the temporal vein.
And you must command the one using the suction cup not to press his hand with force so that he does not pierce the artery and cause a flow of blood.
And suctioning under the chin provides relief for alcohol in the mouth, and for corruption of the gums, and for symptoms resembling diseases in the mouth, and it serves as a substitute for bloodletting from the veins that are near the two lips.
And the suctioning that is performed on both armpits provides relief for caphatan, which is caused by an excess of heat.
And the suctioning performed on both sides within the thighs provides the benefit of bloodletting from three veins, namely the basilica, fusca, and cephalica, for it draws blood from all those smaller veins that are in the flesh, and from the finer veins of the other larger veins until the attraction reaches the three main veins.
And command the surgeon not to proceed too much in the incision, for the area is bare of flesh, and leave its nerves and arteries untouched.
And it is a cupping where suction is applied above the thighs and extended to the hemorrhoids of the anus and the pus-filled ulcers.
And it is necessary to command the bloodletter to make a large leeching, and that it be of strong suction, for the area requires strong drying; and strongly apply subtle leeches and let it be scratched with scarification.
When wind affects the abdomen minimally through manifest constipation, for it draws blood from all over the body, and contributes to old pains of the hips and of the mother, and of the bladder; and it provokes menstruation, and contributes to bothor and ademil; and it stands in place of phlebotomy for two sophenas, and alahorcoben, and for two cavilhas.
However, weakness debilitates the whole body and causes fainting in many people.
And regarding the treatment with cupping, it is commonly applied to the chest and back areas using two basins.
And the quality of the placement of the cupping is that you place the cup at the beginning and suction out the blood及时地，不过度延长杯的位置，而是轻柔地放置它们，并且谨慎地保留它们，使得体液能被引导到相应的地方。 And do not stop repeating this and continue until you see the area already reddened and swollen, and that the heat of the blood appears.
And now you should gently scrape and repeatedly apply suction little by little, and then consider the position of the body.
For that person who has delicate flesh and rare pores, you should scrape them once and not more, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And command the fan operator to enhance the scraping and increase it slightly, and apply suction with ease.
And if the blood is thick, then you should scrape twice, for in the first scraping, the path for the subtle elements of the blood and its moisture is opened. And in the second scraping, you deepen the examination obtained from the extraction of the thick blood.
And if the blood is very foul, then a third scraping should be done to achieve the desired result.
And finally, when we want to extract blood little by little or in small amounts, a scarification is sufficient for us.
And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we do so with extensive scarification; and if we know that the blood is thick, then we must scarify using deep incisions.
And the term "scarification" refers only to the depth of the cut.
And if the vein is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, it is necessary that the areas for cupping be anointed with more soothing, opening, and resolving oils; in summer, such as oil of aloe or violet oil, or oil of crushed almonds, or coltsfoot oil; and in winter, then use narcissus oil, or lily oil, or camomile oil, or blood oil, and similar ones.
And if the excess is thick and cold, then the oil should be marigold oil, or balsamita oil, or aloe oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
If the bloodletting site has wide pores and tender flesh, then it is necessary to abstain from oil, and before applying the cupping at these sites, they must be washed with hot water or cold spring water, or with water boiled with herbs, or with water from dew, and similar things for those purposes.
And for those whose blood is of great moisture, wash the cupping sites with sour wine, or with water mixed with myrtle and sumac, and similar things for those purposes.
And for those whose excesses are thick, wash the cupping sites with old wine, or with water mixed with thyme, or with an infusion of dill, or chamomile, and similar things.
And it is necessary to protect the cupping site before bathing; usually, it should be administered just before bathing by about one or two hours, and it is necessary to rest near the cupping site.
What is necessary is that bloodletting should be regulated before cupping.
It is necessary to consider at the beginning: if the person to be cupped or bled is choleric with acute blood and inflammation, then they should take cooling remedies, such as sour pomegranates, endive in sour wine, lettuce, sage, julep, and similar things.
And pause their foods as if they were porridges, and serve them bird meats, and foods seasoned with herbs, and similar things.
And for one whose condition is hot, it is necessary that they drink almond syrup or hempseed syrup with sumac and fragrant wine mixed between old and new; and it should be recommended to them to use moderation in drinking and eating, and to pause the foods like pork and hempseed and fattened geese and small birds and pigeons.
And it is necessary that on the day of bloodletting and venesection, the drink should be more than the food.
And it is necessary that in certain hours some people be given theriac or musk medicine, such as mace or alhelí, before bloodletting or venesection or afterwards, so that the main limbs may be comforted and the blood may be refined; and they should not take that which is heated.
And the bloodlettings that are performed by incision should be applied to the liver area, and on the spleen and gout, and on the navel, in the areas of the joints, and at the pit of the stomach, because these parts cannot withstand incision over them.
And it is not desired for those [areas] but the attraction of blood from the limb, just as we place a bloodletting on the breast in the illness of nasal bleeding; and we use that to dissolve fresh, sticky blood congestion in the limb, just as we place it on the abdomen and navel; because that rarefies the limb, heats it, and relieves pain when resolving blood congestion.
And it is already placed on the lungs when you encounter their obstruction or phlegm, for by virtue of strong attraction it draws out the obstruction and expels the phlegm from its place.
And similarly, it acts when placed on the liver, expelling the harmful air trapped within those areas.
And these suction cups are administered only with wetting; and sometimes they are applied with heat.
And sometimes they are applied filled with warm water in ailments related to the air or breath.
And this is why the suction cup should be filled and made larger with either warm water alone or water in which suitable herbs are boiled for this purpose.
Form of a suction cup applied with heat: the diameter of the opening should be about two fingers, as we have formed it; and the depth inside should be half a palm; and it should be placed on the skin in the area that is circular, covering half of it, with the opening being small enough for a needle to fit inside.
Here is the translation of the given line:
And place in the middle of a transverse beam of iron or wood, where a candle is placed with fire.
And this cupping glass is larger than the one we have recommended; and it should be smaller according to the illness and the age of the person who uses it.
And the suction cups for children and the weakened are different from the suction cups for the young and those with robust bodies.
And the quality of applying this cupping with fire on the limb is to extend a strip of wood burning properly in front of a small candle flame, and place that at the center of the transverse bar in the middle part of the cupping device, so that the fire is lit around it without burning the patient's body.
Then it should be placed on the patient's limb, with the finger over the spot we have mentioned; otherwise, when you have the cups and do not want to hold the finger so that steam rises over that spot, then the cup will soon become loose.
And then ignite the strip according to its method, and repeat that if necessary.
However, in cupping that is administered for pleurisy, with water, there is no transverse bar or spot, and it is not administered by placing anything inside; instead, it is filled with water and placed directly on the limb.
And this is its form: And this cupping vessel, the larger it is, the better, because it can receive a large quantity of water.
Capitol .xcvii.
Bloodletting is not administered in many parts of the body but only in those parts where it is not possible to apply cupping due to their small size, such as the foot and gums and similar areas; or in parts devoid of flesh, such as the fingers and nose and their likes.
And the quality of using those leeches that you have found in the waters that are clean and free from decay.
Then let them be kept day and night in clean water until they become hungry, and ensure that no residue remains in their bodies; then evacuate the body at the beginning with bloodletting and cupping; then rub the patient’s limb until it reddens; then place them on [the affected area].
And when they are full and fall off.
And if it is possible to draw out the fluid from the area using a cupping device, it is more beneficial for healing.
And if not, then wash the area with vinegar and then with clean water; and let it be rubbed and squeezed.
And if the flow of blood near the insertion of the leeches is prolonged and this discharge occurs, then you soak a cloth in cold water, and place that over it until the discharge is stopped.
And if the blood is multiplied [i.e., if bleeding occurs], then sprinkle finely ground vitriol or gallnuts and similar astringent materials until the blood is stopped; or place the mashed cooked beans on the area, leaving them until the beans stick to the location, and thus the blood will be stopped.
And it is necessary, if required, to repeat the bloodletting, changing them [the leeches] when possible.
And if leeches are prohibited due to suspension [of treatment], then rub the area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the spots until blood comes out; and then apply [a dressing], for those who feel some blood will stop [the flow] immediately.
And when you want them [the leeches] to detach, sprinkle a little finely ground alum or salt or ashes on them, and they will fall off immediately.
Thus begins the section of the third part: on restoration. This chapter is often necessary in the art of medicine; it is about the restoration of fractures and dislocations in the bones.
O, son, know that those who boast about this chapter are foolish doctors and the common ones and those who never cared to look into the books of the Ancients nor read a letter from them.
And for this reason, it is made that this method of the learned in our land is private; and I have not forgotten it at any time at all; and I have not adopted what follows without extensive reading of the books of the Ancients and study on understanding those, from which I extracted the knowledge of those.
And then direct yourself to experimentation and study throughout the length of your life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that my knowledge contains and on which my experience has passed; since I have summarized this for you others and freed it from further expansion; and I have summarized this at the end of the summary; and shown this at the end of the declaration; and formed several forms of the treatments that are administered therein, as is done by adding to the declaration, just as I have done in the two previous chapters.
First chapter.
Summary and collections on bone fractures, from which a preliminary note is necessary before we begin the recollection of fractured limbs and the various types of each. Therefore, let us speak in the preface of this chapter about the summaries of the discourse; and the chapters which must be understood by the artisans at the beginning, standing on the truth of those things; so it is for you and those who are quick to know or learn this noble art other than yourselves.
And so it is said that when you encounter a fracture or dislocation or twist or sprain, then you must begin with bloodletting or setting it, or both together, unless some cause prohibits this, such as weakness of strength, or if the person affected is a child, or an old and frail individual, or it is during a time of intense heat, or extreme cold.
Then one should be content with food such as fresh herbs and the meat of birds and crabs; and we forbid fatty meats and overfilling oneself with foods and any food that fills the veins with blood, except when you are certain of an abscess cautery, and if you do not fear an effusion of matter in the limb.
And then return the patient to their original regimen with which they were accustomed.
And so when the broken bone begins to heal, then the patient must be fed nutritious foods that are rich and heavy with viscosity, such as bread made from wheat cooked with water, rice, beans, fish, cow's stomach, eggs, fresh cheese, thick wine, and similar items. With this regimen, the coagulation of the fracture occurs more easily and better.
And know that the fractured bones in young men and elderly people cannot be continued and consolidated according to their nature due to the dryness of their members.
But however nature heals and you should bind over the broken bone of any part with something similar to glue in which there is a thickness that adheres and strengthens that space until it is conglutinated and united together, until strength and firmness come, just as fire at the beginning, until nothing prevents it from its works.
And for this reason, it is necessary to stop the patient's food, food in which there is heaviness and viscosity and thickness, just as we have said.
And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the thigh bone is different from a fracture of the skull bone; and a fracture of the foot bone is different from a fracture of the hand bone; and similarly, all other limbs are different from one another.
And I will proceed with the recollection of each type of fracture, explained in its own chapter distinct from the other.
Note the diversity of fractures within the fracture itself. And there are various types of bone fractures in their details; for an arched fracture is caused by accidents to the stars (likely metaphorical); and sometimes a fracture occurs along the length of the bone: and these are the fractures of the ribs, splinters, and consequential and non-consequential additional breaks, just as it is done when a reed is prepared for writing, and there is a fracture with a wound and disruption in the head, and there is a small fissure.
And in every case, there is a particular engine or torment appropriate for the restoration of it, according to which will come a distinct recollection in its respective places.
Mark the sign of a bone fracture. And by this is known a bone fracture: it is the twisting of it, and from that prominence and perception of it to the touch, and its sound when you press it with your hand.
And therefore when there is no visible deformity and no pain is found when you touch the bone with movement and the patient does not feel great pain, then it is not a fracture.
It is possible that there may be a slight deformity or small fissure, in which case you do not need to apply pressure with your hand and compression all over; instead, place one of the medicines mentioned at that moment on it; then bind it tightly for subtle constriction.
And know that when the area is bent but not split in two or affected by anything else that does not cause significant harm, such as an inflammation of any part of its surface, then you should begin to correct it immediately by applying a cauterizing agent if an abscess occurs.
And if an abscess does occur, then leave it for several days until the abscess subsides; then treat it in whatever way you can with care and ingenuity.
And know that the restoration and healing of it [the affected area] is quicker than that of a bone when significant harm has occurred.
And then strengthen that which will come next, the recovery of him.
And if the bone is shattered, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb in two parts, whether it is an arm or a foot; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two ropes or with one rope and the hand.
And in the position with which you hold the limb according to its natural shape, while the broken parts are extended, you must skillfully return those adducted parts to their places in whichever way you can.
And be careful according to your strength that you do not cause pain or injury to the patient through your operation; and do your best to align one bone with its companion in their best possible forms.
And it is necessary that at that moment you skillfully touch with your hand whichever area, and if there is any other cause, correct it and adjust it according to the extent of your ability.
And beware of excessive extension and compression, just as some foolish doctors often cause inflammation due to their operations, or cause contraction in the limb, as we have seen happen many times with their procedures.
And the quality of the constriction of the tranquilized limb is what I recommend; for you to know that broken limbs differ in their smallness and greatness and in the form of them.
And for those that are small, such as the arm and the foot and similar ones, then the wrapping should be of very fine cloth.
And for those that are large, such as the thigh or the chest, then a thick and hard wrapping is needed in those areas, because a thick binding connects the large and strong limb tightly from all sides with equal constriction, so that no imperfection enters it.
And then begin, before your evacuation of the dislocation, to apply a suitable bandage over the site of that fracture with three or four layers according to what the limb requires; and hold your hand slightly over the bandage.
And then place your hand at the highest part of the fracture site, and hold firmly so that your binding does not loosen where you have tightened the area of the fracture. And then gently stretch the area of the fracture slightly, and gradually loosen the binding little by little until you have loosened a large part of it.
And then take another bandage and wrap it again over the broken area with layers, and place the layers at the part farthest from the fracture; and perform your operation in binding these layers and loosening them as we have said for the first wrapping above.
And then place between the layers of linen or cloth something that conforms to the contortion of the fracture if there is any contortion; and if not, do not place anything in it for any reason.
And then place over it another bandage, and then apply these properly made star-shaped bandages immediately if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area, and then place on that which is the abscess and reduce the swelling; and leave that for several days; and then you tighten the star-shaped bandages over it.
And let the star-shaped bandages be half a palm width, and well-formed wisely; or they may be made of pine wood; or from palm ribs; and let the size of each star be according to this form and this figure:
However, the star-shaped bandage that is placed over the fracture should be thicker and slightly wider than the other star-shaped bandages, and the length of the star should correspond to the size of the limb in terms of its magnitude and smallness; then tighten over the stars with another bandage according to your initial binding; then cover it with pitch appropriately as we have said about binding, which is that your binding should be tighter at the site of the fracture, and the further away from the fracture, the looser the binding should be.
And it is necessary that the threads be moderate in thickness and fineness, and they should be made of linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen in the operations of some foolish people using their threads from twisted ropes, it is a great error, for then the binding loses its equality.
And fine filaments are not suitable, because you will not achieve what you want through constriction with those, and it is not necessary that between filament and filament there be less than a finger.
And if the patient is affected by the extremities of the stars near the constriction in those areas, then place there wool or padded cloth between so that it does not cause injury to them.
Here is the translation of the provided line:
And know that not every broken limb should be set with splints on the first day; the reason is that when the limb is large, it does not need to be placed under the splints until about five or seven days later, or even more, according to your certainty of the occurrence of inflammation and pus.
And this is the method of the plasters with which the Ancients would treat, which are placed over fractures, dislocations, and sprains.
Method of a plaster for the restoration of fractures, suitable for various complexities and especially for women and children, as it does not generate heat or irritation: take flour dust, which is the fine powder that comes off during the grinding process in the mill.
And prepare it thus, but strain it with egg white, and make the mixture neither too thick nor too thin; then use it accordingly.
Another method of plaster for restoring fractures, dislocations, and sprains: take assafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is the resin of wild millet, each one drachm x; myrrh and aloes each one drachm v; aloe one drachm xx; all should be ground and strained and mixed with alcoholic water or egg white if the condition of the patient is inflamed; then use this plaster, as it has a good composition and easily restores broken bones, and you can share this with many people.
Another method for making a poultice that you apply to fractures and sprains: take myrrh and add white horehound, one drachm each; of frankincense and aloe, half a drachm each; of acacia, six drachms; of Armenian bole, twenty drachms.
All shall be ground in a mortar with fine powder, and they shall be sifted, and mixed with water or egg white and then administered.
Method for making a poultice for joints and bones displaced from their places, which causes pain in those areas as well as fissures and fractures: take raw wool and soak it in sweet wine and cooked oil, then place it over the affected area.
However, in this poultice there is no virtue of restoration; it is a hot poultice that draws out and properly expels pain.
Another method for a poultice that restores broken bones: take bark from a fig tree and bark from wild poppy; grind everything together and make a poultice with it.
Method for a poultice used to administer restoration of bone fractures and when you want to resolve the remaining swelling: take horehound seeds, camomile, and violet flowers, bran from ears of grain, all in equal parts; grind everything together and mix with wine if the member is not inflamed.
And if it is inflamed, then soothe it with coriander water or with water and vinegar.
Another method of plaster more potent in resolution than this first one, when you encounter a hard swelling and wish to restore the limb: take roots of coltsfoot and seeds thereof, and roses, sweet clover, marjoram, violets' flowers, chamomile; all these in equal parts and ground finely; mix them with sage water or with soft water or with wine, whichever suits the nature of the limb and the color condition thereof.
May Hippocrates not say in his book that it should be placed on the broken limb for its restoration, but rather a salve made of wax and oil, and nothing else; and he recommends that it be of medium consistency between thickness and fineness.
May it be seen in Gaul that they place on the broken limb for its restoration substances with slight heat and drying properties, such as myrrh, incense, and similar substances to those causes we have mentioned.
Method of plaster to comfort injury and pain: take manna, chickpeas, shaved human hair or thrush down, coltsfoot, and salt, all in equal parts; grind them finely, sieve them, mix them together, and make a plaster.
And the quantity according to which the bandage must remain and then be removed is that you consider if it is not an accidental pain nor a puncture wound nor the bone is broken or displaced; then you do not remove the bandage for several days. And if you encounter a place with intense pain or inflammation, then you should take care of it immediately, and remove the plaster from it.
And take linen and sea sponge, wet it, and submerge it in warm water, and with that wash the affected area until the inflammation subsides and the pain is soothed; then let the limb rest for an hour; then place on it fresh wool soaked in sweet wine and oil or ointment, and cover it for a night until you are sure that there is no danger of abscess, and that the swelling of the limb has rested, and the pain from it is alleviated.
And then apply that subtle binding and small plaster without tightening it as in your first constriction, and use it gently until it is healed.
And if you find that the abscess and the hardness and the pain and the swelling and all the symptoms are entirely alleviated and no longer require a plaster or binding, then you should repeat the process as you did at the beginning in the same manner.
And if you do not encounter any of the causes we have mentioned in the limb, then do not remove it but wait for three or four or five or seven days; and sometimes this is left on for twenty days according to how you see the healing progress of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and approaches the coagulation of the flesh over it.
And now adjust more tightly at the constriction than in your first tightness overall, and adjust according to the swelling of the food (likely meaning "body") of the patient, as is preceded by the memory of it.
And if you see the site of the fracture already dry and withered more than it should be, then know that nourishment is prohibited from reaching that place; therefore, foment that area with lukewarm water continuously as you clean it; this should be done over three days; and lighten the tightness a little, so by this operation nourishment flows to the limb, and it heals gently.
And what those unskilled restorers of a fractured limb do otherwise when it is not restored properly at the beginning, and is set according to its deformity, is an error according to their operation, causing great concern; if this were correct, the Ancients would have expanded on this in their books and acted accordingly.
And I have not seen any of them do this, which is why it is more reasonable to conclude that it should not be done.
Chapter second: On fracture when it occurs in the head.
The types of fractures are many, and their forms are diverse, and the causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by the impact of a club, where the impact pushes all the bone inside the skull, which is left without bone, just as this happens to a tree trunk; therefore, this type is named ascial. Or the club incises some part of the bone and cuts the flesh but does not pass through to the backside of it. This type of fracture is called levatio absoluta.
And the severity of these two fractures is either great or small, and of the fracture that is comminuted or impacted; and the cause of it is percussion with a blunt object or falling on stone, and their symptoms are similar.
And this fracture either penetrates close to the periosteum which is beneath the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the damage of these two fractures is either great or slight.
And regarding fractures, it is a break that occurs in the bone within the fine threads of the bone, and thus this type of fracture is called capillary.
And it is a fracture that is caused either by falling or by the impact of a stone and similar objects, which causes some bone shards to enter the inner parts, and it happens in a concave area as when you hit the edges of a field with an impact, causing them to break and enter inward.
And this is done especially in bodies with moist bones, such as infants' heads.
And thus, to all these types of fractures, they are pieces, like separate stars. And I will come back to all of this in its proper place.
And know all these types of fractures by detection on them and by inquiry into their attempts and the presence of corrupted flesh that is over them.
And the capillary type is known by what is discovered on the bone, which is cleaned and covered with lint, for the fracture appears black.
In the treatment of fractures, consider at the beginning the symptoms of the patient, and if through the symptoms you see a clear indication of fear, such as vomiting due to anger, and stretching, and loss of understanding, and loss of voice, and fainting, and acute fever, and discharge from the bowels and burning of those, and similarities in the major conditions, then it is not curable.
And if you see unusual symptoms, you hope for healing, then you begin the treatment of the patient.
The reason is that if the injured person comes to you at the beginning when they are injured and this occurs in the winter days, then you must study the condition of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all conditions.
And if it is during the days of summer, then it is necessary to remove the bone before the seventh day, fearing that what remains around the bone might be corrupted by gangrene, and that accidents which we have recounted may occur.
And if the fracture has already reached the thin membrane covering the brain, and it is broken into small pieces and worn down, then you must cut into the fragmented and worn-down area, as I will recommend to you.
And you shave the head of the afflicted patient, and expose the bone according to your customary method and as is possible given the shape of the affliction, making it light on the patient.
And if you encounter the discovery of bone exposure, bleeding, or an abscess, then you should address it accordingly, which means filling the area with cloths soaked in wine and oiled herbs, and allow the wound to rest until the abscess is calmed and ensure that the bleeding has stopped; then proceed with the reduction of the bone and its realignment.
And this should be done according to one of two methods of operation.
And one method is that you cut the bone with a straight incisor, and this is its form: Then apply another incisor like this one, slightly to the side of the first; and this is its form:
And then administer more of the incision farther from the second [point or area].
And it is necessary to have various types of incisors, some wider than others; and some are shorter than the others and are at the end in terms of sharpness of their tips, and they should be made of Indian iron or steel.
And use them with ease in percussion over the incisions so that the head does not become stuck and lead to that.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then you must perforate around it before you administer the incisors with the drills, which are called non-deepening drills.
And they are not called thus only because those do not stop the edge of the bone of the head to where it is close, so that on the circumference there is a round extremity or margin over which the sharp end remains similar to a small margin or circle, which you must prevent from being submerged and passing beyond the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take of these probes a large number, each of which should be suited to the sharpness of each bone, among which there should be present in all types of needles for the brain, the end of which should be sharp, the length and brevity of which should be according to the degree of sharpness of this needle.
And this is the form of three types of treatments: The quality of piercing around the broken bone is to place the treatment on the bone and rotate it with your hands until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then change the treatment to another location, placing it so that throughout the process the size corresponds to the thickness of the ray or something similar.
And then incise with an instrument that is between each fragment of the bone, and apply as much subtle pus over it at the end of the operation as you can, as we have said, until you expose the bone, either with your hand or with some other means through various tools which you will prepare for this purpose, such as tongs and fine forceps.
And you must be careful that the incising instrument does not touch any part of the spine.
And then, once you have circumscribed the perforated bone, separate it from the spine if it is connected to it, and extract it. You must rasp and level it on its roughness with an instrument similar to an incising tool, but it should be thinner and finer than the other incising tools.
And if any small and stubborn parts of the bones remain, then remove them easily with the appropriate tools you have; and then treat the wound with lint and ointments as we have mentioned.
And another method of operation is lighter and farther from fear, which is called "Gualia" and is exposed due to great heat; this is what it entails: at the beginning, you must start to uncover the part of the bone in the location where the fracture is most forceful and evident, until you have uncovered that part and placed the tip of this smooth and gentle incising tool, whose form is as follows:
And here is the translation of the given sentence:
And then strike on the cutting area of a part with a small hammer so that you cut through the entire bone easily as it turns, and be sure about the periosteum that no accident happens to it in any way; indeed, even if the surgeon were the most foolish of all men and the least knowledgeable among them, certainly, and even if he were asleep.
And if any membrane is attached to the periosteum at certain points of the bone, cut it with the sharp end of the lenticular knife and remove it easily, for it is removed without harm and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the periosteum, and what is cut off or remains of the bone is its surface, and roughness and small splinters remain, then it is necessary to scrape that roughness and remove those splinters with fine razors which you have prepared in various quantities so that you can use them in the most appropriate places for your operation on the broken bone and its shape.
And you must use your judgment to start scraping the bone with the blunter side of those razors, and then progressively use the sharper side of them, and do not stop doing this continuously until you reach administering the sharpest and finest of all those razors.
But in each of the other small capillary fractures and subtle fractures, you must administer treatment according to what is lost for the correction of it.
And it is a reason that not everyone who has studied in that art is trusted or relied upon. And add to what we have written that in large fractures we have shown.
And if the panicle is retained when you extract the bone, then it is necessary to take cloth according to the size of the wound, and submerge that in anointed oil, and place that over the opening of the wound; then take another folded or tripled cloth and submerge it in wine and anointed oil and place that over the first cloth and do this as lightly as you can on it so as not to aggravate the condition; then apply a linen bandage over that, and tighten it only according to the size of the wound just enough.
And leave it with this treatment for one or two days until you are sure of a safe abscess; then remove the bandage and apply medicines that have excessive drying properties, such as linseed and bran flour, and powder of ashes and myrobalan, and similar substances to those.
And you should make these medicines into a powder that is sprinkled over the wound when they are dry; generally, apply to it any medicine whose property is to clean without irritating.
And be careful according to your ability that the wound in your treatment is clean; and let there be no deafness of ointment or other impurities; nor should you allow virulence to accumulate in it; for when it is applied over the panicle of the brain, it corrupts that and weakens it, and you risk causing a malignant evil to the patient.
And apply to the skull area, where the bone is altered and especially when the care of it is neglected, and there is blackening on its surface; therefore consider now if these accidents happen to the patient that we have mentioned, know that it is harmful to any treatment.
And if no blackening occurs except from the medicine that is applied to it, and it is due to that medicine causing such blackening, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil, and with those mix a cloth, and then place that over the wound; and then treat it with healing spices until it is healed.
Chapter III.
For the restoration of the nose when it is broken.
Know that the nose is not broken into more than two main parts, or one of those semi-cartilaginous areas, because there are two bones in it, and the part that is cartilaginous does not break; thus, you only encounter friction, twisting, and curving.
And if one of the two parts of it is broken, then you must insert your little finger into its nose, and you should align that fracture inside with your index finger, and with your thumb from outside, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And this is done for you with ease, and be careful that you do not harm through your operation on the painful patient.
And if the fracture is in the highest part of the nose, and the finger cannot reach it, then it must be aligned using the end of a rod with a small thickness.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should treat it accordingly.
And consider restoring it on the first day of the fracture if possible; and if not, then around the seventh or tenth day, you should rest from the inflammation cautery.
And then insert into the end of the nose a wad of linen cloth, if the fracture is in one part, or put two pads, if the fracture is in two parts, and let the pad be thick enough to fill the gap in the nose.
And some of the ancient restorers say that the pads should be infused in butter and changed throughout the day, but I do not agree with this; instead, the wad should be soaked in egg white mixed with powder of millet; then leave the pad inside until the bone is fixed and the cartilage has hardened.
And sometimes a pen made of wax wrapped in linen cloth should be inserted into the nose instead of a pad, especially when the nasal fracture is severe and to ensure that the patient's breathing is not obstructed.
And this method is not necessarily required; if you wish, do this, and if you wish, use pads instead.
And if swelling occurs again, apply a poultice to the nose with wax or fat infused in sweet wine and rose oil, or use diachylon (a type of plaster).
And if you do not apply a cautery to the abscess, then it is necessary to cover it externally with barley flour and the powder of crushed eggs mixed with egg white; then place a lion's paw on top of it, and do not uncover its nose for any reason.
And if the bones of the nose are broken with a small fracture or comminuted, then you must incise over them and extract them with instruments appropriate for that; then close the incision, and treat it with substances that promote healing and consolidation, and with plasters suitable for that purpose.
And if you encounter an infection inside the nose, then you must treat it with cauterization and administer lead tubes until it is completely healed.
Chapter IV.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not infected, then examine if the fracture is only on the outer side and not split into two parts or bent inward; in this case, the treatment is relatively easy.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the right index finger; and with that finger, push the soft tissue of the fracture inward easily to the outer parts, using your other hand on the outer part of the bone; in this way, you properly align it.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you must administer extension from both sides according to straightness until it is possible to align it.
And if you encounter the dislocation of teeth to disruption, then secure those that you hope will remain with a thread of gold or silver or wax; and then place cerot over the broken jaw, and then place a doubled cloth over it, and place a properly made large splint or a piece of linen equal in length to the jaw over the cloth; and then bind it according to how your bandage is prepared for application until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and feed them liquid foods through a tube.
And if you suspect that the shape has already been altered in some way, then on the third day you should be cautious and loosen it; then correct what has been altered of it by applying a poultice made with ground meal, egg white, or carob flour, after removing the wax from it, and place wool over the poultice.
And then when you have applied and adjusted the poultice on it, and the position of the bone has not been altered, leave it alone, do not loosen it until it is healed and the fracture is strong; for often this fracture heals in three weeks.
And if an abscess occurs again, then administer what we have said multiple times during the treatment until it is healed, and ensure that the abscess is drained.
And if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, then consider whether it is a fragment of the bone that is separated or splinters; you must be careful to remove those splinters with what is appropriate for their removal from the wound.
And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you should enlarge it with an incision according to the amount of enlargement needed.
And then when you have removed those stitches and nothing leaks from them, now sew the wound's opening if it is large; and if not, place over it one of the plasters suitable for this and let that heal until it is healed.
It appears you've indicated a section heading,
On the restoration of the clavicle when it is fractured.
Often the clavicle is fractured in front of the muscle, and this fracture can occur in one of three ways.
For it is either broken, separated, or divided into two parts without stitches; and its restoration is easy. Or it is such that stitches are needed for it, and its restoration is difficult. Or it is such that the fracture involves a wound.
And the operation for that case, when the fracture involves a wound, is that you should have two assistants present, so that one holds the clavicle with forceps and follows the broken clavicle, and the other extends the neck to that part.
And then align the fracture with your fingers in such a way that it takes the shape needed, and there should be neither slight prominence nor concavity.
And if you need more extension, then it is necessary to place a pad under the patient's armpit made of cloth or wool, and the size should be according to your need; extend and lift the splint and compress the pad with your hand until you align the fracture as needed.
And if you cannot pull the end of the splint to the outer parts because it has reached the shoulder, then the patient should be laid face down on their stomach, and place a cushion of moderate size over the muscle.
And the assistant should press on the muscle below so that the bone of the splint is raised to the shoulder level, and then you should correct the fracture and align it with your fingers.
But if you feel splinters and they are causing discomfort, then you must cut over them and remove those splinters with ease.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you must make an incision with one of the incisors that you have prepared for this purpose, since you have already placed the forked instrument—the stirrup—that serves as a clamp; and the stirrup is made of wood or iron, and its form is as follows:
And it is similar to a spoon, of which this is the concavity; and its width should be according to what you need from it, depending on the size or smallness of the bone.
And let the length of it be as much as is possible for you during the operation; that it have two ends just like your fingers, and one end be wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you have extracted the splinter from the bone is wide, and there is a risk of abscess formation, then you should approximate the two edges of the wound with sutures.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear abscess formation, then you should fill the wound with cloths and poultices according to the extent of the wound's裂口。请注意，我将在接下来的翻译中修正这一小部分以确保流畅：
And if you encounter an abscess that needs cauterization, then soak a cloth in sweet wine and rose oil and wine, and place it over it.
And all of this, so that the splint over the broken bone is not loose; and for this reason you must see the patient every day, when the bandage becomes soft or you notice the splint already to be loose, then you correct this and tighten the binding.
And then place the shoulder of the patient on their pillow, and leave the head slightly elevated from the shoulder during the night with a small cushion; so that by doing this, the support from that side is raised, and thus the clavicle fracture is elevated along with the muscle; or have the arm tied to the neck in that manner.
And do not loosen the bandage unless you encounter pus or an abscess at the site within twelve days.
And then renew the plaster if you have seen that its surface has come off, and adjust it to the constriction, restore it, and leave it until the clavicle fracture is restored and coagulated.
And it is strengthened and healed according to the method in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some men, it happens in less time.
Chapter VI.
On the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
The shoulder blade is fractured on the outer side of it, and not broken through, but only the edges are fractured.
And therefore when the area is fractured — and it is fractured in the middle of the area — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture force it into preparation and reduce it according to its natural form in every manner of ingenuity that is possible for you.
And then place on the area powdered mallow with egg white and lion's storax; then place dusted double cloth; then apply over it a thin piece of tablecloth according to the amount of the entire spoon or somewhat more.
But if the area covered is concave in some parts of the spoon, then you fill that concavity with lion's storax, and then raise the area to an even level.
And then strengthen over it with a long bandage wrapped appropriately and secure the area so that it does not move from its position.
And examine the bandage each day; and every time it becomes loosened, bind it again, strengthen it, and adjust the area if it has moved from its position.
And lay the patient on his side.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
And therefore when this number is complete, then you dissolve the joint, and you must be sure which of those are bones whose beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you process the site of the broken bone and place the chain there, then you split it open, remove it, and proceed as we have said in the fracture of the clavicle due to abscess cautery if this occurs here.
Capitol .vii.
For the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
The foot sometimes breaks in the middle and this heals slowly; however, the ends of it move and heal together.
And of the accidents when it is broken in the middle, it declines towards the internal parts and leads to great pain, difficulty in breathing, coughing, strong heat and vomiting blood; and it is declared by the cavity formed in the broken bone and is not hidden from sensation.
And the restoration is that the patient should be laid back on their stomach, and place a cushion between their shoulders; then press on their muscles, and align their spine with your hands from both sides, and delicately proceed with the operation and alignment in every possible way that suits this situation, until the bone returns to its proper shape.
And then place an ointment and lint on it, and cover that with a fine linen or calico cloth, or something similar in lightness, as you wrap it in fabric; then delicately position that over the broken bone so that it is not moved; and go around binding according to the roundness of the back several times, and secure that with a proper tightening; then consider the bandage at all times, and when it softens, tighten that.
And if necessity arises due to corrosion or irritation, or pain, or swelling that may occur in the area, then you should treat and unbind it, remove the ointment, and correct what has happened through methods of healing; then reapply the ointment if needed for this purpose; and adjust its binding until it is healed.
The text appears to be in an old Romance language that
For the restoration of ribs when they are broken.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence: And knowledge of it is not hidden from the senses; you should investigate it with the said methods.
And the restoration is such that you equalize the fracture with the mentioned method as possible, so that it fits properly according to what is needed, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bone with a splint, if you need that.
And if the fracture of the ribs is pressing inward, then intense pain and puncturing occur, much like the puncture that happens to one who has pleurisy, and because of this, the bone pushes on the membrane; and breathing difficulties, coughing, and vomiting blood also occur; and this is difficult to cure.
And the antidotes are prepared with many ingredients.
And concerning what I have said: one must prevent the patient from consuming foods that cause inflammation and flatulence, so that the stomach does not swell and expand, which would push the fracture outward.
But let us beware of this so that it does not easily cause the formation of an abscess, if it does not already exist; and if it has already occurred, then it helps in treating it.
And some of them said that a cupping glass should be placed on it and then suctioned strongly; this seems reasonable, but nevertheless, there is concern that the cupping glass may draw the excesses to the area due to weakness.
And some of them said: the area must be covered with wool that has already been soaked in hot oil, and cushions should be placed between the ribs until it is filled, so that the binding is as when you wrap that second round; then the patient should be treated with a diet and medicine for pneumonia.
And if the severe constraint on the patient is unbearable and the bone pierces the membrane with a puncture wound, we fear for the patient; therefore, it is necessary to incise over that area, expose the broken rib, then place an instrument over it to preserve the spine, remembering its position beforehand, and to cut the bone easily and extract it.
Then, if the wound is large, we should sew the two edges of the wound together and treat it with plasters until it heals.
And if an abscess forms inside, then you should place and press pillows soaked in oiled rue over the area, and treat the patient with what is necessary for an internal abscess.
And let him lie on his side on which he sleeps until he is healed.
Chapter IX.
On the restoration of fractures of the vertebrae of the back and the neck.
Sometimes fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and similarly to their articulations, and likewise in the vertebrae of the back. And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider, for if their hands are already softened and numb and dead and cannot move them nor stretch them nor clench them and when you press on them with your fingers or pierce them with a needle and they feel no pain in them, then you know that they will not be healed, and in the days of such conditions it is mortal.
And if you press on them and they feel compression with your fingers and a prick, then you know that the bone marrow is saved and that the patient can be healed with treatment.
And if this appears in the vertebrae of the neck and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then examine their feet.
And if you find that they are already softened, then what happens to the hands will also happen to them. Then when he lies on his back, there is swelling and involuntary excretion, and sometimes he rolls onto his back and tries to urinate but cannot, then you know it is mortal, and then do not labor in his treatment.
But if none of those causes occur, the cause is better and lighter.
And the treatment of it is that you puncture the swelling of the abscess which you place on the affected or rubbed spine, or with a poultice made from eggs; place on it several times a day until the abscess is sedated.
And then apply one of the comforting and stimulating plasters, and bind it tightly with a bandage; and command the patient to rest and remain calm and not sleep on the part where they feel pain until they are healed.
And if you happen to separate the articulation of the bone due to some trauma or any other cause that has already separated it, then you must clean the wound and remove that bone; then approximate the two edges of the wound, sewing them if it is large; then treat it with something flesh-generating from ointments until it heals.
And if the lower part of the bone in the buttocks, which is the end of the hip bone, is fractured, then you must insert the finger of your left hand into the buttock and align the broken bone as much as possible with the other hand according to the second method of equalization; then apply a plaster and splint if needed, and bind it tightly.
And if you feel that the bones are fractured within it, then you should operate on that area, remove the fragments, and treat the wound with the previously mentioned treatment until it is healed.
The text "Capitul .x.
For the translation of the phrase "De restauracio de la ancha," it can
When the bones of the ankles are fractured, and if they are broken, then the fracture is only at the extremities of those bones and runs along their length, inclining inward; the patient experiences pain and puncture sensations in the area, and the leg becomes numb when fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you place your hand over the area where the fracture is, following the shape of it.
And if the fracture is only at the extremity of it, then you align that part according to what is appropriate for equal balance, ensuring it matches its natural shape.
But if the fracture is along the length or has already inclined inward, then you have the patient lie on their stomach so that you can prepare to restore that fracture. And then, once you have aligned it, apply a plaster over it, and subsequently place a splint of wood or linen over it, securing it tightly so that there is no fear of further fracture points or displacement of the splint.
And fill the cavity with something that takes up space inside so that it creates a constriction evenly, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
And if an abscess occurs, then you should stop the extension of it and its restoration until the abscess is calmed. Place something over it to calm it down as previously indicated; then return to restoring it and strengthen it as needed.
And if the bones are fractured or broken, then you should treat them.
Chapter XI.
On the restoration of the fracture of the auxiliary [bone or limb].
The auxiliary is that which is between the knee and the top of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is done in one of two ways, one of which is that you take a flat splint of medium thickness according to this form:
And let there be two ligaments at the two ends, and then let it be suspended from an elevated place.
And place the patient on a seat; then extend their broken arm over the splint so that it reaches the tip of it at the midpoint where the curvature of the splint is attached.
And then suspend over it some heavy weight, or the servant should extend it to the sides; and then the doctor should hold the fracture with their hands together until the fracture is properly realigned.
And the other method is that the patient should be laid down on their back and suspend the arm of the collar with a ligament; then command two servants, one of whom holds what is above the fracture with their hands, and the other holds the part below it; each extends to their respective side.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you pull on the fracture with one bandage and on that with another bandage, and each of the two assistants extends from their respective sides.
And therefore, if the fracture is near the end of the muscle, then it is necessary to place half of the ligament over the tendon and the other part under the fracture by the knee.
And similarly, if the fracture is near the hip, then it must be that a bandage is placed over that area and over that hip.
Apply that with ease and careful work, and then when it is properly aligned as needed and correctly applied, strengthen that area if an abscess does not accidentally occur.
But if an abscess does occur, then leave the dressing on until the seventh day, and place over it wool soaked in vinegar and rose oil until the abscess subsides, and then strengthen that area.
And the method to strengthen that area is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then put a bandage of clean cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm against that support, and place your open hand over their muscle.
And place the cloth and strengthen over the support the arm so that the arm is in a stable position, unless any cause from the broken bone prohibits this.
And now use splints.
And it is that you place over the fracture that splint which is more aside and stronger than the other splints; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break with an addition of three fingers on all sides.
Then tighten over the splints with the binding that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your binding over the site of the fracture should be tighter. And when the fracture is more extended, the binding should be looser.
And thus you should change the position of the splints and the binding as we have said at the time when you restore the limb to its proper position.
And if you fear an abscess may form, then you should loosen the binding and the splints within the seventh day as we have said.
Then examine the limb in all parts for three days so that no pus or inflammation may occur at the site; it is prohibited for food to reach the limb due to the excess of binding; therefore, correct everything according to what we have said.
But if you are confident that there is no cause for this, then do not remove the ligature until three days or more.
And let the patient's body lie on their back, and their hands be placed on their stomach.
And place over the splint a pad filled with wool evenly, and ensure at any time of night or day that the shape of the broken limb is not loose or dissolved, or that the bandage is loosened; therefore, correct this entirely with your skill.
And provide the patient's food according to the order we mentioned before, such that the food is light at the beginning while strength is being built up; and then it is necessary to make the food more substantial for them.
For it is customary for the splint and the bandage to be kept tight for forty days; and then they must be loosened, and a bath should be administered and treated with ointments that correct that condition.
And if the fracture is a complicated one, then you should not loosen the bandage and the splints until forty days or even two months.
The given text appears to be in an archaic form
For the translation of the provided sentence:
The arm is composed of two bones which are called the radius and ulna; of these, one is smaller, and it is that which forms the mentioned wrist, and the other is larger and is the one placed below the small bone mentioned, from the part more downward.
And often only the larger tendon is cut, or the smaller one, and sometimes both are cut together.
And when the smaller tendon above is cut, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is even easier.
And when the tendon is cut below, then the fracture is bad, and its healing is difficult.
And worse than that is when two bones are broken together.
Therefore, if the tendon that is cut is the smaller one above, then it is appropriate for the doctor to restore it with slight extension easily until it is healed.
But if the larger tendon is the one that is cut, then it is necessary to apply more forceful extension.
And if both tendons are cut together, then you must apply even stronger traction.
And you must place the hand in such a position for its restoration and extension over a cushion, with the wrist of the hand pointing upwards more than all other fingers, and the little finger being lower than the others, and the patient should be seated on a low stool.
And place a cushion in front of him at his height or straight ahead, so that the patient does not twist.
Then the minister should extend the arm from the lower part with his hand or with bandages, and another minister should extend it similarly.
Then the doctor should align the bone as he returns it to its best possible position.
And if there is any doubt in the setting of the bone, then you must carefully reduce every piece to its proper place with your skill.
And if there appears to be a separate doubt that the joint is dislocated and there is no hope of restoring it, then you should act on it and treat it according to the method we have described above.
But if the fracture is accompanied by infection, I have already made a separate chapter on this, and thus you should follow the treatment outlined there.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth with a cerot made from rubbed oil and white wax, which is of medium consistency between thick and thin, and place a strong cloth over it with subtle pressure until the abscess yields; then remove the cerot and apply a poultice prepared with ground powder and egg white, and then apply bandages; and let the bandage that is placed over that fracture be softer and stronger.
And know that the number of bones in the arm is seen in the major dispositions, or rather a fracture in one part or two parts together.
And then apply your bandage firmly and forcefully over the site of the fracture, and if the bandage tends to slip upwards beyond the fracture or downwards below it, adjust the bandage a bit looser according to how it was initially described at the beginning of the chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, and not hard or rough, and the thread with which it is tied should be of a proper medium between fine and thick, as we have recommended.
And examine the limb and the joint after a few days. And if any cause arises for which correction is necessary, such as swelling that occurs in the limb, and now it is necessary to soak the limb in warm water until that swelling subsides.
And leave the limb unconstrained until it rests, and then reapply the bandage.
And if the bandage has already been softened and the bone has healed and appears as it should, then adjust everything with your skill.
And consider if the nutrition is prohibited from reaching the limb due to excessive constriction, for then you must soften that area slightly and leave it for several days so that the nutrition can flow back into it, and then strengthen that area.
If in the patient there is no occurrence of any cause from those that we have mentioned, then it is not necessary to release them after about twenty days or around that time.
Then the arm of the patient should be suspended due to its restless movement, and make the patient sleep on their back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-two days, or it is often restored in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the condition of the humors and the constitution of the body.
Chapter XIII.
On the restoration of fractures in the wrist and fingers.
Know that the wrist of the hand and the joints of the fingers can also be fractured, and they are not affected by anything other than occasional minor impacts.
And when the hand is fractured or sprained, then it is necessary that the patient follows a diet and in front of him, place a splint according to proportion, and then place his hand on it, extended.
And then the minister extends the broken bones and the doctor aligns those that are disjointed with proper alignment.
And now it is necessary to place a plaster and lint, if you do not want an abscess to form from the cautery; then place a bandage over it according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in cloth.
And if the break is inside the palm of the abdomen, then make a ball out of cloth, and instruct the patient to hold that ball with their broken palm; then bind it with long cloth.
And let the star-shaped dressing be placed on the cloth in which it is lifted, so that the dressing is applied to the palm; and press it according to what is needed.
If the fracture is on the external parts, then it is necessary to place a splint on top and another splint under the broken part, so that the hand is open and straight; and then apply the bandage, in such a way that the hand is turned palm-down between the fingers with ligaments.
And if a fracture occurs in one of the bones of the fingers, then the finger should be aligned as necessary and then held with the palm; if you wish, place a small straight splint on it so that the fracture is elevated and not compressed.
But if the fracture is in the other fingers, such as the middle finger, or the index finger, or the ring finger, or the little finger, then it should be aligned and bandaged with the adjacent finger; or all of them can be bandaged continuously, which is better; or place a small splint on it, just as we have said for the thumb.
And consider, in your restoration, and also in that of the patient, the disposition of a hot abscess and its opposite—through your operation—with what is necessary when any cause of these occurs, as is repeatedly narrated about it.
Capitol .xiv.
For the restoration of a fractured thigh bone.
The bone of the thigh is broken and declared by sensation according to how it turns towards the front part and the highest swelling.
And the restoration is done thus: the bandage is tightened over the fracture and another bandage is placed below the fracture, and the patient is laid face down on their stomach.
And then the minister (likely referring to a medical practitioner) extends the entire limb to its original position according to its nature, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
And if it is applied to the base of the thigh, then the bandage should be brought down to the knee at the level of the patella, so that the extension presses inward, and the other bandage leaves the fracture.
And similarly, if the fracture is near the neck, then the bandage should be placed near the neck, and the extension should be made towards the parts below it.
Then the doctor equalizes the bone with both of his hands so that he can reduce it according to its natural shape, and the bone is joined by a good union; at this time, it is necessary to apply a plaster and binding, unless an inflammation has already affected the limb. But if an inflammation does occur, then you should leave it for several days until the inflammation has subsided, and then return to your treatment.
The binding should be done as follows: you must wrap a hard bandage over the fracture, fold it two or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap the limb until you reach the ankle and the root of the thigh.
And insert a long strip of cloth between the thigh and the limb near the neck and downward towards the parts below, so that the ends of the cloth come from the higher part of the two sections; then wrap what is excess of the bandage around the limb and the thigh.
And then place over the thigh at the site of that fracture some splints, and put one splint over the bone of the leg.
And then fill the spaces between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the tightness is alleviated.
And then begin with strong binding in the middle over the site of the fracture with three or four wraps, and as you move away from the area of the fracture, make your binding looser and lighter and softer.
And then extend the two ends of the bandage to the areas between where it reaches the ankle of the foot, and secure both ends of the splints on the other side so that the binding does not move from its position.
And then apply the binding over that in such a way that you do not cause any corrosion, inflammation, swelling, or similar conditions to the limb; and if any of those causes occur, then loosen the binding, and correct whatever occurred as soon as possible, according to what we have said many times.
And if there is a piece of bone that has come off within the bone itself, then you must glue it back on as much as possible; and if not, place something over it and remove it, and treat it with whatever method precedes until it is healed.
And sometimes this thigh fracture is treated by setting it with splints, just as we have said in the helper and in the arm.
However, during the restoration of the patient in such a manner, do not cause the patient lameness; and if it is restored alone, without applying the other side, then it is necessary that the one whose side has been treated becomes lame.
And know that the thigh is strong in forty days or a little more or a little less, and all of this depends on the diversity of the constitutions and of the other conditions.
The text you provided seems to be in an early Romance
For the restoration of the fracture of the collarbone.
Know that a fracture of the kneecap can occur rarely, but it often happens in multiple places with atrophy.
And if you encounter a fracture, then it is not just a crack or break in its parts, and this can be one wound or several wounds, and on top of that, everything has been determined by feeling.
And the restoration of it is such that what is broken in its parts should be aligned by means of which it should be added and joined as much as possible by equalization, ease, and construction.
And then apply a plaster and place it over that round spot if you need to; and bind it tightly with an appropriate bandage.
And then consider all the treatments that we have recommended in other fractures, such as applying a cautery to an abscess and similar procedures that are applied to any accident with what is appropriate until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the restoration of a fracture in the thigh.
Know that in the thigh there are two bones, one of which is thick and is named for the thigh itself; the other is slender and is called the fibula.
And it happens to some types of fractures that affect both bones of the thigh, and by this, the restoration is done in the same way as the restoration of an arm, and the operation for it is similar.
And if both bones are broken together, the thigh is displaced in all directions.
And if the bone is fractured more finely, the chest is turned toward the parts in front.
And if the largest bone is broken, you find that out, and it is one of those causes that does not come easily to you.
And then administer extension, equalization, and ligature of the splints according to that alignment.
However, if the fracture of the thigh is slight with small fragments, the extension should be less and lighter, and relieve it with your strength.
And there is also a reason for operation on the thigh, which is when you align the splints and complete all your procedure; then you will take pieces of pine wood, which are placed under the causes that are set in soles, and they are made somewhat like palm branches; choose those with small thickness, not too large, and the length of these should be according to the length of the thigh, and from the knee down to the least part below.
Then wrap each piece of cloth in two layers according to its length, and place one layer over the part of the thigh on one side and the other on the opposite side, extending from the knee down to the lower part of the foot.
Then tie the two splints in three places at both ends and in the middle, for with this structure, the thigh is prevented from tilting to the right or left side, and remains in proper alignment.
And already a splint of wood according to the length of the chest has been administered; and it is placed on the patient's chest to prevent any movement.
And it is especially important that you do this in a fracture, and when it is properly treated as such.
And then consider each day the chest and study it with that which was previously studied, and you guard against abscesses and inflammation or other similar causes; and when any of those causes occur, immediately attend to it with what is necessary until it is healed.
It seems like you've provided a chapter or section heading,
On the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and toes.
At the ankle, not all fractures occur; but fractures do occur in some instances to the bones of the foot; and fractures are rarely seen in the toes of the foot, and they only suffer wear and tear in matters of disposition.
And if there is a fracture in the bones of the foot and it often happens that those bones are raised above one another, then the patient should place their foot on the ground prepared as if walking.
And then place a hand on what is raised from those bones, and then press those bones, and squeeze them back into their proper places in the area.
And then apply a plaster and bandage on top of it, and place a small table under the foot’s belly to which two padded ends are attached.
And then strengthen that with the foot using a suitable structure, since you have wrapped it with cloths and other materials as needed.
And after three or four days have passed, then you untie the bandage, for you will find the bones squeezed together, whether they are broken or dislocated, and the operation on them is thus as you know.
But if some fingers are broken, then restore them, and align them as I have taught you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. And then place a splint on the broken finger according to the length of the finger, and position it slightly to one side; then place the foot on the table that I have recommended to you, and secure it with a proper binding.
And if what is taken from the bones is two or three or more pieces, then you place on each finger a bandage of its amount wrapped in linen cloth, and tighten the table at the bottom of the foot, and stand over one end of the table while you pierce the sole of the foot so that it holds the bone well.
And it is important for you not to forget that you should not consider all the causes which are said to you in other fractures of the accidents we have mentioned; and apply yourself to each accident with what is necessary.
The line you provided is simply a chapter heading, likely indicating the
Regarding the fracture of the female chin and the bone of the pelvis and the male penis.
When the chin of the woman is fractured, then place her in a seated position, and then slightly tilt her to one side, and hold her from behind.
And then the midwife fills the chin with cotton, and it is placed in her mouth in such a way as to form a sphere; and then the woman should be shaken gently, and her back should be raised little by little, because all of this helps until the fractured part of the chin comes forward and the broken bone returns to its place.
And then place pillows under her back, and when she wants to urinate, the cotton should be removed with ease, and let her urinate; then replace it according to the method you used at the beginning, and then return her to her original position on the pillow.
And do this for seven days or around that time, because it is during this period that the injury is restored.
And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and stretch a reed tube over the urethra; and insert the whole bladder into the penis, and then blow into the tube with enough force that the bladder inflates inside the penis, for the fracture will return.
And then it is filled with fat and kept for several days according to what we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the heel of a man or woman is broken, then administer in its restoration and setting what we have recommended for the bone of the hip.
And what is right is not hidden in these rare and close fractures, especially to one who has some study and practice and understands my book well; for this fracture signifies the greatest disposition towards proper restoration and fixation, and thus understand well.
But when the penis of a man is broken, take a container made from an eggshell, and place the penis inside it; then put a wrap of cloth over it and cover it up, and leave it for three days or around that time, and it will be healed.
Chapter XIX.
On the restoration of bone fractures when affected by infection.
It is advisable for one who has sustained a fractured bone with an infection, especially if the bone is large such as the thigh bone or the shinbone, or similar to those, that you should cautery and incise it immediately if the conditions for incision are suitable for you or indicate so, as we have said above.
And if the wound is bleeding, then you must apply pressure to it by sprinkling powdered earth over the wound that has been finely crushed, if there is no other remedy available.
And then begin to restore the fracture on that very day, and do not delay this, unless an abscess occurs.
And if an abscess occurs, then you should delay the restoration for nine days until the abscess has been resolved, and do not approach it on the third and fourth days, because you may cause harmful complications.
But if the broken bone protrudes above the skin, then you must reduce and align it using your hands with ease and minimal extension.
But if extension is not prepared and the alignment by your hands, then you should reduce it with this instrument; this instrument is made of iron, its length being seven or eight digits, and its width according to the size of the injury; therefore, it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of these, depending on what is needed for the treatment in any kind of fracture.
And it should be round and have minimal thickness so that it does not bend when applying pressure on it during the operation.
And it should have an acute extremity at its edges; and the upper part of it should be thick throughout, and from the middle of it extending to the parts.
And this is its form:
And it is called in Greek "voluntary hernia", which is a small flap or fold.
Therefore, it is necessary that the extremity of the limb be elevated above the prominent part of the bone.
And push that part gradually until the bone returns to its place, and be aligned with some adjustment.
And then strive to align the ends of the fracture with each other, and if the broken end is delicate and does not hold the instrument firmly enough, then you must incise the end of that bone until the instrument can grasp it properly.
But if you cannot reduce the bone entirely by the methods we have recommended, then incise it with one of the appropriate incisors that we have mentioned; or cut it with a saw in whatever manner is possible for you.
Then smooth out any roughness and small splinters that remain on the bone.
And when the bone is reduced, and after the reduction, the patient experiences intense pain, then you should know that the bone has not returned to its natural position; and then do what you can to greatly alleviate the patient's discomfort.
When the restoration you perform on the bone is complete, then soak a cloth in styptic black wine, and especially if it is summer, do not place cerot or any other substance containing oil on the wound, so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption.
And then apply poultices at the time of completing the restoration of the bone, and leave the wound uncovered until you trim the bruise with scissors and use bandages according to the size of the wound.
And be cautious to not strain the wound with the fracture, for many times inexperienced doctors have done this, causing their patients to suffer death or a corrosive or gnawing illness, which is gangrene. And if your bandage is light, soft, different from the bandage of other fractures.
And if the wound is large or is a bad wound, and you fear those accidents we have mentioned might occur, and you find pain in the area, then it is not advisable to apply poultices; instead, make a bandage of hard cloths instead of poultices and bind it tightly with them.
And when after one or two days the inflammation begins to generate pus, then you remove the cloth that you had placed over it, and afterwards apply ointments, with which we customarily treat wounds, such as tetrapharmacon ointment and similar ones.
And it is necessary for you to loosen the bandage and examine the wound every morning and evening until it is consolidated and healed, and it must be that the limb be prepared in such a way that the pus can flow from it to its parts easily.
If many days pass and the wound does not consolidate or the pus does not separate from it, then you should know that there are signs of small problems, for which you must examine the wound with a probe. And of those signs, those that are separated should be removed and extracted. Those that do not separate and affect the limb and cause pain, you must incise them according to what is possible for you to do.
And if the wound develops gangrene or ulcers, which are signs of corruption and putrefaction, then you must apply one of those treatments suitable for it, as was previously described in its respective chapter.
And to this matter in which my speech must stay and you pay attention: when the large bone is broken, expose the limb as if it were the thigh bone or the shinbone and similar ones to those of the large limbs, and do not attempt extraction from it, nor its removal since many times accidents occur by this the death; having left that inside which could rot, for strong it will fall off on its own in about twenty days or thirty; and now treat the wound if you see it, and if not leave it as such.
The text you provided appears to be in an
Here is the translation of the given line:
Here is the translation of the provided line:
Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer those medicines that have a styptic effect such as alum, ashes, myrtle, cicuta, acrisia, and similar ones; thus you should take some or all of them, and mix those with styptic wine, or with egg white, or with sweet wine, and place that on the swelling with tow, and bind those tightly over it with a good constriction.
And leave the constriction for several days without loosening it; then loosen it and repeat another round until the swelling is reduced; or apply a piece of lead over it gently, because lead has the property of reducing all that is inflated in the limbs.
But if the swelling has already turned into a hard mass and is tight, and it is necessary to carefully remove it, then cut through the highest part of it, and incise the excess and protruding parts, or reduce it with hot poultices until it is diminished; and care for it until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and then the limb remains weak and does not function according to its natural state.
When a bone fracture is restored, and the limb then remains thin and weak, this does not happen without causes: of which one is an excess of solution of the ligament and the bandaging done not as it should be; or due to an excess of tightness in the ligaments that prevents nutrition from reaching the limb; or by excessive application of external ointments; or by unnecessary movement at an inappropriate time; or by a lack of blood in the patient’s body and their overall weakness.
And the cure for this is to feed the patient and make their heart tender until blood is multiplied in them; and administer baths; and bring joy and happiness to them.
Then place a poultice on the limb, so that the poultice draws nutrients to it, or continue applying warm water treatments until nutrition flows and returns to its natural state.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of broken bones when they are restored crookedly and preventing the proper operation of them.
When you encounter a restored limb near the healing of it from curvature and prominence at the broken bone and knotting, which is due to the shape change of the limb, yet the limb is not hindered in its natural function, then there is no need for you to accept the opinion of one who supposes that limb has been newly broken.
And indeed, there are foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is highly condemnable, leading to great fear, the sign of which is mortal.
But if the limping and knotting are recent, then they should be treated with warm water in which mollifying herbs have been boiled, such as the leaves of elder and its roots, and melilot, and similar ones; and a poultice should be applied using a mollifying plaster like well-made diachylon; or mucilage from the root of elder should be prepared and mixed with ground green vitriol or oil of cerami, and then used as a poultice; or plump figs should be crushed with pigeon droppings, and similar medicines that are named for consolidating strengthening.
And sometimes it is dissolved with constant light friction using the wettest hands, and should be administered movement to the limb in all parts at all times.
If the tortuosity has already advanced and has become strong and turned into stone, prompting the need for iron therapy, then it is necessary that the pus above be removed and the continuation of the bone be dissolved. Cut away what is excessive from the knot formed with the bone using subtle instruments, and administer relief in that area with care and attention.
The provided text appears to be in an archaic form
Given the structure and vocabulary of the phrase "De sermo en dislocacio,
Dislocation is the displacement of some of the joints from their proper place, which prohibits movement, distorts the shape of the limb, and causes severe pain and significant injuries to the patient.
Therefore, when you encounter a dislocation, it must be reduced immediately, and do not delay the reduction, for if it is delayed, the area becomes inflamed, making the reduction of the dislocation difficult.
And for this reason, it should not be massaged or stretched during the time of inflammation, as doing so often causes spasms and intense pain.
However, when this occurs, you must prepare for the surgery of the patient, and then wait until the inflammation subsides;之后肢体要用热水和油擦洗，然后才能轻松复位。
And every limb should be treated with that which will bring its memory back to its place.
And I have already ordered the chapters of dislocation according to how they proceed in fractures; from the part of the body most superior down to the part most inferior.
The given text appears to be in an old form of a Romance
Here is the translation of the provided line:
So dislocated the two jaws do not snap; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two ways: either they are displaced from their places by a slight movement, and thus softened slightly; or they are dislocated completely through total displacement, within which they are softened at the joint area where saliva flows from the patient and cannot hold it nor can they close their mouth, and the tongue is wrapped in their words.
When the dislocation is slight, then in most cases it returns by itself with little cause.
If the dislocation is complete and total, then reduction must be administered gently, and should not be delayed at all.
And it is that the minister holds the patient's head, and the doctor inserts the tip of one finger into the area of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth of the patient if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both tips together if the dislocation is on both sides, with the other fingers of his hand outside for support; and commands the patient to relax their jaws and allow them to move from each side; and the doctor aligns the jaw and pushes the jaw until it returns to its proper place.
And if the reduction is difficult, and especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer an evaporation with hot water and oil until the reduction of both is gently made, and do not delay the reduction of both at all, as we have said.
And when they are returned and aligned, and the patient's mouth is closed and not softened, then place over them a cloth poultice with cerot, which is made of wax and oil mixed together; and then bind it easily with moistened linen.
And let the patient sleep on their back, and let his head rest between two pillows, so that it does not turn to the right or left; and do not force them to chew anything; before their food is well-chewed like a lion’s, until when the pains are eased and the jaws relaxed, then let them eat what they wish.
And this should be administered with ease, and do not work on the area around the mouth while eating and drinking are occurring, until the jaw is closed and healed.
And if it is difficult to reduce two dislocated jaws that have not returned to their proper places at some point, then fevers often occur repeatedly and there is continuous sweating; in such cases, the abdomen of the patient is greatly inflamed, and they vomit pure bile.
And when you see this, then know that it is a sign of destruction; and often the one to whom this happens dies within ten days.
Chapter XXV.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and the extremity of the muscle.
The clavicle is not dislocated inward due to its continuation with the shoulder; however, it is sometimes dislocated outward at the joint, and this is apparent to the touch.
And the restoration of it is for the patient to lie on their back and extend their arms. And then compress the area with your palm using strong pressure, for it will return to its place.
And then place an ointment and pillows over that area and strengthen it.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And then place an ointment, and pillows, and bind it tightly, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until they are healed.
And with this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced and returned to its proper place when it is separated from its location.
Chapter XXVI.
On the reduction of muscle dislocation.
Know that the muscle is dislocated in only three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated at the joint near the tendon.
And the second is when it is dislocated at the upper part of the muscle, and this happens slowly; and it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder; and it is not dislocated in front by the nerves.
And it is more often dislocated outward at the lower parts of the joints near the tendons, especially in those whose muscles have little flesh, where it is easily dislocated; but in those with more flesh, it is pushed out with difficulty.
And forcefully you should reduce some men's dislocations or fractures, and the muscle of it is swollen with a hot swelling, and it is treated because it has already been dislocated.
Therefore, it is necessary that you introduce this into what you are specifically focusing on with the patient, and then proceed with the treatment of the patient.
And it is known that the dislocation is when it affects parts where the tendons twitch; so you can distinguish between the dislocated muscle and the healthy one, for there is evident difference between them; you find at the head of the dislocated muscle a concavity, while in the tendon area, touching the head of the muscle feels like an egg, and the patient cannot bring their hand to their ear nor move it freely.
If the foot or ankle is dislocated and you now find a clear touch, and it is not hidden.
And from this dislocation, an easy reduction is made when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
And the reduction of it is that the minister raises his hand to the parts above; and then places your thumbs below the swelling, and lifts the joint forcefully into its proper place, and the minister raises his hand, and extends that over it; and then places that below so that it returns lightly.
And if what we have said does not return the dislocation to its original state within a few days, then the patient must be bathed in warm water and given an infusion that softens and relaxes as if it were boiled roots of elder, fenugreek, and mint in water, which should be administered.
Then the patient should be laid on their back and have placed under them a soft pillow of wool that is neither too loose nor too tight. Then the doctor places his foot on the sphere [likely referring to a device used in treatments], lifts the head of the muscle with strength, and pulls the patient’s hand so it does not become distorted at the joints below. Another assistant holds the patient's head so it does not get out of place, for this will quickly return it to its proper position.
And if you wish, reduce it in the following manner: have a person present who is taller than the patient. This person should stand on the same side and place their thigh under the patient’s thigh, lifting the patient's thigh upwards until the patient hangs in the air. Another assistant pulls the patient’s leg from below their abdomen. But if the patient is light, then it must be suspended with something else that causes weight to be added, so that gravity can help, because the dislocation returns quickly.
And it is reduced according to another method: and that is to plant a long pole in the ground whose head should be round in shape, like the pestle of a mortar, neither thick nor thin, then place the patient on top of it; once placed over the tip of the pole with lion's cloth, the patient stands along the length of the pole, then extend his hand to the other side from underneath; and extend the body strongly from the other side, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if the reduction is difficult due to all the reasons we have mentioned, then apply this treatment: take a pole whose length should be two cubits, and its width should be four fingers, and its thickness should be lightened at the tip according to this form:
And then on the round head, place linen cloth so that the pole does not hurt the patient.
And then place the tip of the pole under the patient's armpit, extend the hand or arm over the pole towards the opposite side, and bind the pole to the helper, the arm, and the extremity of the hand.
And place the arm on a step of a ladder according to its latitude, and the hand should be extended towards the side, and the other body part should be suspended from the other side, for the joint will soon straighten.
And when the insertion is completed according to any manner that is possible for you, and then it is necessary to place a thin woolen cloth of equal quantity; and then apply a plaster prepared with powdered mallow seeds and egg white over all the muscle, thus covering it above, and then secure the thin cloth with an appropriate binding; and the bandage should be wrapped around the plaster, and the hand of the patient should be attached to their neck, and left so, without moving the hand for seven days.
And it is necessary to reduce the food of the patient for a while, until the limb is strengthened, because it is lighter for the recovery of him.
And then the food should be gradually increased over seven or five days and exercise should be performed; and if it is stabilized and not softened, then it is healed.
But if the joint is dislocated multiple times due to moisture that affects it or for other reasons, then it is necessary to apply a cautery with three burns, according to what was previously stated in the chapter on cauterization.
And if all this is done and after seven days the bandage is removed and the joint is not healed, and the plaster and binding are reapplied several times but it does not heal and the arm cannot be raised to the parts above, then you know that the nerves of him, which are at the head of the muscle, have been cut or stretched or softened, and know that the joint will never be put back in its place.
Regarding the dislocation that occurs in the feet and ankle or the parts behind, the reduction is made with impulse and extension using the hands until it returns to its proper position.
And another binding should be applied there, and care for it until it is healed.
And if during the healing process there is heaviness in the limb and slowness in its movement, then the patient should use baths several times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original natural state.
Chapter XXVII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the knee.
Know that the joint of the knee is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all directions, but more so forward than backward, and the dislocation is not hidden from you whether by sight or touch according to whatever figure it is dislocated, and when you align the dislocated knee with your hand, this is made manifestly clear to you, for the joint is concave and cannot bend the leg, nor can it touch its own muscle.
And it is necessary that you cool and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before it becomes a hot abscess, for if it turns into a hot abscess, reducing it becomes difficult, and even when healed, it is not fully restored; especially when it affects the rear parts, because it is worse than all other types of dislocations, causing more pain, and often leading to death with that.
And the restoration of it, when it is one that can be reduced, is to extend the limb with two hands, and expand the arm, placing the doctor's hands over the knee and pushing the joint with the tips of his fingers together, or with the edge of his palm until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in the front parts, then return it by bending the arm with your hand, until you strike the elbow with the edge of your palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey reduction, then administer strong extension and forceful motion.
And it is that two ministers extend the arm, and hold that limb with two ministers so that the extension is not hindered.
Then the arm should be rotated in all directions, since it is wrapped with a long folded cloth over his hand or bandage.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that those factors which help in the lubrication of the joint are facilitated; then forcefully push the joint until it returns to its place.
Then for the reduction of a dislocated shoulder, it should be placed on that bandage which has styptics and compresses with egg white, and it should be pulled with a downward traction, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and left like this for several days.
Then it should be untied; and if the joint is returned to its proper place, then you should remove the bandage from it and leave it.
And if you see that the joint is not well strengthened, then repeat the plaster and the bandage, and leave it for several days until it is healed; then remove it.
And if you happen to injure it severely near the reduction of the joint, and its position is in motion, then apply moistening in baths and gentle friction, and compression until it is relieved; or place on the joint extensions that are suitable for oily movement; then bind it, and leave it over the bone day and night. Then remove that, and place it in a bath; when it rises, then gently rub the joint with moderate friction, and then apply extensions to it again, which are suitable for moist movement, once, and the second time, and the third time. using bath treatment until it is smoothed out.
And if you wish, place moist and scraped calf skin on that area and bind it tightly; do this several times, for it will be moistened and returned to its proper position.
Capitol .xxviii.
For the treatment of a dislocation in the joint between the arm and the hand,
When the hand or sometimes another joint is dislocated, and the reduction of this dislocation is easy, while the opposite is true for other joints; however, it must be done quickly in reducing it at the moment when it becomes dislocated, before the area becomes inflamed or an abscess forms there.
The reduction of the dislocation is done by placing the patient's hand joint on a table and having an assistant extend the hand. The doctor places their hand or palm over the prominence of the joint and pushes until it returns to its proper place.
However, it must be considered that if the palm is already dislocated towards the back of the hand, then the patient should place the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction. If the dislocation occurs on the back side of the hand, then the position of the hand should be naturally placed on the table so that the doctor's hand can press over the prominence of the joint.
And if it returns immediately, that is good; but if not, then strengthen that area with a soft bandage to prevent inflammation and leave it like that. Do not repeat this process, because otherwise, it will not tolerate or allow for the reduction of pus that may form over the days.
But however the joint remains according to its tortuosity; and you notice in the patient no cause, except that the hand is softened and cannot hold any cause; therefore know that the nerves are broken or crushed, and now there is not a remedy for it other than holding it with cautery near the place of injury and thus you confer some benefit.
When the dislocation has been corrected, then place over it the bandage we have recommended, and let it be left and held for five days; then it should be loosened and left, and the hand of the patient should be exercised.
But if the movement of it is still impaired and you notice some severity in it, then relieve it with warm water and friction several times until it is alleviated.
Chapter XXIX.
On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Sometimes the fingers can be dislocated in any direction.
And when any of those fingers is dislocated on the back of the palm or on its belly, then hold the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
And then support the head of the finger, and suspend that part which is dislocated, and leave it like this for two days.
And then suspend it and extend it until it is straightened out on that same day.
And when it can be moved, wrap it according to that method, and do not stop unwrapping it during the day and exercising with movement, and wrap it at night; do this for many days until it is straight.
And treat it similarly if it is dislocated at the wrist; wrap it in that area and perform this as your first operation until it is healed.
And similarly treat it in this manner when it is dislocated at other parts.
Chapter XXX.
On the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When a complete dislocation occurs in any of the vertebrae of the back or neck, and several vertebrae are displaced from their positions, then there is no cure, for death is imminent to the patient.
And the sign of this is that the excretion of the patient is expelled beyond their will, and they cannot retain it; and many times are softened some parts of him or both sides of his chest or both arms of his, or one of those; or a vertebra is dislocated from its place, for often it is dislocated and often the relocation of these occurs in four directions.
And when it is dislocated towards the back, it is called gelbozitation (a term which seems to refer to a specific condition of dislocation or deformation).
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
But in those cases that come from trauma or by impact or similar to these, the Ancients spoke at length about the methods of cure with verbose speech, most of which return with profit; but I have already summarized that which lacks due to its excess, through my proximity to my own exposition's intention, with which I have explained and shaped this differently than how they showed and discussed it.
And of those conditions, it is only cured when it descends properly to the back using what I recommend.
And it is that the patient should be laid face down on a soft pillow near the wall, and their legs should be stretched out underneath with a moist poultice so that their feet are not harmed.
Then a straight stick should be placed, planted in the ground at the end of the pillow near their head, and another stick across their feet at the other end of the pillow.
And the minister should hold the stick, and it should not be fixed in a hole; another minister should hold the other stick in the same manner.
Then wrap around the head of the patient and place a thin cloth loosely over it; extend one end of the cloth to the stick that is near their head, and tie it there; then tighten another cloth over their hips, towards their thighs, and secure it to their chest; finally adjust all the bindings and tie them to the other stick which is near their feet.
And then the minister should extend the ligament to the part of the bone, and let not both bones and ligaments remain in their original positions where they were fixed, but rather do not fasten them as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or he places them on a table, and then adjusts his feet on the table until it returns.
If it does not return by this method, then take a table whose width or length is about three cubits, and excavate in the wall near the patient a place where one end of the table can fit. Then place the middle of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and pull strongly so that the spine is compressed and returns to its proper position.
And if you wish, use a drill that is turned by hand; and for this, place under the head of the patient two poles at the back end, each pole being one arm's length long, and place under his head again at the back end another two poles; and the distance between each pole should be one palm, and already drilled holes are made in each pole through which the drill turns, and each is firmly fixed to the ground so that they do not move.
And there should be one round pole on which the drill is mounted, and it should rotate in the two holes of the two poles.
And at the end of it there is a joint in which the shaft is formed, the length of which is one palm plus what is coiled; and in the other two shafts, it is similar to that.
And then tighten the straps that you have placed on the patient's feet at the spot where their head should be, and the straps that you have placed on their thighs at the part where their feet should be.
And next, each wheel should have a servant who turns the wheel with their hand, and the doctor aligns the vertebra as we have said.
And then ensure the vertebra is returned to its place, and the area is leveled, at this point it is necessary to apply a drying poultice with egg white, and then tow; and then place on the poultice strips of cloth whose width should be about three fingers or around that, and the length of which should cover the area of the swelling, and over the part of the vertebra.
And then bind it with the bandage we have mentioned, and keep the patient on a subtle diet until they are healed.
And if any prominence remains in the area at the end of the healing process, then it is necessary to administer medicines that mollify and cleanse with prolonged application of the ointment we have recommended; and already a sheet of lead is applied to that area.
And sometimes prominence occurs at the rear of the vertebrae of the back, and it is caused by that dislocation; and it is that bone which protrudes such that no prognosis should be made for it using this medicine, because applying it strongly could cause death.
The line "Capitul .xxxi." appears
For the treatment of a dislocated hip.
Know that the joint of the bone and the joint of the muscle can only be dislocated in such a way, and do not apply to them what you would apply to other joints with small movement and concavity.
And the joint of the ankle is dislocated in four ways, for it can be dislocated inward, or outward, or forward, or backward.
And it is most frequently dislocated inward, and rarely forward or backward.
And the sign of the inward dislocation is that when you align the healthy leg with the affected one, the affected leg appears longer and the heel more prominent than the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their foot towards the sole, and it is at this location where the swollen area becomes inflamed due to a hematoma, so that the head of the thigh bone has already reached here.
And the sign of the dislocation that occurs outward is that the symptoms are contrary to those of the aforementioned condition.
And the sign of the dislocation that occurs forward is that the leg extends fully, but it cannot bend due to the pain in the heel; and if one attempts to walk, they cannot do so forwards; the urine of the patient is retained, and the swelling becomes inflamed, and movement is restricted around the ankle.
And the sign of one to whom dislocation occurs in the parts behind is that he cannot stretch out his leg, nor can he bend forward what he bends at the knee, and the thigh on that side is shorter than the other, and the knee is softened, and the head of the thigh bone is displaced from its proper place.
When considering the reduction of this type of dislocation, at this time, if the dislocation is old and ancient, which has already become fixed by having been that way for a long time, you administer the reduction to it and leave it according to its position; however, it is not in full recovery with this treatment alone; therefore, it does not need further intervention or prognosis.
But in the case where the dislocation is recent and it belongs to one of the four types of dislocations, you should pay attention so that you return the joint to its place both internally and externally, and move it left and right, for it will easily return to its natural position without needing further treatment.
However, if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare one assistant to stretch the patient's chest from below, or by their hands, or use a bandage that is tied over the chest above the head; and another assistant should extend the hand of the patient upwards so that they grasp below the armpits; then bind with a bandage around the root of the thigh, and have another assistant hold the end of the bandage.
And the extension of the dislocation should be towards the armpit for the part of the collarbone, or towards the back for the part of the shoulder blade.
And this extension should be done simultaneously while the patient is lifted with their body off the ground and remains suspended.
And this type of extension is common to all four types.
And therefore, if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then in every case it is necessary to speak of the proper treatment.
In the reduction of the joint, when it is dislocated and the dislocation is inside, the patient must be laid on their side; then place the ligaments over the ridge of the thigh at that point between the head of the thigh and where the hip bone is; then extend the ligament up from the part near the hip to the higher part of the shoulder.
And then another minister should strongly take the arms of the patient, and firmly grasp the thick part of the sick thigh and extend it outward with strong traction, because this returns it to its proper place.
And this kind is a lighter cure by which this member is reduced compared to the other kinds.
And if it is excused on you and you do not obey this type of treatment for the whole condition, then the two feet of the patient must be tied together with a strong, light binding over both ankles and both toes.
And let the length of each thigh be the quantity of four fingers, and let the patient’s chest be extended more than the other by the quantity of two fingers.
And then the patient should be suspended over the top of the pole, and it should be in the house; and the length from the ground should be the quantity of two arm-spans.
And then command a strong young man to grasp the head of the thigh, and let him be suspended with the patient, another young man pressing the thigh strongly so that the joint returns to its place quickly.
And in the proper reduction, when there is a dislocation at the outer part, it is necessary that the patient lies on a couch as we have recommended in having prepared with cold; and the limb of the sick person should be strongly placed on their chest properly and on their feet.
And then two poles are placed, one under the patient's feet and the other at the head; and then poles adjusted in the middle of the bed should be covered with wet cloths so that the patient is not harmed by the pole being between their thighs, for you must ensure that the extension to the parts is not hindered.
And then each minister extends to their part, and the doctor with his hand equalizes the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the forward parts, then it is necessary to extend the chest slightly, and this follows the same procedure as described for the bed; and the doctor places the palm of their right hand on the affected joint, and then compresses it with the other hand, and with that compression extends the part towards the neck.
And if the dislocation is at the parts behind, then it is not necessary for the patient to be extended on those parts, and they are raised above the ground; rather, they must lie on a hard surface, just as when setting the limb if the shoulder of theirs is dislocated outwardly, according to what we have said about placing them across two boards; and they should lie on their face with the ligaments stretched out, as we have mentioned, without delay.
And it is necessary to apply compression with a board over the area where the joint is.
Thus, when the reduction is completed as it should — and the sign of the reduction is not hidden from you, which is that you stretch both arms of the patient, and when you see them equal and the patient extends their arm and you expand that with its support, then you know that the limb has returned as it should — and now you align both thighs and place padding and extend with a bandage so that the joint is not strained in any part; and confine the patient to rest for three or four days.
And then remove the bandage and the padding, and compare one arm with the other.
When you see those marks on their clothing, then know that the dislocation is already fixed, and then let the patient go.
And if you see any cause of softening, then you return and plaster that area, and apply it according to your initial structure, and leave it for three days.
Then unbind that area, and have the person walk around for several days until it is strengthened and comforted.
Chapter .xxxii.
For the translation of the given sentence:
The joint is dislocated in three ways: it is dislocated to the outer parts, and to the inner parts, and more towards the back parts; and it is not dislocated to the front parts.
And the sign of dislocation is that you command the patient to apply their chest with their thigh; then you will know that the joint is dislocated.
And the restoration for all types of dislocation is that you make the patient stand straight, ensuring that they extend their chest as much as possible; place your two hands on their face, and put their foot between your feet; then use your palms to hold their joint, keeping them between your fingers over the joint with strength, and another assistant extends their leg until the joint returns to its place.
And the sign of reduction is that their chest adheres to their thigh with an effortless upward movement.
Then apply a plaster to that area and make the chest adhere to the thigh; then bind those areas with a bandage for three or four days; afterwards, unbind them.
And do not allow the patient to walk for several days until they are healed and strengthened.
And if the reduction must be done by you, then administer strong extension with the ligaments, as previously described in the narration of hip treatment.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the talus.
The talus is sometimes displaced by slight movement, and at other times it is dislocated completely, and the dislocation of it occurs either inward or outward.
And the sign of its dislocation is that the talus swells, moving to the side to which it is dislocated.
However, the treatment for its displacement is a simple reduction, which involves extending it easily with the hands and keeping it in place until it returns to normal.
However, in the treatment when it is completely dislocated, you must make the patient stand straight, and have a strong and valiant assistant behind the patient, holding them firmly at the midpoint of the affected area.
And then you should hold the foot with your right hand on the higher side of it, and with your left hand on the lower side of the foot at the ankle area.
And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand for two turns, and then extend with your left hand; and push the toes of the foot with your right hand away from the chest.
And do this twice as we have counted.
And then push the toes of the foot towards the chest for the third time, and you should be at the ankle.
Therefore, return it in one attempt or two following this method, and if you can bend the foot, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation on it until it does return.
But if it is forbidden for you to reduce it by the method we have recommended, then make the patient lie on their back on the ground, and place a small stick firmly in the ground so that it rests between the patient's thighs, and you should wrap a cloth around it so that it does not hurt the patient.
And then the minister holds their thighs, and another minister stretches the foot with his hands or with a band that lies across the top of the foot; and then each minister extends against the extension of their partner, and the penis is extended between the patient's thighs maintaining this position so that the body of the patient does not pull back from its extension.
And then the doctor aligns the dislocation with his hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh on that side, because the dislocation returns easily.
And then when the dislocation returns and you are assured of the success of the reduction, place a plaster and bandage it strongly with bindings, and bind the foot to the chest with bands.
And you must be careful of the nerves that are behind the talus, so that the bandage over it is not too tight and does not compress it strongly.
And then leave it for two or three days; and if the bandage becomes loose, tighten it.
And then untie it on the third or fourth day, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days. And if it is necessary to proceed beyond that space, there is no assurance that the dislocation will not be dissolved and corrupted, and then it will not receive treatment.
And if you encounter an abscess that needs cauterization, then it is necessary that you administer in the discharge of it what was previously mentioned in our narrative, at another site for treatment and application, before it is completely healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.
For the translation of the given medieval medical treatise-like text into English:
Cover that which is dislocated with slight extension of its joint; and this is not difficult, first be gentle.
But if the dislocation is in any of the toes of the foot, then you must make the patient place his foot on the ground or a table, and let him be standing as if he were walking.
And then you stand firmly, and place your foot on the area near the joints that need attention, and then press with your foot with enough force to make it return to its proper position, ensuring that it lies flat and no prominence appears in that spot.
And then place his foot on a table that supports the entire foot, which has two ends, and then tightly bind it with proper and firm bandaging for three days; and then loosen it and let him rest by walking for several days until it is strengthened and recovery is assured.
Chapter XXXV.
On the types of dislocations that are caused by blows or fractures or any combination thereof.
When any of those causes occur, and you perform the treatment and restoration, death sometimes results.
And by this, one should not assume that anyone can handle the treatment, but only he who is wise in the art, of long practice, merciful and pious, slow, not rash nor presumptuous; and that at the beginning he uses medicines which will simply reduce swellings without causing cauterization, and leaves the patient to divine judgment, unless it is for one from whom you hope for salvation from destruction, some relief from illness, in whom there appears any hope. And then strive to perform the reduction on him at the beginning of the cause, before it becomes a cauterized swelling.
And then, if the member returns as we wish, administer a regimen that will reduce the cauterized swelling and treat the wound with one of the most drying ointments suitable for it.
And if the dislocation is accompanied by a fracture and occurs in separated parts of the bone, then you should pierce the area around them, and proceed as we have said for simple injuries to those areas.
And guard and avoid according to your ability those from the mixture in the paths of fear as my preaching precedes you; for this is better for you to serve your Creator, and more lasting for your glory, and you will find more health for your body in doing so during your time. Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt. The word "Amen" is
