O, filhs, pus yeu he a vos complit aquest libre,
For the operation with a hand is laid bare in our region and in our time completely deprived, except that only little of its knowledge remains and its trace persists; and nothing but some small descriptions remain in the books of the Ancients, which have changed much and led to errors and misconceptions such that the meanings of it are closed off and the strength and artistry of it are weakened.
And it seems to me that I revitalize that according to the order of this treatise in a way that follows exposition and clarification and abbreviation; and for which to come with the forms of the tools of cautery and other instruments of the work as by adding to the explanation, and for the preparation of it, which cause is necessary.
May the cause for which no good artisan is found with his hand in our time is that the art of medicine is long, and it requires its practitioner to be exercised beforehand in the science of anatomy, which Galen mentions among those who know the joints of the members and their forms; and the conjunction and separation thereof; and had knowledge of the bones, nerves, and veins, and their number, and their extension; and of the pulsating veins and the quiet ones, and the places of their origin.
And for this reason Hippocrates says that in name it is small, but in action it is great, and especially so in the art of the hand.
But we have already spoken of this in the introduction of this book; for whoever is not knowledgeable about what we have said concerning anatomy will not be exempt from falling into error, which can lead to the death of people, as I have seen too many cases of this. For some are formed in this science and then stray from it due to a lack of knowledge and experience.
For I saw an inexperienced and unskilled doctor attempt to incise a scrophulous abscess on a woman's neck, and in doing so cut some of the arteries in the neck, causing a great loss of blood, which led to the woman dying in the arms of those present.
And I saw another doctor who took it upon himself to remove a stone from a man who had suffered in his condition, and the stone was large, and he came to him and extracted that stone with a piece of the bladder, because that man died on the third day.
And I have already called for extracting it, and saw that due to the size of the stone and the condition of the patient, I understood that he would die.
And you see another doctor who was receiving payment from a duke of our land for surgery, and happened upon a castrated black man who had a fracture in his thigh; and the doctor prepared with his ignorance, extracted the fracture, over the wound, with pillows and splints with strong binding, and did not leave the wound to breathe.
And then release the bandage according to their wishes, and then dress the wound, and then keep it dry for some days and command that we loosen the binding; and this should be done until the thigh and foot are free from abscesses, and recovery is achieved.
And I was called to him, and prepared to loosen the binding, and thus peace was achieved and his pains were somewhat alleviated.
But corruption had already set in the limb, so it could not be stopped, and the corruption continued to spread throughout the limb until the patient was in peril.
And I saw another doctor who punctured a cancerous abscess, and it became ulcerated over the course of several days, until the malignancy of it grew significantly under the care of the doctor.
The cause is that the cancer is pure of melancholic humors, so it is not necessary to treat it with iron entirely, but rather the limb should be treated so that it suffers and is thus purged.
And therefore, sons, it is necessary for you to divide the operation under my guidance into two parts: one part is an operation associated with health, and the other involves work where there is peril in the most critical dispositions.
E yeu ja he exsitat aquo en tot loc de aquest libre en le qual venc opperacio en la qual es error e temor;
And therefore take up your weapons with diligence and under the protection of God, and treat your patients with happiness and firmness.
And use the best method by the grace of God to reach health and favorable outcomes, and leave behind terrible diseases that are difficult to heal, and withstand what makes you fear with your defenses, so that hesitation in your faith and in your name does not escape you: for more remains for your glory, and further out in the world and later for your sanctities.
When translating this line by line from the given medieval-like text into English: Do not treat illnesses poorly, so that bad doctors are not named.
And I have already divided this book into three chapters.
Begin the division of the book, and first of the first part. The first chapter is ordered from head to foot, in the forms of the instruments and in the tools of the cauteries, and of what is necessary in the operation.
The division of the second part. The second chapter, on drying and piercing, and on cupping, and on plasters, and on the extraction of arrows and similar objects, all chaptered and ordered according to the forms of the instruments.
The third chapter, on restoration and dislocation, and on the treatment of fractures and similar injuries; a chapter ordered from head to foot, and detailing the forms of the instruments.
It is necessary for me to say the quality of the benefits of that cautery and its harms, and in what conditions the use of cautery is prohibited.
Therefore, I say that the discussion about the quality of the usefulness and harm of cauterization is long and prolix, subtle through science, and secretively hidden; many wise people have already spoken about it, and they are in disagreement about it, and for me, a small part of their discussions suffices, fearing lengthiness.
And therefore, I say that cauterization is beneficial to all complications universally, whether they are with matter or without matter, except for two complications, which are complications of the tail without matter.
In the condition of dry and hot illness, materials tend to disarrange; for some say that a cautery is helpful in this case, while others say the opposite, that a cautery is not appropriate in an illness which is by nature hot and dry, because the nature of fire is hot and dry, and it is inappropriate for a dry and hot illness to be treated with something that is also hot and dry.
And let those who say the opposite be heard: they claim that a cautery provides relief in all dry and hot illnesses that occur in human bodies, because when you compare the body of a person and its humidity to the composition of fire, you find that the human body is cold.
And I say by the speech of that person, who has experienced this to me several times openly.
Mays empero no cove que vengua sobre aquo aquel que ja es exproat e excersitat en le capitol de cauteri per derier exercici,
And in other conditions, there is no need for fear, especially in cold and humid illnesses, because all doctors agree on these, and they do not disagree about treating them with cautery.
And know, sons, that the secret of healing through cautery with fire and its goodness, especially concerning cautery combined with burning medicine, is that fire is simple, the action of which only reaches the member being cauterized and does not affect the adjacent member except with a slight harm.
And here is the translation of the given sentence:
Here is the translation of the given text line by line into English:
And know, sons, that they forget the time in which it is appropriate to perform cautery and consider the best time of spring.
And I say that cautery is convenient at all times, so that the harm caused by accidental time is submerged in the healing brought about by the cautery, and especially if the cautery is for necessary pains or to prevent pain, strong and urgent, which do not tolerate delay because it is feared that those may worsen, which are greater evils entering over time.
And this does not fall into your views, or, children, this is only valued by the common people and foolish doctors, for that disease which is healed by cautery is not recommended at all times, and its consequence should be paused.
And the cause is not as they think by this means, for cautery is nothing more than a method of medicine that alters composition and dries out the humors which are the cause of the pains.
And yet cauteries are excessive in medicine due to the eagerness for its health benefits and the power of its operation and the greatness of its lord.
And it is possible that their illness may return at some time, according to the constitution of the patient and the location of their illness, and their strength, and what is prepared in their body due to the accumulation of excesses within them, and what has been acquired by them through food and similar causes; but for an illness where a cautery is administered, it should be an illness subtle in a member with few excesses and moisture, just as a dental cautery for pain and similar issues, it is possible that such pain will not return to them, although this is done to a small extent.
And the common saying is that cautery is the last resort of medicine, and this saying is true, not in the way that some people understand it, for I believe that there is no cure that benefits as much as medicine or any other cause before resorting to cautery.
And the cause is contrary to that; and the intention that cautery is the last remedy of medicine is only when we administer treatments for certain diseases, and those medicines do not help, and then at the end of the treatment, one administers cautery, which proves effective in that case. And now from here, it is not true that cautery is the last remedy of medicine, according to the understanding which the common people and many foolish doctors hold.
And the ancients said that cautery with gold is better than cautery with iron, and they said this only because of the purity of gold and the nobility of its substance.
And they said that the location of the cautery does not matter, but this is not absolutely true, for I have tried this and found that it only works on certain bodies and not others, and cautery with gold is good and better than with iron as they said; however, when you perform cautery with fire using gold, it is not clear to you, for it ignites according to the amount you want due to the hardness of the gold, and because it prepares to receive heat; and if you place fire upon it, the gold melts from the heat, and some flakes fall into the fire, causing issues for the craftsman due to this situation.
And for this reason, cautery is performed with an iron that is both lighter and more precisely applied to the correct procedure.
And I have already arranged this chapter on cautery according to sections, and I have organized those of the head between the feet, so that I can quickly provide the inquirer with what they seek from it.
The first chapter.
This cautery is applied to humidity and coldness over the spleen, an accidental part where these are causes, thus it is a cause of rheumatic fluxes called rheumatism, from the head to parts of the eyes and ears that are affected, as well as excessive sleepiness, toothache, and jaw pain, and generally all diseases that come from coldness, such as paralysis, apoplexy, and similar illnesses.
The form of this cautery is as follows: first, command the patient to be purged with laxative medicine for three or four nights, according to the strength of the patient, their age, and their habits.
Then command that they shave their head with a razor. Then have the patient sit between your hands on a lowered bench and place their hands on their feet.
Then place the root of your palm near the nostrils at the base of the nose between their eyes. However, when you have reached the middle of the area as mentioned, mark that spot with a probe, and then heat the olive-shaped cautery, which has this form:
And then place that over the marked area with tension, in such a way that it descends gradually, with which your hand should be applied little by little, and you turn that.
And then lift your hand lightly and look at the area, and if you see any part of the bone exposed, about the size of a grain of barley, then raise your hand, and if it does not return by itself, use that instrument again or another one if it is cooled down, until the bone becomes visible as I have told you.
And then take a little salt and dissolve it over the area and leave it for three days.
And then place over it a cloth soaked in butter and leave it there until the heat of the burn is destroyed. And then treat the area with a tetrapharmacon ointment until it is healed.
And it has also been said that when the wound remains open, washing it with honey is better, because it is more effective and more beneficial.
And some of them say that the area around the bone should be cauterized, and the cautery should be applied until some part of the substance of the bone adheres to it.
And then remove what is attached to the bone, and then clean it.
And others said that with the cautery, reach the buttock area, pressing strongly on the bone until it gives way, and this is the method of performing a small alfahcuti. And they believe that from that place, vapors escape from the head.
And if the wound is kept open for a long time, then it should be treated before it becomes consolidated.
But I have not seen these two types of cautery used on everyone, but only in some people as a method of fear; and leave that aside, you must tell me, it is better for health when it is so; for the head is damaged by the disruption of its continuity just as we have testified in other members, and especially when the patient's head has a fragile nature.
And the first type of cautery is safer and better, you must tell me; and from that point on, it should be done in a way that is beneficial to health.
Second chapter.
About the cautery of the head.
When chronic and prolonged pain affects the entire head of the patient and you have used remedies such as scrapings, leeches, purges for the head, plasters, washes, baths, and poultices, especially if it has already been cauterized with a cautery that has not brought any benefit; then consider whether the patient's head is naturally of strong constitution and not fragile, with considerable heat. In this case, apply another type of cautery slightly different from the previous one. And then cauterize that area above the horn of his skull with a cautery until the vein is severed. Cut the tendon and expose the bone to the extent we have recounted, and cauterize that area with a cautery at the rear part of the head in the spot which is called the sinus — and it is the location where the suction cup is placed. And move your hand in this manner, and do not expose the bone, for the patient will find much greater pain from this different from the pain of all other cauteries on the head.
And I want to describe this cautery in its place, because the cautery with which you cauterize the horns of the head and the occiput is a more delicate cautery than that with which the middle part of the head is cauterized; and this is its form.
Chapter three.
On the cautery of non-traditional migraine.
When a persistent pain occurs in the head or extends into the eye, the head should be cleansed with medicines and other treatments should be administered as I have described in the sections on diseases; if all this does not help, then cautery is applied in two ways: either by means of an acute burning medicine or with iron.
And for cautery with burning medicine, you should take a piece of wool, clean it thoroughly, and attach the ends of it to both sides. And then you cut into the painful area on the temple with a slanted lancet, placing it in such a way that the vein is hidden, or rather, concealed.
And then apply pressure to it with a bandage using continuous compression, and leave it for the span of three hours; and then loosen it and remove it, and let the wound be open for two or three days, and then place over it cloth dipped in balsam until the area becomes red.
And then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
And if you wish, do this with some medicinal substances which I have written about in the two treatises on burning medicines.
Perform the cautery with an iron according to this method: heat the cautery iron, which has the following form:
It is called a "claw cautery" because the head of it resembles the shape of a clove with some curvature, and in the middle part of it, there is a small elevation.
And then place it on the site of the pain, and move your hand back and forth — so that the artery underneath does not stick — and rotate the iron little by little with speed.
And if the quantity of it that is adhered by the pressure of the chain is such as half of it, lift your hand so that the artery below is not adhered to, so that there is no flow of blood.
And then soak a piece in salt water and place it over the area, and leave it there for three days; then place a bandage soaked with ointment, and then treat with an unguent until it is healed.
And if you do, cauterize with the tip of the cautery knife as a cautery, and be careful not to cut an artery in this non-traditional area.
Capitol quart.
Of the ancient method of cauterizing migraines.
When you treat migraines using the methods we have discussed for previous treatments and in the divisions of diseases, and if the treatment does not prove effective, and sometimes due to the disease the first method with medicine or fire cauterization is not sufficient, then you must heat the scalpel-like cautery until it becomes white-hot, and mark the location of the pain with a line as long as half the width of your finger; then place your hand on it for a moment and press it so that the effect reaches the artery and goes deep into the bone.
However, it is necessary for you to be careful with the continuity of the jaw, which is important for chewing, and that the tendon is not adhered and the nerves which affect it are not spasmed.
And if it concerns the protection and caution regarding the blood flow from an artery that is to be cut, for there is fear in its cutting, especially for those who are ignorant of what they do and are not studious or experienced; thus, one should leave the operation to someone else at the beginning.
And I come with a reminder of the regimen for blood flow accidents from arteries according to its manner, in its place within this book.
And if you find that this cautery is not enough for this disease and the body of the patient is tolerable, apply a cautery at the middle of the head as we have recounted, and treat the ailment until it is healed.
And if you wish, administer the cautery that we have described in the chapter on artery rupture using a cautery with two blades, and this is a better and more appropriate cautery.
Chapter 5.
On the cautery of ear pains.
When pain in the ear is caused by cold and is treated with laxatives and other treatments that I have mentioned in the division, and if the pain persists, then apply the cautery. This cautery is called "puncta," and its form is as follows:
And then apply the puncta near the ignition, and move it around the entire ear as a wheel is rotated, or along the circumference of each part if the pain is in specific parts. Lengthen with the cautery of the razor from the earlobe slowly so that you feel the area with your hand.
And if the cautery of these points covers the entire ear, treat it accordingly, and then care for the areas that need to be healed.
Capitol .vi.
From the cauterization of tumors.
Turtura la qual es curada e am cauterizacio no es sino de las specias las quals veno per flecma, segon que havem dit en las divisios de las malautias.
Avoid cautery of the kind that can cause drying out or spasm of the nerve.
When you treat that kind of tumor with scrappings and purges and fomentations, and if your treatment does not bring comfort, then you must cauterize the patient with three cauteries: the first at the edge of the ear, the second a little below the temple, and the third at the junction of two lips.
And place your cautery on the opposite side of the diseased part, for moistening does not occur except in the area that appears healthy.
And the method of cautery is to apply the cautery directly at the uppermost tip of the ear, a little above the horn of the head, and on another temple as well, the length of which should be according to the length of the thumb, and then place your hand with the cautery until half the thickness of the skin is burnt.
And this is the form of the cautery, which is a type of instrument, the shape of which is described above. And yet it is more subtle than what you see a little bit like this; and it requires that in place of excessive thickness, there should be a bit less.
And then treat the area with what has been previously prepared until it is healed.
It seems like you've indicated a chapter or section heading, specifically "Capitul .vii.", which in English would translate to "Chapter VII." If you have more text from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to share it! How can I assist further with this content?
This title appears to be in a language similar to Medieval Latin or an early Romance language. Here is the translation into English:
When apoplexy has become chronic and you have treated it with the methods we have mentioned and your medication does not agree and the patient has no fever, then cauterize that area with four cauteries: on all the corners of their head; and with one cautery in the middle of the head as we have said; and with one cautery on the nape of the neck. And the method of the cautery is done according to what has been said above.
And it has already been cauterized around the mouth of the stomach; and it is more towards the back; then it should be treated with what you process.
Chapter VIII.
On cauterization for forgetfulness caused by flame.
It is necessary to give the patient at the beginning large seeds and pills that cleanse the kidneys.
Then shave the entire head of the patient and apply a poultice of cerate, as described in the treatise on poultices, to the nape of their neck.
And apply that several times, for that is a method of cautery. And do this according to that doctor's order which I have already mentioned.
And thus if that healing is good; and if not, then apply three cauteries to the lower part of his head, which should descend from the highest part of the head towards the part closest to the neck. And place between each cautery the width of a thick finger, and then treat the cautery as has been described.
But if you wish to increase it and the patient can tolerate that, then apply the cautery in the middle; and if you want to increase it further, now cauterize the area over both sides.
Then treat that area until it is healed; and let the cautery be olive-shaped according to the form previously given.
Chapter IX.
On the cautery of the bladder and the soothing of the entire body.
You should proceed with the soothing of the head using jars and as we have said; then shave the patient's head, and then apply a cautery in the middle of the head, and with a cautery over all sides of the head, and with a cautery on the lower part of it, and with three cauteries on the vertebrae of the neck.
And if it is necessary in the illness of excessive softening of the body and the patients tolerate it and the disease is severe, then cauterize that with four cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and finally with a cautery inside where the spinal cord is located, and raise your left hand. And then treat that which needs healing, and this should be done with an olive cautery.
It seems like you've provided a section header, "Capitul .x.", which likely means "Chapter 10" in a slightly altered medieval style. If you have text from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, please provide it, and I'll be happy to help!
Regarding the cautery for epilepsy.
The epileptic is not cauterized unless the epilepsy is due to phlegm.
And therefore, you must purify the brain of the patient at the beginning with herbs and with the other treatments that we have described in the section when the patient is strong and can tolerate the administration of medicines.
And if it is a child who cannot tolerate the medicines, then administer purgatives and masticatories that cleanse the brain, for several days beforehand, with an improvement in diet.
And then shave the head of the patient, and then cauterize it with one cautery in the middle of the head according to the previous method, and with another cautery on the occiput, and also cauterize each temple. And if the patient is strong and tolerant, then cauterize that area with the cauteries I have mentioned, having produced paralysis and softening of the body over the vertebrae of the neck and the vertebrae of the back.
And let the cautery be olive-shaped according to what is prescribed.
But if the patient is a child, then apply a gentle cautery according to this method.
Chapter XI.
On the cauterization for melancholy.
When the causes of melancholy are corrupt humors and thick phlegm, then cauterize that area with the cauteries we have mentioned, producing paralysis.
And if the cause of melancholy is an excess that turns to melancholy, and the body of the patient is moist, then give them something to drink that purifies their brain according to what has been mentioned in the previous section.
Then shave the head of the patient, and properly apply a well-made poultice on the circle [area], and then place that in the middle of the head.
And the patient should be made to sit down, and be held from all sides.
Then apply an ointment; and it is better to use the grease from old sheep. And warm that over the fire with moderate heat, which the said patient can tolerate when it is applied to them. Then place that on the top of their head in a circle, and allow it to be rubbed in so that it is thoroughly applied.
And do this with the patient once a week for a whole week, along with other good treatments until they are healed; or if you prefer, cauterize that area by making small points according to the worst part of it, but make sure your hand holds a cautery arranged in this way: this is a special kind of cautery that moistens the brain equally.
Then place that cloth soaked in grease or in goose fat.
Chapter XII.
On the cauterization of water descending into the stomach.
When it is declared that the beginning of water in the head is indicated by the signs which I have mentioned in the division, then begin and give to drink to the patient something that purifies their head, and protect it from all moistures.
And have that person sweat in a bath for several days.
And then command him to shave his head, and cauterize that spot with a cautery in the middle of the head; then cauterize that area with two cauters on both temples if it is the beginning of water flowing out of both eyes, or from one side if it is the start of water coming out of one eye.
And with a cautery, incise all the veins and arteries that are left in the chain; and let the cauters be at that length along the latitude of the temples.
And be careful of blood flows when it is being cauterized; and if you see any blood flow, stop it using some medicine that is available to you.
And come with the wisdom that is in the extraction of arteries and the cutting off of those, along with caution regarding blood flows.
And sometimes it is cauterized on the neck between two bones with two backward-facing cauteries.
Chapter XIII.
On the cauterization of old tears.
When tears of the eyes are long-standing and gradually through the veins and arteries that are in the obvious location on the head outside, and it is confirmed that this is cold superfluous phlegmatic fluid, then cauterize that with a cautery which we have mentioned at the beginning about water falling into the eyes, and with a cautery in the middle of the head and with two cauteries on both temples, and with two cauteries on the neck leaving two bones. And if you need to apply an additional treatment, then cauterize that part on the entire side of the thigh above the outer end of the eyebrow with a small cautery.
The text provided is in an archaic form of Romance language that blends elements from Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Here's the translation for the given line:
Of the cauterization of nasal odor.
When you treat that condition with what we have said in the division and your treatment does not improve it, then prepare and give to drink to the patient decoctions for three nights; then shave his head, and cauterize the affected area moderately with an olive oil cautery. And then cauterize that with a V-shaped cautery using two cauteries on both eyebrows, leaving the hair a little bit.
And be careful of the artery so that you do not burn it.
And this is the form of the V-shaped cautery.
Chapter XV.
On the cautery for softening the eyelids of wounds.
When the eyelid of the eye is softened by illness or moisture, then cauterize that eyelid with this lunar cautery; and this is its form:
And if you do, cauterize that on both eyebrows slightly with two cauteries over the entire area, and extend them towards the temples. And let the length of each cautery be according to the size of the eyebrow.
And do not press too hard with your hand using the cautery, but to the extent that one-third of the eyelid is adhered.
The line "Capitul .xvi." appears to be an indication of a chapter or section number in Roman numerals. It doesn't have direct content related to medical advice but marks the beginning of a new section or chapter.
From the cautery of the eyelid when the hairs are converted into particles inside and puncture the eye.
When the hairs inside the nose are converted into parts within that cause nasal pain, cautery is applied in two ways, either with iron or with burning medicine.
If with a hot cautery you are to burn it, command the patient beforehand that they shave their own hairs as those who are shaved do, before they are elongated and curled; and if you pinch them by their roots, then hold the skin of the area with a bandage so that it is not damaged until the hairs have grown back.
When the hairs have grown back and are curled, then place the head of the patient in your lap, and then apply something on the eyelids of the area with a tent-shaped sign, which resembles the shape of a leaf of mert (a type of plant), and the beginning of the sign should be close to the hairs.
And then place something soaked in egg white or in a paste of flour on the wound.
And then heat the cautery, which has this form to it.
And then cauterize over the figure which you have marked, little by little, in small spots, until the surface of the chain, which is as thin as a myrtle leaf, is thoroughly burned.
And the sign of health in your work is that you see the eyelid of the eye already contracted and the hairs of it raised due to the puncture of the eye.
And then raise your hand and leave it for three days, and then place something on it with bandages until the scar is healed. And then treat it with ointment until it is healed.
But if any cause returns through the hairs near their root and the eyelid is softened, then apply the cautery again over that area just as you did initially.
And if the hairs are in the eyelid area, then cauterize that area so that it is raised to its natural position and smoothed out, ensuring that the hairs do not irritate the eye.
And the cautery with burning medicine commands the patient to pull out the hairs so that they are extended and smoothed, and then make the shape of a myrtle leaf from cloth paper.
Then take soapnut and fresh bark, about an ounce or so of each, and thoroughly mix these ingredients quickly so that they do not cool down; then spread this mixture over the paper that has been made in the shape of a myrtle leaf, and place it on one eye or both; and cover the eyelid with beaten egg white, and keep the patient's head tilted towards you.
And place your finger on the medicine and press it slightly without removing it until the patient feels the sting of the medicine, for the sting is like that of fire.
And when the patient perceives the sharp sting, then remove the medicine and take it away with your finger; once the sting ceases, then remove the medicine and wash the eye with water; now consider if the eyelid has been lifted as needed, and if so, cleanse the constriction with fire or incision, for it is then well done; but if not, return to applying the medicine on the area where it has not yet taken effect and continue until your operation is smoothed out and the eye contracts properly.
And then place on the abdomen with a bandage so that the chain of adhesion is eradicated, and then treat it with an emollient or another substance so that it is healed.
And it is necessary for you to carefully guard your operation so that no part of the medicine falls into the eye, and if the eyelid near those days becomes softened and some hairs poke into the eye, then reapply your medicine on the area where the eyelid is softened, just as you did at the beginning, and then treat it with a substance so that it heals.
And this is the form of the mirtla leaf.
And know that the veins of men are diverse according to their size and smallness, and therefore according to this your treatment is made.
And do not hide the path to healing from one who is studying this art.
Chapter XVII.
On the cauterization of a fistula that is in the lacrimal duct of the eye.
When you treat a fistula as we have described in the sections on diseases and your treatment does not work, then you must cauterize it according to this method: instruct the patient to place his head on your thigh, and have another assistant hold the patient's head between your hands in such a way that the head is neither strained nor moved.
And then place a cloth infused with egg white or a poultice of lint over the eye.
And then ignite the cautery, which has the following form:
which should be hollow, like the form of a reed or a vulture's quill, at one end with which the cautery is made.
And if you want, penetrate through the other end. And if you want it to be done in this manner, as I attempt.
But however, that which is concave is better for this work.
And then press the fistula if it is open, draw out the pus, and dry that area. And if it is not open, then open it and extract the pus from it.
And then place on it the cautery which is well ignited, and hold that with your hand a little away from the nose hole at the part of the nostril, so that your hand does not tremble or the patient becomes disturbed, and then place the cautery in the graise (a term possibly referring to the mucus membrane) of the nostril and burn that area.
And if at the beginning of your cautery you penetrate into the bone, that is good; and if not, then repeat the cautery once or twice, as needed; and leave it that way for three days, and then place on that wound with butter and surround it with a drying ointment until it heals.
But if ten days have passed and it is not healed, then apply a sharp corrosive medicine to it until the bone is exposed and is scraped according to what is appropriate in its chapter.
And here is the translation line by line:
And if the fistula is healed with what we have said about cauterization and treatment, it is good; and if not, then it is necessary to administer a tube through the nose and reduce the fistula to the body of the nose according to where it will come to its proper place.
It seems like you've provided a chapter or section heading, "Capitul .xviii.", which translates to "Chapter XVIII" in English. This indicates the start of the eighteenth chapter in a text. If you have more content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, please provide it, and I'll be happy to help!
This phrase appears to be describing a medical procedure related to cauterization. Here is the translation:
When white spots appear in the fissures of the lips, especially in children's lips.
Therefore, when you treat those cracks using what we have said in the sections and if your treatment does not improve, then apply the small knife-cautery according to this form that is shown:
And let the cavity be adjusted according to the delicacy of that area.
Then place that heated instrument carefully into those cracks so that the cautery reaches the edge of the cracks.
Then treat it with ointment until it heals.
Chapter XIX.
On the cautery of a fistula in the mouth.
When in the root of the uvula or on the palate or at the roots of the teeth, an abscess forms and then breaks open, and subsequently becomes old, with pus flowing and a fistula forming, and if you treat it but it does not improve toward healing, then you must heat a cautery according to the size that fits into the fistula. Then place that heated instrument in the tract of the fistula, holding your hand so that the hot iron reaches the edge of it; this is done once or twice at the end. Then treat it with what we have mentioned for treatment until it heals.
And so if the wound is separated and heals, that is good; but if not, it is then necessary to expose the area and remove the corrupted bone as will be detailed in its chapter.
Capitol .xx.
Of cautery of the teeth and of softening of the veins.
When the veins are softened by humidity and the teeth are decayed, and you treat those with medicines but do not find relief, then place the head of the patient on your knee, and next ignite the cautery which will come close to this: in such a way that you place the tube on the tooth and insert into it the ignited cautery quickly, and hold your hand slightly so that the patient feels the heat of the fire reach the root of the tooth.
And then remove your hand, and then repeat the cautery several times as you wish.
And then the patient should rinse his mouth with salt water and hold it for an hour, and afterwards spit it out, for the decayed tooth is fixed, the softened gum is strengthened, and the corrupted humidity is dried.
Chapter XXI.
Of the cautery for toothache.
When toothache is caused by cold, or if it is frozen or inflamed, or if you do not find relief with medicinal treatment, then apply cautery in two ways: either use cow dung for the cautery, or use fire.
Cauteri am boder es que tu prenguas boder de vacas e bulhas aquel en culhe de ferr , e aprop pren coto e envolopa le sobre la extremitat de la tenta, e aprop enmergeys aquel am boder bulhit, e pausa aquele sobre la dent dolorosa festinantment entro que sia enfregidat.
And then repeat that several times until the heat from the fire reaches the root of the teeth.
And if you want, soak wool or cloth in the decoction mentioned above, and place that on the painful tooth, and place a heated iron over it until the iron reaches the depth of the cavity of the tooth.
And yet the cautery with fire is what you should pay attention to when using an iron or cauterizing agent, and if there is some roughness in the core of it and the sharpness of the fire does not reach the mouth of the patient.
And then heat the cautery to the shape it will take, and place it on the tooth and hold your hand inside until the cautery is cooled; and do this several times whether the pain persists or not, either on that day or on another day.
And it is necessary that by the application of that cautery, the patient fills their mouth with good food and holds it for an hour and then spits it out; and this is the form of the cautery.
And cauterize whichever extremity according to what is possible for you.
And this is the form of the cannula:
Chapter XXII.
On the cauterization of exstrophy.
When exstrophy is caused by phlegm and cold humors and does not respond to treatment with medicines, and you wish to treat it lightly, then ignite the cautery with a shape as follows, having two hooked ends so that smoke can escape from one end while you hold the cautery by the other end. Place that heated cautery once on the tumor, and repeat if necessary until it reaches the core of the tumor.
And if the tumor is small, then apply the cautery according to the size of the tumor. Then leave it for three days and place a cloth soaked in ointment on it until what the fire has burned is healed.
Then treat it with ointment, bandages, and cloths until it is healed.
Capitol .xxiii.
From the cauterization of hoarseness of voice and constriction of the throat.
When the moistures come over the region of the lung, and especially when this is due to coldness in composition, then it is necessary that the patient be purged at the beginning with laxative medicines, and then cauterize those places by shaving the area around the navel.
And be careful not to reach the navel with the cautery nor burn too much of his skin.
And cauterize that area with another cautery over the joint of the neck at the last vertebra. And the cautery of it should be done with a needle according to the previous method.
And then treat that with what is prepared beforehand so that it may be healed.
Chapter XXIV.
Of the cautery treatment for lung disease and cough.
When cough and lung disease are caused by infiltrating humidity, and the patient does not have fever or tuberculosis and the illness is chronic, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the collarbone at the places where the arteries and veins lie; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot between the two mounds; and let the cautery be in the shape of a claw according to the previous form.
And if you wish, let your cautery be a puncture using the cautery that is called "puncta," the form of which precedes in the puncturing for ear pain.
And make points inside the thighs at those spots; then treat that area with the method previously described until it is healed.
And let the cautery have three prongs, with which the cauterization is done in this way: you can make three cauteries according to this form.
Chapter XXV.
On the cautery treatment for tinnitus, which is an ailment of the head.
When the head of the joint is dislocated due to lubricating humidities and not fixed at the time of its return, you must place its dislocation inside so that it returns as usual, and then with a slight movement, it is dislocated again in such a way that it falls out, just as we have witnessed; therefore, you should first reduce the dislocation, and then the patient should be laid on their back or side; and then raise the chain which is inside the joint towards the upper parts using the fingers of your left hand, if the joint is dislocated inward.
And then ignite the cautery having two heads; and this is its form:
And then cauterize the chain before it penetrates into the other side; and the figure of the cautery will come to have four heads.
And sometimes it is adjusted according to this method, and that is why the cauteries are eight.
And then place salt over the cautery points, and then bring the patient to tranquility, and do not move the limb for some time until it is healed.
And if the dislocation is in the upper parts and this needs to be done, then cauterize over the muscle with a clamp cautery or with multiple pointed cauteries, for the joint is confirmed, moisture is reduced, and the patient is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On cauterization of the stomach.
When cold and various moistures come into the stomach, causing it to deviate from its natural composition and multiply harmful substances within it, if you continue with the methods of treatment without conferring improvement, then the patient must lie on their back, extend their arms and legs, and then cauterize that area with three cauteries: place one cautery below the feet, about the size of a finger, using a clamp cautery, and with two other cauteries placed below each side of the first cautery so that they form a triangular shape; ensure there is space between them to allow for proper drainage.
And if the depth of the cautery is about two-thirds of the thickness of the chain.
And let the shape of the cautery be according to this form with this addition: And if you wish, cauterize with a large cautery in the middle of the stomach according to this form; and this shall be a cautery according to the form of a circle according to this form:
And if the stomach is to be cauterized in such a way that it scares the one who undergoes this cautery: first, you place your hand on the stomach and prick according to the amount you wish with a probe, then cauterize those points with a cautery; finally, treat that area with the treatment that precedes until it is healed.
Chapter XXVII.
From the cautery of the cold spleen.
When pain occurs in the spleen due to coldness or moisture or excessive wind that throws off its usual composition through excess egress, and the patient is treated as we have said but does not improve, then the patient must be placed on their back with a cushion under their head, and three cauteries should be applied with thread according to this form and quantity below the spleen at the hypochondrium, having taken the person's lying position into account.
And let the space between each cautery be according to the thickness of a finger, and let the cauteries be according to the length of the straight body.
And do not press too much with the cautery.
And if the amount that is added equals half the weight of the chain, and it should not be tighter than that; and if the patient is standing on their feet; and if they are not standing, then let them lie down, with their legs already extended, and raise their arms.
And it is possible for you to cauterize these cauteries with a knife-shaped cautery, when you do so with subtlety and prudence in the art.
And be careful not to process too much during the cauterization, and let the essence of the entire chain adhere so that the whole body is attached and penetrates into the intestines, for the chain here is subtle; and know this.
Chapter XXVIII.
On the puncturing of an abscess in the spleen with a cautery.
When there is an excrescence or abscess in the spleen and you want to know if that abscess is in the flesh of the spleen or in its membrane, then if it is in the flesh of the spleen, the patient will show signs of heaviness and acute pain.
And if it is in the membrane of the spleen, the pain is very acute and often even fatigues the doctors treating it.
Therefore, the patient should be turned over on their side; then feel the area of the abscess with your hand; then heat the cautery which resembles a rod, the form of which has been described on the previous page. And cauterize with that type of cautery until the entire vein is constricted, until it reaches the spleen, so that pus does not come out.
And then treat that by the treatment of other swellings until it is healed.
And it is not necessary to use this form of cautery except by one whose study in the art of medicine has been prolonged, and in whom most diseases are known; yet this should sometimes be dared by those experienced, but still leave that to us who know better.
Chapter XXIX.
On the cautery of pleurisy.
The ancients said that applying cautery to the roots of Artemisia for pleurisy was effective according to this method: you should take a root of dry mugwort as long as you can find, and it should be about the thickness of a finger.
And then submerge that root in oil and dry it over fire. Then apply cautery with a single cautery at the location between the continuation of the clavicle and the neck; and with two small cauteries, place them slightly downward toward the area below the beard; and with two cauteries on the area declining between the fifth rib and the spine, inclining slightly towards the back regions; and with another cautery in the middle of the foot; and one over the stomach; and with three cauteries on the back areas; and with one cautery at the location between the two shoulders; and with two cauteries on both sides of the foot, placing the cautery that is between the two shoulders.
And you do not need to hold your hand with the cautery, but rather on the surface of the wound while working.
And the ancients have already said that among those men who use an iron cautery resembling a ray and ignite it, and place it in the location between the ribs, until they reach that swelling or pus-filled area, just as we have mentioned in the case of pleural empyema.
And in this perforation with cautery there is no fear, for one dies so quickly when it happens at the location of the fistula which cannot be healed.
The given text appears to be in an archaic or constructed language that borrows heavily from Romance languages. However, "Capitol .xxx." does not require translation as it seems to indicate a chapter or section number (Chapter 30). Here is the interpretation:
Of the cauterization of the breast.
When you treat the disease of the breast with what we have said about the cure in the division and if you do not achieve a successful treatment, then cauterize it according to three methods, all of which are correct. One of these is to make three or four linear cauteries along the length of the breast following the shape of the spleen cauteries, whose figure has preceded [been described earlier].
And there should be the thickness of one finger or a little more between each cauterization, and the method of the cautery should be the method we have described for the spleen cautery as well.
And do not move your hand during the cautery; and the patient should be lying on their back.
And another method of cauterization is to apply the cautery with two firm movements, the reason for which we have described in the chapter on muscle dislocation, and lift the chain that is along the length of the breast according to the lying position of the patient on their left side.
And let your elevation be such that you raise the chain according to the length of the body, so that cauteries may be made according to the width of the body.
Then insert the two heated instruments into that area where you will penetrate with the chain from the other side.
Then remove the cautery; thus, four cauteries have been made.
And if you wish, cauterize using a cautery with three points.
Then you treat the cautery after it has stopped bleeding for several days, because it is more conducive to healing than other preceding causes.
Chapter XXXI.
On the cauterization of dropsy.
Cauterization is not used for dropsy except in certain specific cases properly.
When you treat the dropsy using the methods of cure that we have mentioned in the division and if your treatment does not work, then it is necessary to cauterize with four cauteries around the navel, one cautery on the stomach, another cautery on the liver, another cautery on the spleen, two cauteries between the vertebrae of the back, one cautery in the middle of the foot, and another cautery on the stomach. And the quantity of the depth of the cautery should be proportional to the sharpness of the chain.
And then leave the cautery open so that it burns for a long time.
And do not remove the patient from treatment near the cautery with which it is covered, so that two intentions are added to it, and it will be quickly aided in its healing.
The shape of the cautery with which the belly is cauterized is claw-like according to its form as previously described, and the one with which the back is cauterized is olive-shaped according to its previously described form.
Chapter XXXII.
On the cautery of feet and thighs.
When the feet are swollen with dropsy and filled with serous fluid, it is necessary to cauterize the feet on the back of the foot between the auricular and the ankle bone, lift your hand with the cautery and do not twist it; then raise your hand, but do not completely return it, for the serous fluid will drain out.
The cautery is in the following form: And then apply two cauters on both thighs, and on each thigh make a cautery with the pointed end of a knife-shaped cautery. And let the cautery be according to the length of the thigh: place one at the top and another at the middle of the thigh; and on each thigh two cauteries.
And leave the wound open for a long time so that some water (fluid) may ooze out of it.
Then treat the patient according to those causes which we have mentioned.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the cautery of the abdominal area.
When the abdomen is weakened by cold and humidity, which debilitate its functions, such as digestive and retentive powers located in the stomach and intestines, it should be treated with appropriate methods of treatment without delay. Sometimes patients are subjected to cautery to enhance these functions. In this case, apply a large cautery over their stomach according to the previous method used for stomach cautery, using a circular cautery and four cauteries around the navel in a subtle manner, with a delicate nail-shaped cautery; or apply a cautery on the alvine region (likely referring to the rectal area) with a large cautery, or use two cauteries.
And if you remove the excessive humidity and the patient tolerates it, then cauterize that on the kidneys and on the intestines, and strongly adjust by placing two cauteries over the stomach and near the inguinal area, for this is a perfect cure that brings quick relief which cannot be wrong.
It seems like you've provided a section heading, "Capitul .xxxiv.", which translates to "Chapter .xxxiv." or "Chapter Thirty-Four" in English. This indicates the start of Chapter Thirty-Four within a text or document but doesn't contain any content for translation. If you have more content from this chapter that needs translating, please provide it and I'll be happy to help!
This line translates to:
When it is in the nature of old hemorrhoids or one caused by thick humors or corrupted moisture, and they are treated with what we have said about division but you do not agree with that treatment, then cauterize with three cauteries on the pus near the lower vertebrae and small triangular areas, and with a cautery above the navel using two fingers.
And if you suspect that the stomach of the patient is chilled and their food is not digested, and their face sometimes becomes swollen, then cauterize over the stomach with a large cautery as previously mentioned; and with one cautery on the spleen, and another cautery on the liver using a nail-shaped cautery, and leave the cautery open for some time, and then treat internally to heal them.
Chapter XXXV.
On the cauterization of the armpit near the amputation site.
When you amputate the armpit, then ignite the cautery that resembles a ray. Then insert the ignited cautery into the amputated armpit, and move your hand until the cautery reaches the opening of the vein from which the blood comes.
And do this once or twice, because if they are too numerous, then cauterize each of them as we have recounted, and then treat those with whatever ointments you apply to them until they are healed.
And if you cauterize with a large cautery on any area, it is more detrimental to healing.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the cauterization of fistulas that are naturally detrimental in those areas.
When nature does not obey the treatment we have recommended in its proper place, and the patient is frightened by it, he should be treated with a cautery.
Therefore, when there is an old fistula in a naturally detrimental area that discharges pus and corrupt humors, what is most appropriate is to probe it with a fine探针, and then determine the depth of it with the previously mentioned probe.
And heat the cautery which resembles a ray. Then place the heated cautery into this fistula, according to the extent to which you probe with the probe.
And apply the cautery repeatedly until those corrupted bodies are burned sufficiently, once or twice or three times, according to your necessity.
And beware of burning the nerves and veins; or if the fistula leads to the body of the bladder or the intestine, then be careful of all those areas; and do not perform this unless the fistula is in a fleshy area and you think it is not penetrating.
Then treat the area until it heals.
And if the area is sealed and the materials are separated from it, and remain that way for a long time, then you know that it is fully cured.
And if the materials are not removed from it, then you know that it is penetrating or into the area of the corrupted bone, or this comes from those causes which will lead to a recurrence in its place.
Capitol .xxxvii.
Of the cautery of hemorrhoids.
When hemorrhoids cause pain due to cold or excessive wind (swelling), and for this reason, the patient's bowel movement is hindered, then it is necessary to cauterize those areas on the hemorrhoids with a pointed cautery applied to each hemorrhoid, specifically as described.
And we strongly cauterize them with a slight separation, so that three linear cauteries will result, and thus they will be more effective in healing.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the cautery of the bladder.
When you encounter weakness and softening of the bladder due to cold and moisture such that the patient cannot retain urine, then cauterize in the area slightly above the bladder where the pubic hair begins. Cauterize with one cautery on the right side and another on the left side of it.
And the length of each cautery should be according to the number of the patient's fingers; and cauterize that area with a cautery on the lower part of the back, or with two cauteries if necessary.
And let the cautery be applied with a clamp as it is processed.
Capitol .xxxix.
Of the cauterization of the womb.
When cold and humidity come into the womb, and because of this conception is prohibited, and their menstruation is corrupted, and the provocation of them is delayed, and pain occurs at the descent of them, then it must be that the area be cauterized with three cauteries around the navel, as we have said in the cautery of the bladder; and with a cautery over the pubic region below, or with two cauteries, and let the cautery be cloven.
It appears you've provided a section marker, specifically "Capitul .xl.", which seems to indicate Chapter 40 (since xl is the Roman numeral for 40). If you have text from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, please provide it, and I'll be happy to help!
This line is in a language similar to medieval Latin or Old French and translates to:
When moist phlegmatic humors are poured into the area of the ankle, and they become causes of swelling in their location, and a sign of it is that one thigh appears extended compared to the other when they are compared together. And the location of the dislocation is found where there is swelling.
Then it is necessary to cauterize the patient on the area of their ankle with a circular cautery, since you will have marked around the area as it is turned back, and in such a way that the area falls in the center of the circle.
And it is the cautery with which one precedes the form of cauterization of the stomach.
And if this cautery is not available to you, then cauterize that area with three large olive oil cauters.
And let the cautery be done according to the severity of the entire condition; then care for it until it is healed.
Chapter XLII.
From the cautery of the sciatic vein.
When pain comes in the upper part, and it is caused by cold and humidity, the patient is treated as we have said and do not doubt this, which is old-fashioned now, at present you should release the patient from thick humors with foul pills or artificial pills or similar ones; then cauterize that area.
And the method of cautery in this case is according to two methods: either cautery with burning medicines, or cautery with fire.
And it follows two known methods, one of which is to cauterize that area on the broad part with three triangular cauteries in this form; and make with those a good depth. And the space between each cautery should be the quantity of the thickness of a finger, and the cautery can be olive-shaped or grain-shaped.
And sometimes the cautery should be placed on the exact spot at the head of the ankle, making four cauteries.
And if you want, cauterize with a circle, which precedes the form in the cautery of the dislocation of the ankle, such that the circle contains and burns the entire length of the tendon.
And this is the method of cautery for gout when the pain is attached to the ankle and does not extend into the thigh.
And if it extends into the thigh, then cauterize that area with two cauteries on the thigh at the spot where you ask the patient where the pain is; and with one cautery on the calf, about four fingers away from the outer part.
And if the cautery is knife-like, and the depth of the cautery should be according to the degree of protrusion of the chain.
And if the patient complains that the pain is spreading around the area near the toes of the foot, then cauterize that area where they complain with a cautery using three points or four or more as needed.
And if the patient complains that the pain extends from the ankle to the thigh, then cauterize that area with a knife-shaped cautery.
And be careful in any cauterization that you do not use the cautery so much as to burn nerves or major arteries, and by doing so, cause harm or contraction to the patient.
And I have seen some who cautery near the ankle and overdo the cauterization, causing the hot ember to swell inside until the tumor reaches the foot, and the heat perforates and corrupts the entire foot. Then a strong discharge from the stomach occurs, and consequently, death may follow.
And if the pain is in two separate areas, cauterize each one according to this method.
And the wise ones have said about certain things in the cauterization with a circular cautery, of which this is the method: make a circle of iron where the circumference should be half a palm; and let its hole be according to the thickness of a date bone or somewhat less.
And within that circle is another third; and the space between them is equal to the size of a nut of the foot; and those circles are opened from two sides; and the length of those rods is one or two nuts, and make on those edges of iron decently fitted into the circles; and this is its form:
And it should be heated in the fire until it becomes red and emits sparks, and then it should be placed on the affected part of the ankle, with the patient lying on their side. And then cauterize that area with three circular cauteries at once.
And then leave it for three days; then apply a plaster to it, keeping the wound open for several days; and then treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Dixit Albucasis: O, sons, of this kind of cautery we have used little due to the fear of its appearance, and because few have found it worthy of attention.
And among the good cauters for him who has suffered, and find with that the spot on him.
And using a cautery with adhering medicines, you should make two circles having an armula perforated in which they place the hinge of the iron door; let the length of the walls be according to their nature two nuts or keys whichever.
And if the space which is between each of the width of a finger; and they are opened below and above, and they contain themselves in this way according to this form:
And then place your hand on the area of the ankle while the patient lies on their side, and press your hand on the area of the ankle; and then take warm water and pour it between two circles, and the quality of that should be near the fire little by little, and keep that for about an hour, and let the patient endure the burning and adjustment — for that finds burning as if from fire — until the burning ceases.
And then lift your hand with the instrument and clean the warm water off the entire ankle with cool water.
And then let it rest for three days and place your hand on the area until the blackness from the burning is removed, and let it rest for several more days, and pus will run out of it; this is the final stage of healing.
And then treat that area with ointments until it is healed.
And if the pain is spread in the thigh or the abdomen, apply the treatment in a way that involves water as it is done for the ankle similarly.
And this is the method of hot water, and I have already written about it in the treatise on the refinement of medicines. Take equal parts of alkali and unextinguished lime (quicklime), mix them together, and place the mixture in a new container, one part of which should have a small hole to allow for the passage of vapor according to the amount that enters it.
And place the bottom of the container on another perforated container, then pour soft water over the alkali and quicklime until it covers them by a finger's depth. Then compress them with your hand with good pressure, and allow the hot water that drips from them to fall into the part below in the perforated container.
And then concentrate all that water, and pour it over more quicklime and new alkali, because this will result in a strongly acidic solution, which is used in many medical procedures and for the cauterization of other body parts, as this operation involves fire.
And thus, with some medicines with which a broad cauterization is performed, such as tezizic and honey anacrat mixed with quicklime and soap, which are combined together.
And Gaulus recounts an operation and cure used by one of the ancients for treating pain in the ankle and sciatic vein, and he magnificently praises it as being very effective, saying that no other cure is necessary, and claims that one who is treated this way is healed permanently just as he describes, having immersed himself in a bath and thus freed himself from it.
And it is that green fennel should be taken, and if green fennel is not found, fresh figs should be taken; they should be crushed with a little fat and placed on the ankle where there is pain, or on the thigh, or on the abdomen, and should be bandaged.
And it should be left for a period of three hours or for the amount of time that the patient feels relief from the application.
Then put that in water and when the body is heated, place it in the sun, for the pain will cease and be healed.
And know that it is not necessary for anyone to use cautery with these medicines except near the evacuation of the body.
But Escorides says that when the vein is cauterized with goat's milk, it greatly benefits; and the cautery should be applied in this second manner: take wool and soak it in old oil, and place it between the toes of the foot and the sore.
Then take dried goat's milk and char it over fire until it becomes charcoal; then place it on the wool and spread it out. And then repeat this, and do not stop doing this until the sensation of the bite reaches up to the ankle and the pain subsides.
And this method of cautery is called cow cautery.
Chapter XLII.
From the text provided and its structure, it seems like an old medical text that combines elements from various Romance languages. Based on this pattern, let's attempt a translation for the given line:
During certain times, pain in the back is caused by various reasons, such as from falls or blows or excessive evacuation, and due to causes similar to these, by the infusion of cold and moist matter.
And cautery is only used in this specific condition which is caused by the effusion of cold matter.
Therefore, it is necessary to evacuate the patient with pills that are fitted and similar to them, which should be applied on the back where the pain is located in three lines according to its width, and then mark each line with ten points or more for cauterization, depending on the tolerance of the patient and their strength.
And the cauterization should be done with a pointed cautery.
And if you wish, cauterize with three or four cauteries using a medial claw-shaped cautery in the following manner:
Chapter XLIII.
On the use of cauterization at the beginning of jaundice.
Spotting or slight bleeding often occurs with this ailment in small children; and a sign of the onset of it in children is that it affects their structure, causing elevation and movement in the eyes.
And you will find that the lower vertebrae of the back and spine begin to protrude above the other vertebrae.
And therefore when you see this and want to prevent it, then cauterize that area with a circular cautery according to this form: And take the cautery over all parts of the vertebra equally.
And if you want, cauterize around the vertebra with a pointed cautery, two or three lines. And let the points be close to each other.
Then treat the area in between so that it heals according to what we have said.
But beware that cautery should not be applied to swelling caused by nerve spasms.
Chapter XLIV.
On the Cauterization of Gout and Joint Pain.
When joint pain is caused by cold humors that penetrate each part of the body, and when pain occurs in the feet, doctors customarily call this gout properly.
And thus when gout caused by cold is treated with a method of cure and the pains are not alleviated, then they should be treated with cautery.
And it is that you cauterize that area near the evacuation in the circle of the foot joint with multiple cauteries.
And it is an olive-shaped cautery, of which this is the form:
And if it is necessary to make points on the surface of the foot, then do so with a pointed cautery. And if the pain rises into the fingers or other joints, and this often happens, then apply cautery to each finger with three or four cauteries from all sides using this olive-shaped cautery.
And if you need more cauteries than these, then apply the cautery without pressing your hand too hard on it first, just around the size of a coin.
And if the pain spreads into the finger and hand, then apply the cautery that we have described in its chapter.
And if the pain is only in the muscles and it is called suagra (likely a medieval term for a specific condition), then puncture around the armpits as they revolve, puncturing along those two lines.
And if the pain remains in the toes, then puncture around the armpits on each toe and on the palm of the hand.
And if the pains approach after some days to the joints or the muscles, then cauterize those areas all around with the help of instruments.
And do not deprive the patient of good regimen and reception of medicines, for if a good regimen is followed and the pus is evacuated with this cautery, they will be healed, may God help.
Chapter XLV.
On the cautery of fractures.
When there is a rupture in the thighs and the intestines protrude before the hernia at the groin, and this often begins gradually, then you must have the patient leave their meal on that day and use laxative causes so that the flux descends from their belly.
Then follow the patient with your hands on their back, and command them to keep their body straight until the hernia or the intestine is expelled or appears.
Then, with your hands, return it by pressing the rupture over the bone of the thigh, using a tool whose end resembles half of a circle, applied to the upper parts of the body.
And then heat the cautery of which this is the form:
Until it becomes red hot and gives off sparks. Then return the intestine or hernia to its cavity, and then place your hand over the area so that the intestine does not come out.
You have already opened the space between the patient's thighs and placed a cushion underneath. Another servant should be on the patient’s chest, and another on their feet, holding their hands.
Then place the cautery on that mark with your hand holding the cautery straight, and do so until you reach the bone of the heel in the middle of the wound; and repeat with that again if you have not succeeded in reaching the bone in the first attempt.
And carefully observe the condition of the intestine during your cautery, so that you do not burn it, causing death or another great harm to the patient.
And know that when you do not reach the bone with the cautery, your operation is not successful.
And it is necessary that the cautery for children be subtle according to their size and measure.
Then treat the area of the cautery for three days with ointment until the scar from the fire is healed.
Then treat that area with other ointments until it is healed.
And the patient should lie on their back for forty days until the area and the wound are fully healed.
And it is necessary to control the patient's diet according to the length of their treatment, so that their stomach diminishes, and to prevent the intestine from coming out due to the effort of healing.
Then, when it is time to remove [the treatment] after forty days, administer a properly made medicine, and let the patient take it for another forty days.
And let them be reduced in labor and the consumption of food and drink, and loud voices, for when they follow this regimen of complete healing, they will be healed.
And I will tell the treatment for ruptures in other parts of the abdomen, and at the beginning, if they do not want to heal, then cauterize the rupture with a round cautery according to its size, and let what is protruding from the wound be about a third of it; then treat that area as we have said, and do not adjust.
And some of the first [doctors] have already said that a rupture should be cauterized with a triangular cautery according to this form, since it is marked with a line [indicating where to apply the cautery].
And it is placed with a straight line that you draw across the widest part of the side above the rupture, and another line below; then place your hand with a claw cautery, but the first cautery should be lighter and better.
Chapter XLVI.
On the cauterization of torsion.
When pain occurs in the limbs due to a fall or impact and that pain persists for a long time without improvement through medical treatment, then it is necessary to cauterize with a pointed cautery.
And let the cautery be applied to each limb according to its size and smallness, and strength and weakness, and the location of the twist and pain in it.
So if it is healed by the first cautery, that is good; and if not, then apply the cautery to it again; for it is customary with those pains to puncture the limb near the area affected, because you must achieve this with a cautery before the patient is healed.
Chapter XLVII.
On the cautery treatment of leprosy.
Some lepers see great benefit from being treated with cautery, especially if the type of leprosy is caused by the putrefaction of blood and melancholy.
And when you want to cauterize the patient, consider if the leprosy is widespread and can be cured with what we have said in the division and does not remain, and you fear that the corruption will encompass the whole body and all the composition of it, then cauterize on the head with five cauteries: one in the middle of the head, and the second slightly below it, towards the forehead at the end of the hair; two on both temples; and one behind, on the neck or nape.
And place your hand with the cautery a little inside so that it presses on the bone slightly, and from there dislodge the scales, so that the expiration of thick vapors may be alleviated for them; and cauterize over the shoulder as necessary.
And if the leprosy has already spread over the patient and appears manifestly, then you must cauterize those areas with the cauteries we have mentioned above; and with a cautery on the tip of the nose, and with two cauteries on both cheeks, and with two cauteries on two vertebrae of the neck, and with six cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, and with one large one on the vertebrae near the hip, and one on the hip itself, and with two on the knees, and one on each knee, and with two on the elbows, and one on each elbow joint, and with two on the shoulders, and with two on the muscles, and with two on the tendons of his foot; and cauterize those areas over all the joints of his fingers and toes, and on each heel of his feet, and on the nails of his hands.
And be careful of the nerves that are on the heel so as not to burn those.
And sometimes it is cauterized with a cautery on the bone of the hip and with another on the mouth of the stomach, and another on the spleen.
And know that the more you adjust the cauteries, the more beneficial and appropriate it is; and know that the patient does not feel pain in the cautery, unlike they do with others, because their body is already numb.
And it is necessary that the cauteries be large or few according to the limbs and joints, depending on the specifications of the tools.
Then treat the cautery with crushed ear flour mixed with honey and with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter XLVIII.
On the cauterization for stupor.
When any limb is numb or paralyzed and is treated with medicines, oils, and plasters, but is not healed, then you should cauterize that numbed limb with cauteries according to the size of the limb or its smallness.
And let your cautery enter slightly into the opening of the wound. And then treat that with an ointment so that it may be healed.
And sometimes a cautery is applied to certain areas that affect the hands and feet, and the vertebrae of the back, to clear the excretions of the nerves which cause that member to be affected, and the area is cleaned.
But do not presume on this unless one is knowledgeable in the anatomy of the limbs and the distribution of the nerves that move throughout the body.
Chapter XLIX.
On the cautery of ulcers that are malignant.
When an ulcer is old and does not respond to any of the ointments of medicine, then you should cauterize it using a cautery for a short period according to the severity of the infection, so that the whiteness and color of it are cleaned, and its color changes.
And then treat that with flour of ashes and lentils mixed with rose oil and leaves of arnica, and with the blood of a dove or the blood of a swan, each in equal parts and all well mixed, and then apply it to a cloth and place it on the area until it is healed.
The line "Capitul .l." seems to indicate the start of a new chapter or section in the text, possibly numbered as ".l.", which might correspond to "Chapter 1" or simply mark the beginning of a new part. Here is how it can be translated:
Of the cautery of hernia.
When cancer begins and you want to remove it, then cauterize it with a circular cautery around it as it appears.
And the wise say that it should be cauterized with the latter cautery in the middle of the area; but I have not seen this, for I fear it may ulcerate, and I have indeed seen this happen several times.
And it is better that it be cauterized around it in a circle as we have said, or with multiple cauteries.
Chapter II.
On the cauterization of hernias.
When some hernia is delayed in maturation, and this is due to an excess that causes it, or due to the condition of the patient, who is old and weakened, with little blood, or due to time, and you want to hasten the maturation of the hernia; then cauterize around it with small pointed cauteries; and afterwards leave it so that it will hasten in maturing.
If you wish to perform the perforation with a cautery, then heat the cautery which has this form: and place it in the most suitable location within so that the cautery penetrates.
And if the cautery in that most suitable location is left there, so that the arm's body be relieved; and then care for it until it is healed.
Chapter II.
On the cautery of corrosives.
Corrosive is a moving corruption in the limb, which corrodes it as fire consumes dry wood.
Therefore, if you find the corrosive in a place that can withstand cautery with fire, then heat several small and large clavicle-shaped cauters suitable for the location where the corrosion is.
And then cauterize it thoroughly until you eradicate all the corrosion and leave no cause of it remaining.
And then leave it for three days, and place over the cauterized areas a dressing made with oil mixed until all the scabs are removed and all the corruption is eradicated.
And then treat it with flesh-generating ointments.
And if within three days the flesh does not grow healthy and without corruption, that is good; but if not, then apply the cautery again to those areas that are raw and corrupted.
And sometimes it is treated with sharp medicine, for that is used in place of cautery. However, cautery with fire is a more reliable method.
And I have already described the treatment with sharp medicine in the section, so use that when you find it necessary.
Chapter LIII.
On the cautery of claws and other similar parts.
Often observed are conditions affecting the parts of the foot that are called claws, which are caused by a severe swelling that turns the foot. Cauterization in these cases is done in two ways: with fire cautery and with hot water cautery.
And here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And then place that ignited cautery on the joint, and then rotate your hand with the cautery around the joint until the cautery reaches the depth of the joint. And leave that for three days until it begins to sweat out [the excess]. And then apply a plaster made with crushed wild mallows and salt to that area, and leave the plaster on it for one night, because this will root out its origins.
And then treat the area with an ointment made from generative flesh until it is healed.
And if it does not convert, and many times you encounter this on the surface of the body, particularly in the hands and feet, then you must administer these cauteries with water. Take a quill or a tube made of iron or a feather shaft, and place that over the claw; then pour a small quantity of hot water into the tube, and hold your hand; rotate it with the compression of your hand all around, pressing the edge of the tube against the nail bed; the hot water will find its way to the root of the nail. Let the patient endure the sting of the hot water for an hour, and then remove it, as the claw along with its roots will be eradicated.
And in this way, with these, one approaches the other until all of them are reached throughout the entire body.
And then treat those abscesses where the roots of the claws (nails) are removed using these ointments which cause the flesh to regenerate.
Capitol .liii.
Of cautery for trembling.
When there is a tremor in someone due to cold in the nerves or from a cold fever, or for another similar reason, then you must cauterize that with four or five cauteries on the vertebrae of the back, placing one cautery between each vertebra; and also apply a cautery to their feet, and over their stomach using an olive-shaped cautery.
And the tremor of the patient is calmed and hastens the healing of the cold illness.
Chapter 5.
On the cauterization of various accidents to the body.
When there are swellings and pustules on the body, which are formed from thick corrupted matter; at the beginning when they appear, it is necessary to cauterize over each head of the fistula with a fine cautery using myrtle sticks, the end of which is extended with fire; or with long ash-tree splinters; or with a lens-shaped cautery.
And sometimes the cautery is also applied at the beginning of its expulsion in this manner; and they are not considered harmful, and the excess is disrupted by doing this, thereby healing them.
However, it must be done near evacuation with bloodletting.
Capitol lvi.
Of cautery for accidental blood flow due to artery cut.
Watch out for blood flow from an artery that has been cut, which can cause the wound to bleed externally, or lead to the beginning of abscesses or the need for cautery on the limb, and similar situations, making it difficult to remain there.
Therefore, when this happens to someone, you should press with your hand on the opening of the artery, and place your finger over it, squeezing tightly within until the flow of blood stops, ensuring that it does not continue.
Then place the small and large olive-shaped cautery irons in the fire several times, and blow on them until they are thoroughly heated.
Then take one of those, either small or large, depending on the location and the wound where the artery is ruptured, and apply it over the vein quickly after you have removed your finger, holding the cautery until the blood is congealed and restrained.
And if blood is expelled from the opening of the artery when you remove your finger and withdraw the cautery, then take another preheated cautery from those prepared in the fire, and continue applying them one after another until the bleeding is stopped.
And be careful not to burn the nerves that are here, and that no other mischief comes upon the patient.
And know that when blood flows from an artery, it is not possible to stop the bleeding in those places except by one of four methods: with a cautery as we have mentioned, or by extraction when it cannot be extracted, because when it is extracted, the ends of the arteries are burned and the blood flow is restricted; or it can be tied with thread or with a bandage tightly; or substances that have the power to constrict the blood should be applied, and they should be pressed with a poultice appropriately.
And he who administers appropriate constriction with bandages and tight binding with cloths or through the position of cauterizing and similar methods should not apply it too quickly.
And if this happens to someone and the doctor is not present nor medicine available, then apply pressure with your index finger on the opening of that vein as we have said, and understand that you must constrict it tightly so that the blood stops from the main part of the wound, and do not remove your finger from the artery; and above the artery, sprinkle it with cold water that is very cold until the blood coagulates and thickens; and finally, consider whether cauterization or medication is necessary.
About incision and puncture and cupping and bloodletting and plasters and their equivalents.
We have already said in the first chapter about all diseases in which cautery with fire is appropriate and with burning medicine, and the occasions and causes of it, and the instruments necessary for them along with the forms of the cauterizations; and I have ordered the chapters from the highest part of the head down to the feet.
And I will proceed in this chapter in the same manner, so that the reader may be relieved regarding what they have sought to know about this.
And before I begin this, son, it is important that you understand that in this chapter, there is a continuation of what was in the first chapter on cautery.
And for this reason, great caution is needed, because in the operations described in this chapter, many times bloodletting occurs, which involves the vein from which life depends, or incision on an abscess, or opening for extraction or purification of a wound, or removal of an arrowhead, or the initiation of stone expulsion and their equivalents. And accompanying all of these is fear and trembling, and in the majority of cases, death.
And I warn you that this should not happen to you in which there is danger, for sometimes your ways as a person can turn into ways of illnesses. And of them, some will go with their illness and death is near due to it, and this because of the intensity of what they find in their illness, and due to the length of their illness, and with the illness comes fear which signifies death.
And of those is the one who gives you his belongings and says, you hoping with that person for health, and their illness is perilous.
And therefore you should not consent to what comes to you in this manner; and your caution should be greater than covetousness and greed; and do not presume any cause over this unless it is based on certain knowledge that confirms what you owe, and for which praiseworthy success follows.
And used in the cure of all your illnesses, for prognosis and indication to whom health is restored, because therein lies your help towards acquiring fame and memory, praise and glory.
O, sons, may God inspire you with His understanding and not remove direction and protection from you, for this is in His hands.
And I have ordered this chapter distinguishing by sections according to what was preceded in the chapter on cautery, of the treatment from head to foot, so that it may be alleviated for you what you ask about this and of which you have need.
First chapter.
On the treatment of water that is contained in the head of children.
Know that this illness often occurs due to childbirth and when the wet nurse tightly binds the child's head with cloth.
And sometimes it occurs due to hidden causes that are not known.
But I have only seen this illness in children; and in all those cases, death was the outcome, and thus it seems to me that it is a fatal condition in them.
And I have seen a child whose head was filled with water, and the head of the child was always so enlarged that he could not support himself due to the size of his head, and the humidity increased until it caused death.
And this moisture either accumulates between the tendon and the bone, or settles beneath the bone on the spinal column.
For the operation in that case where moisture is between the tendon and the bone and the abscess is small, then you must cut into the middle of the head with a slit horizontally, and let the length of the slit be about two fingers' width so that the moisture can flow out, and this is the form of the spatula:
And thus, if the humidity is more increased and the abscess is larger, then there are two incisions according to this method:
And if the humidity is near the bone, a sign of it is that you see the sutures of the skull open from all sides and water is squeezed when you press that area with your hand on the inner parts and this was not previously noticed by you. You must make three incisions in the middle of the head according to this method:
and then extract all the humidity through the incision; and then secure the incisions with bandages and poultices; and then wash it over with wine and oil within five days, and then remove the dressing and treat the wound with lint and ointments, and bind the head equally; and feed the patient with dry food of little moisture until the member is strengthened and healed.
And there is another method of incision, where you consider the size of the abscess and the collection of water, for sometimes it is more in the occipital region, or in the front part, or on the right side, or on the left side; and thus, pay attention with the incision to where the abscess and the accumulation of water appear, and do this according to what is best possible for you.
And observe that you do not cut into the artery, lest blood flow and the patient dies from that blood loss with evacuation of humidity.
Second chapter.
When catarrhs or rheums occur in the eyes or feet, and this has been ongoing for a long time, and you do not see improvement with medicinal treatments, then the final remedy in this case is to begin treatment from those two arteries.
And thus it is necessary that when you want to incise those areas where the patient has their head shaved, and then rub the area with a coarse cloth so that the arteries become visible, and then tightly bind the neck of the patient with some cloth; and then find where the vein pulses; and the locations of each one over the spots which are near the ears are pressed, and they remain hidden in some men.
And then mark over the artery with a thread, and then incise each one with a sharp spathum from each side penetrating into the bone, and do this along the length of the head.
And if you wish, insert the spathum under the artery and break it at the points of incision on both sides.
And the length of the incision should be about two fingers joined, for when any vein is cut, blood is expelled with a pulsating outflow, which bursts out frequently.
And if the artery does not appear at the incision site, then you must measure from the earlobe the distance of three fingers, and then mark it with a needle, and proceed to enter into the bone.
And what is necessary to let flow from the blood is an ounce of wine, and it strongly depends on whether more or less flows from him, and all of this is according to the amount that appears due to the strength of the patient and the fullness of his artery.
And then examine the wound, and if any pus-causing matter remains on the bone, remove it to prevent an abscess from forming.
And then strengthen the wound with poultices and linen bandages, and continue to treat it with ointments until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the extraction of arteries that are in the temples.
When an individual suffers from chronic migraines or sharp headaches due to moisture and qualities in the sinuses of the temples, or when these are severe and similar to those conditions, and treatment with medical methods does not provide relief, then we resort to extracting the arteries in the temples or cauterizing them as we have shown.
And the method of the operation and extraction is that the patient shaves the hairs which are on the temples; and understand the artery that appears in the temple where it is shown to you by its pulse, and it is hidden except in few men due to the strength of cold.
And if it is obscured from you, then the patient's neck should be tightened with some cloth; and then rub the area with a rough cloth or evaporate the area with hot water until the artery appears clearly to you. And now take the spatula which has the following form: And then you carefully scrape the vein until you reach the artery; and then insert and extract it piece by piece until you remove it from the vein and expose it from the tunics that cover it, on all sides.
But if the artery is delicate, then wrap it with the tip of a needle, and then divide it in part according to how much the extremities are stretched or contracted, and there will be no flow of blood, because if they are not divided, the blood will not flow properly.
And then evacuate one to three uncii (ounces) of blood.
And if the artery is large, then you must tie it in two places with strong double-threaded silk or cords tightly, and do not allow putrefaction before the wound heals and the blood flow stops.
And then you cut into the excess that is between two ligaments; and do this at that time or another suitable moment.
And if you wish, cauterize that area with a cautery between the bone using a knife-shaped cautery before the ends of it are incised, and let it remain in place for the same duration of work.
And it is better to perform the work when the patient does not have fever or a heated constitution; for cautery is one of those causes that aids in expelling harmful moisture, and thus it is more beneficial in treatment.
And after the extraction of the arteries, you should fill the area with old catgut, and place them over the wound properly dressed, then treat it with dry medicines that promote flesh growth until it is healed.
And if while you are working another outbreak of blood flows from the artery, then you must act to stop that bleeding, either by using a cautery or by filling the area with catgut, and hold your hand until the bleeding is stopped. And if none of those causes are present to you, then place your finger on the spot where the blood has congealed, and pour water of intense coldness over the area until the sharp pain subsides, and be firm according to what is needed.
And what is lighter in the extraction of an artery is that you cauterize the vein with this cautery having two blades, since you have marked the two spots with a probe, and then place them, ignite them, until they reach the bone and divide the vein into two places, so that what is between the ends of it is elongated, for they are not entirely consolidated by this cautery.
And this is the form of the cautery:
And the sharpness of the two blades should be similar. However, if the sharpness of the two blades is less, it is better, for if they are as sharp as two blades close to each other, they will not cut the flesh quickly.
Therefore, since there is some thickness in them, the heat of the fire is retained in them, and the flesh is cut easily.
And this work is better than all other works and lighter.
And let the space which is between two ribs be the quantity of the thickness of a finger.
Chapter four.
On the treatment of acute and acidic tears in the eyes.
When those tears are acidic, and the source of these veins which are on top of the head is external, and you do not find any cause for medical treatment in this regard, often the face of the patient turns red, and they feel a crawling sensation on their forehead as if it were an ant's crawl, and their eyes become strained to such an extent that even the hairs around them are noticeable, and the eyelids are inflamed by the sharpness of the tears. Ancient bitter remedies were used in treating this condition, and I will not enumerate those treatments here.
And you command the patient to remove the hairs that are on their forehead, and then make three incisions in the forehead equally spaced according to the length of the forehead. And if the length of the incision is about two fingers: the first incision should be equally distant from the length of the nose at the middle of the forehead, the second according to the length a little beyond the movement of the tear ducts which are in the lacrimal area, and the third on the other side.
And be careful of the beginning of the arteries which are on two sides, and stretch your hand along the continuation of both jaws. And if the space of each incision is the quantity of three fingers put together.
And if you have a piece of sponge prepared or dry cloths with which you dry the blood.
And then insert the spatula with two sharp ends, of which this is the form of the incision: The phrase "que es de la partida des templas entro a la segonda inscizio" can be translated into English as follows: Here is the translation line by line: And then stretch this spatula and insert it into the first incision again using another instrument which is called a knife, sharp on one side and not sharp on the other.
And place the sharp side of that against the adjacent flesh, and the other side against the bone, and push it in until it reaches the middle crack, and with that cut all the vessels descending from the head to the heels.
And continue the incision to this part of the flesh, and then do this in the middle crack between another crack.
And when an equal amount of blood flows out, press the areas where the clotted blood is located.
And then place in each crack some old goat hair, and put on those ashes mixed with wine and oil and vinegar, and ensure that it does not cause a harmful swelling.
And on the third day, remove the bandage and administer a large infusion of warm or tepid water, and then treat it with basilicon ointment mixed with rose oil and other things until the wounds are healed.
Capitol .v.
For the given sentence:
When excessive sharp and continuous cathartic symptoms occur, and sometimes the eyes of the patient are weakened slightly, and their vision is diminished, and the eyelids become ulcerated with the hair falling out, and there is acute pain at the fontanelle of the head followed by sneezing, then you should know from these symptoms that the material and cathartic substances do not come but from small veins within the affected areas.
And the best cure in these cases is this: command the patient to shave their forehead, and then make an incision at the center of the forehead, a small one in width (and begin the incision from the left temple towards the right temple; and let the incision be within the bone; and move your hand away from the temples which are painful due to chewing), until the bone is exposed.
Dry all the blood with a sponge or a dry cloth, and then pack between the two edges of the incision with old wool or cloths. Then apply a mixture of powdered material soaked in wine and oil on top to prevent an inflammatory swelling from forming.
And when you unbind it and see that the abscess has already diminished, then it is necessary to rub between the bones where new flesh begins to grow, and next treat this with a drying regimen which causes the flesh to grow, as if you take two parts of wheat flour and four parts of colophony and mix them together, and from these make a plaster and apply it to these areas where the flesh is regenerating.
Chapter VI.
For the given sentence:
Every cause that affects the ears is of one of four types: either it is a mineral stone or something similar to a stone, such as iron and glass, or it is from plants, such as sesame or bean, or it is a flux-like cause, such as water and sour wine and things like them, or some kind of animal.
And so when a stone enters the ear or another similar cause from those causes that do not fit nor grow in the ear, and expose the ear to the sun, and if you can remove the stone, then let it drip with some kind of distilled solution such as violet oil or sizami, and then administer its extract, and make them sneeze with a condition, and plug the nostrils before the occurrence of sneezing. And then place some pieces of cloth or wool around the ear's opening, and stretch the ear upwards, as these methods are often effective with such causes.
And if it is not effective, then administer the extract with an instrument called a subtle epispiral probe, which has the following form:
And if it is induced by movement, that is good; and if not, then administer the extraction of it with an ounce of subtle purgation doubled.
And therefore, if it is not caused by that, then make a tube from a reed and insert the end of the tube into the ear canal and seal around the tube with wax and softened oil so that only the tube remains open. And then extract with your breath using strong suction, for it helps greatly as we have recounted.
But if it is not cured in this manner, then take some quicksilver or an old preparation with which birds are caught in small quantities, and place that at the end of the ear, and then wrap something around it properly placed. And then insert that into the ear canal easily, and then dry the ear of its moisture.
And therefore, if it is not cured by all the methods we have described, then you must consider making an incision before it develops into an abscess or spasm.
And the method of incising it is that you first let blood from the patient’s spleen vein according to the method suitable for them, and then make a cut between your fingers, turn the ear towards the upper side, and then make a small incision at the tip of the ear, removing the pus from the deeply pressed area. And if the crack of lunar shape reaches the stone, and once the stone is found, remove it with appropriate instruments if you can; then immediately close the crack at that time quickly, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the cause of the issue in the ear is one of the growths that have grown and become swollen, then administer its treatment and extraction; but if it does not respond to this method, then take a thin, subtle spatula according to this form: and use it to remove the growth that has occurred in the ear.
And do not perform this when you think that it is already moistened by the vapor from the ear, and place it in small pieces, then extract those pieces with your fingers or with subtle movements, or by incision as we have said, for the extraction of it is easier.
However, when water has entered the ear, the patient should begin by using a sneeze with caution, and fill their ear with some old cloth, then jump over the ear in which the water is, and if it is thus expelled, that is good; otherwise, take thin stone pieces and levers according to the length of a finger, heat those slightly in the fire, and have the patient insert one of them into the passage of their ear and jump on one side of that part while percussing with another stone on the stone inside the ear. Therefore, do not stop until all the water has been completely drained away.
Therefore, do not stop until all the water has been completely drained away. And once the water has been completely drained away, take some paper or hemp, and place one end of it in the ear, and extend the other end towards fire until the middle part of it is burned.
Then insert another hemp and do this as many times until all the water is completely drained away, and stir it with a tube as was mentioned above regarding the stone extractor.
However, in the extraction of a small foreign object entering the ear, if it is small and similar in size and appearance, treat it as we have said in the previous section; but if it is large enough to cause pain deep in the eardrum, then administer its removal with gentle movements and pressure, for the cause of this is lighter than all other causes that occur in the ear.
However, in the extraction of a worm generated in the ear, when you treat it with what we have said in the section and in the tract on distillations and your treatment does not take effect, then you must examine the ear in the sunlight.
And thus if any sign of worms appears here, then extract them with your hands or with fine tweezers; but if no cause appears, then take a tube that is narrow at one end and wide at the other, which has this shape: And insert the thin extremity into the ear according to the amount that the patient can tolerate; and then suck through it forcefully, and do this several times until all the worms have been expelled.
And if you do not obey this instruction, then plug and seal the tube's circuit with wax as we have said; then administer distillations which have already proven effective in the treatment of worms, and you will find these in the treatise on distillations.
And let your effusion be with which you pour the medicinal oils into the ear using this instrument, which has the following form: And make it of silver or of bronze, leave it straight, with a small tube in it, and a plate on top.
And thus it should be designed to fit into the cavity of the tube that will be necessary for containment. And if you wish, take the rod and wrap the end of it with a small piece of cloth, then pour oil into the cavity of the ear, or juice from some herb, or any such medicine into the tube — which is in the ear — and then insert the rod with the cloth on top and press it gently with your hand until the oil is forced into the cavity of the ear and the patient feels the oil inside.
And that which is inserted into the ear should already be warmed with fire a little. And be careful that the substance you will instill into the ear is not too cold, for medicines for the ear do not tolerate that.
Chapter VII.
On the treatment of ear obstruction.
Sometimes, some children are born with unperforated ear drums from their mothers, and this can also happen in adults, where obstruction occurs in the ear canal due to an infection or fleshy growth there. This obstruction sometimes happens at the entrance of the ear canal without touching the eardrum, and sometimes it is on the outer parts.
And that which occurs at the entrance of the ear canal, without involving the eardrum, is often in a more difficult condition to heal.
And in cases where the eardrum is involved, you should expose the patient's ear to the sun and examine it closely. And when an obvious swelling appears, open it with a fine scalpel of which this is the form:
If the extremity of it in which the width is small, one part being sharp and the other not; and the spatula be two-sided so that it does not injure the ear.
And therefore if the obstruction is due to flesh grown in the ear or in the throat, then use subtle hooks and cut that area with great ease until all the flesh is removed.
And if there is blockage in the ear canal, then take a thin piece of linen and warm it slightly over fire, and then insert it into the flesh of the ear.
And thus if you have detected blockage such that the patient finds it easy to exhale due to gravity, ease the pressure on them easily; and be careful not to harm the nerves of the ear.
And then place in the ear a piece of cloth as wide as the size of the tube that you have wrapped in Egyptian ointment; and do this for several days until you are sure of the consolidation of the wound; or take some wax, immerse it in rosewater and sprinkle finely ground powder over it and use it; and if you find the ear to be abscessed, then you must remove that wax and replace it with other wax that you wrap in cloth made with anointed oil until the abscess begins to soften; and continue treating it until it is healed.
And if blood flow occurs, then soak a sponge or cloth in cold water and place it on the ear, and use another treatment that restrains the flow of blood, which is described in the treatise on distillation.
Capitol .viii.
For the care of athezil, which occurs in the eyelids.
Athezil les quals endeveno a las paupebras dels huels alcuna veguada so humitz, alscunas veguadas son secs.
Therefore, you must hold those with towels or cloths, and cut them from their roots with a sharp instrument, then place your hand over the trimmed areas.
And if pain with a flow of blood occurs, then you cauterize those areas with a subtle lens-shaped cautery.
And the best cautery is performed near the incisions and observed veins returning when there remains any cause of their reappearance; and when they are cauterized with fire, those veins are burned and do not return.
Chapter IX.
Treatment for swelling that comes to the eyelids of the eyes.
Visible spots appearing in the eyelids of the eyes, some cause of which resembles swelling in its strength and hardness, and thus it is called swelling.
And it is an accumulation of thick moisture on the eyelid below and above.
Therefore, the procedure for it is to examine whether the swelling is occurring in such a way that it appears from the eyelid and is rough on all sides; and the cause of it is slight.
Therefore, make an incision over it along its width, and then gently squeeze it from all sides until it shrinks, and then suspend it with an ounce and cut it off.
And if the wound is large, then you adjust it with sutures; and care for what is inside so that it may heal.
And if it is small, you will not suffer harm from it because the heat of it restores and reattaches that area.
And if the swelling is decreasing inside the eyelid and affecting the inner surface, then open the eyelid and suspend the swelling with a needle, so that you do not immediately incise from the start, and press on it from all sides; and if the eyelid has been extended by the incision, this does not matter in any way.
Then for the incision, wash the wound with salt water; and treat the area with something that promotes healing until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the treatment around the upper eyelid of the eye.
Axcirnath es grays le qual es engendrat en las tunicas de la palpebra desus, e majorment endeve als enfantz, agrava les huels de aquels et accideyso a lor catartz le mayti; e no podon reguardar la claror del solelh per aquo quar lagremas se coytan ad aquels.
And so you find them lying on their faces all the time, and they sleep with their faces down; and at the edges of their eyes, the eyebrows are wet, which have already been covered by swelling, and an obvious presence of cataract is in the eye; and when you press the area with your fingers, you feel the cataract inside them.
And in some manner of operation, the patient places his head on your lap, and then you place a cloth over him and make it warm. Then create a circle according to the amount that contains arthernach from all sides, and then place that over this and press with your fingers from all around so that arthernach is aggregated in the middle of the circle, and then introduce moisture into the center of that with a spatula inserted through a fissure along its width, and the fissure should not be larger than the one made in flaubotomy.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Therefore, remove that with cloths which you have wrapped between the aforementioned areas on the outer parts and roll between your right and left hand until it is dispersed.
And be careful not to insert it into the fissure so that with the spatula you do not reach the wound and aggravate it.
If the artery does not appear to you at the beginning of the fissure, then place in the fissure a small piece that will facilitate the process of the artery; and then extract it as we have said; and then apply linen cloths soaked in warm wine and water and place them over the area and press them with powder.
And thus, those who use salt and place it in the depth of the fissure to remove any remaining moisture.
And then care for it until it is healed.
And if an abscess occurs in that area, then treat it with plaster made of cedar until it is healed.
Chapter XI.
On methods of applying to the stomach.
When natural hairs grow in the eyelids and become old, these can harm the eye and lead to various ailments such as continuous tearing and softening of the eyelids and film, which can eventually cause destruction of the eye, a condition known as entropion of the eye. This is treated in four ways: by cautery with fire; by acute medicine as previously mentioned in the chapter on cauteries; by creating an atactini through incision and suturing; or by using cannas, which I will explain.
And therefore you must place the patient's head in your lap; then turn the eyelid of the eye with your left hand, and if it turns, that is good; and if not, insert a needle into the area where there is thread from the part above the eyelid, and make the needle penetrate with the thread over it, and this should be — near the margin of the eyelid where the hairs grow — close to the hairs, and pull the thread upwards toward the parts above with the eyelid, and turn that area around.
Then insert into the area inside the eyelid below the hairs using a small spatula from the larger lacrimal duct into the smaller one; then remove the thread and place a small amount of cotton or cloth below the eyelid, and then sew over the eyelid with a needle, and it should be done like a figure of a myrtle leaf.
However, the shape must be according to the amount of elevation of the eyelid, for this varies among individuals, as some require a large incision from the eyelid depending on the extent to which the eyelid is sagging.
And then spread with the spatula over the two lines that you have marked, and begin from the larger tear duct to the smaller one. And if the fissure is near the natural hairs, as is usually the case with most people.
And then place the needle at one of the two ends of the chain, and then scrape that entire area. Then join the two lips with a suture using fine thread or woolen yarn, and clean the blood. Make what is excess from the threads adhere over both eyebrows with some viscous causes if you wish to do so, and if not, pay no mind.
And then remove the suture of the threads between three or four days, and then care for it.
And if you want, leave the wound unsutured, and care for it with things that dry and constrict, because the eyelid being raised requires the sealing of the wound and the addition thereof; however, suturing is better. Therefore, this is what the ancients taught regarding treatment.
However, one must be careful with the patient, and it is part of good practice, and not done out of fear.
And there is another method in taxation, and it involves raising the eyelid like a myrtle leaf, and then lift the eyelid with three separated and brought together points according to this form:
And if it is not possible to do that, keep the hooks, and since this is not equalized, then take a needle with thread and put that in the middle of the figure, and insert the other thread near the larger lacrimal duct, and the second thread near the smaller lacrimal duct, and adjust between those threads equally, and then lift your hand with an equal elevation, lifting the entire chain over which it is marked just as we have recounted.
And then bring together the two edges of the wound with sutures, and care for it so that it may heal.
But if an abscess occurs at your incision or your fissure, seal that abscess with wax and similar substances, and with unguents.
And sometimes you may encounter an eyelid where the hairs are inverted, then you must use in that case what we have said about incision; however, suturing is more intricate in such cases.
To straighten with canes follows this method: And it is that you turn the eyelid inside out and split the figure within as I have recounted; then, make two canes or two fine splints whose length should be according to the length of the eyelid and their width should be half the width of the spatium. And you have already made incisions at the ends of each section where you have the threads.
Then carefully add each one on top of what is excessive from the eyelid, and tightly bind the canals of each section with strong ties, and leave it like that for several days, because the bond caused by the tightness will kill it, make it fall off, and decay inside before it falls out on its own.
But if it is delayed, then break it at the roots, and then treat the wound until it heals.
When it is solidified, the eyelid is raised and the hairs do not poke.
And this is the form of two canals which you will make according to this shape: and there should be the quantity of the length and width neither more nor less.
Chapter XII.
On the elevation of piercing hairs in the eye using a needle when the hair is hard.
When there are unnatural, hard, and rough hairs that sting the eyes, then the operation on him is that you take a subtle needle and place it in that thread of fine linen and lion’s mane, and then adjust the ends of it and tie each one subtly. And let the length of the fields be a quantity of one palm.
And then you apply another subtle ointment on them briefly, and anoint the extremities of that area if you wish to do so.
And then place the patient's head on your lap, and position them close to the sunlight so that your work may be clearly seen, for this is a subtle and delicate operation.
And then insert the needle into the root of the hair that requires treatment, and make it penetrate quickly into the eyelid before removing it from beneath the natural hair.
And then pull the hair up and insert it into the eyelash area, and let there be one or two or three hairs, not more.
And then pull your hand with it until the hair is moved into the eyelash area of the eyelid along with the natural hair.
But if the eyelash area is pulled and the hair does not move, pull the eyelash area towards the sides with the ointment you have prepared, until the hair is moved into the proper position in the eyelash area.
And view that with the sight of the wound, because when you mix ashes and the balm, and sprinkle each and close the wound, and leave the clamps for two or three days, until the hair adheres to its place and new good flesh grows over it.
And if the hair is shorter, then you adjust a long hair from natural hairs, and lift with that, or let it within so that it stretches towards some space, and then you lift it.
Capitol .xiii.
For the given sentence:
When sneezing occurs in the nose, and there is a contraction of the eyelid when it is pulled inward, either to the right or left side, due to poor healing from an injury, dryness, or cautery, and this condition is called leporina, and this sneezing disorder can be natural or accidental, and is caused by poor healing from injuries, dryness, or cauteries, or similar maladies.
May the manner of the operation on him be that you cut through that consolidation and separate the lips of it, and place in there a piece of linen cloth, and tie those until they are healed.
And it is not necessary for you to treat him through the causes that dry out and constrain; for if you do so, it will cause even more harmful pus than ever before.
Use in that case causes that mollify thus as fenugreek is, and foment with the water in which its seeds are cooked along with its leaves, or a liniment of dandelion, which is liquefied with some of the oils, and submerge the affected area in it, and treat with that.
And the treasure of your cure is that you should perforate with all devices that are not consolidated according to the form that fire at the beginning.
And this operation which we have mentioned is nothing but a certain correction of displacement that does not restore the area to its former shape.
It seems like you've provided a chapter or section title from an older text, likely in a Latin-like style, which reads "Capitol .xiiii." This translates to "Chapter XIV" in English, indicating that this is the fourteenth chapter of whatever work it belongs to. If you have more content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to share!
Here is the translation of the provided line:
This inflammation which occurs on the eyelid is called precisely an "alxacrati"; and it can be either a natural condition or an accidental one.
But an accidental wound is made by a blow or by a cut or by cautery or by similar means.
And the method of the operation is that you take a needle with double thread, and insert it into the flesh, and pass it from the left tear duct to the right tear duct, until the thread reaches both ends of the flesh.
Then stretch the flesh at the points above with the needle and pierce it with the needle, and incise with a wide spatula. And then return the shape of the eyelid as needed; if not, take the thread and place it in the cut shape, and use that to turn the eyelid, and create the two slits on the side of the eyelid.
And let the ends of the two slits be at two angles of the incision that you have made where they converge, and form an angle between them so that when they come together, a figure is formed from them.
And this figure is the Greek letter: lambda.
And then remove the flesh in the amount that is equal to the length of the sharp object left behind, which is the eyelid.
And then align the separated parts and sew them together with wool thread; and then treat them with what we have said about the mollifying medicines and the poultices until they are healed.
And if you need to incise due to a fissure or suture or cautery, then you must make a flat cut over the skin of the eyelid as indicated. And then separate with the poultice between the two lips as we have said.
In summary, regarding the treatment of incisions that are above or below, which occur during the operation, according to the form in which the incision is prepared, and that form varies in different ways.
And the wise artisans always prepare in each manner that is possible for them until they restore the figure to its natural form or close to it, and for that patient according to what is most suitable for the operation and the instruments in their best conditions.
Chapter XV.
On the adhesion of the eyelid to the conjunctiva or to the cornea.
When this consolidation occurs in many men, ensure that the upper eyelid is solidified with the white of the eye, and it is restricted from easy movement and its natural functions; therefore, you must insert the tip of a reed under the eyelid, lift that up, or extend it with an uncial.
And then you incise the adhesion with a subtle spatula, which should not be sharp at the tips of the incisions, keeping it slightly blunt so that the patient is not disturbed during the operation, and remove the spatula without scratching the skin with its sharpness.
And let your incision carefully separate that adhesion so that the eyelid returns to its natural form and the entire adhesion is healed.
And then you put salty water on the skin with which you wash it; or drip juniper dissolved in water onto it.
And then separate the eyelid from the skin with a scraper, and place wool infused with egg white on the skin; and on the third day use consolidating treatments until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the incision of the nail and the flesh growth of the lacrimal area.
Know that a nail can exist in two ways: either it is nervous, resembling a hard and subtle chip; or it is non-nervous, similar to frozen white moisture, which when touched with an iron, or forced to be taken with tweezers, breaks off and the tweezers do not stick to it.
And both conditions do not begin until from the larger tear, gradually it covers the vision and you prohibit light and movement of the eye.
And the method of operating in the inscription (likely referring to an incision or marking) is that the patient places their head on your lap, and then you open their eyelids, lift the eyelid with your hand, and then grasp the nail with a small instrument folded twice and extend it towards the upper parts. And then take a needle and insert into it a horsehair or ox hair or cow hair, or something similar, or strong thread, or double the small end of the needle little by little and place that in the middle of the nail, and penetrate that with the needle, and bind the nail with thread; and extend that to the upper parts, and scrape with the hair the side of the nail which is the matrix. And in this way you follow that with the hair inside the posterior of the patient.
And then you incise the remaining part at the root of the lacrimal duct with a fine spatula or small scissors, and clear the flesh around the natural lacrimal duct so that continuous flow of tears does not result from this incision.
And sometimes the nail is removed with the sun once extended or with sulfur, as we have said, and then it should be extracted with a lion-shaped spatula of this form:
And be careful not to touch the corneal layer with the spatula so as not to cause a rupture and perforate the pupil.
Then the incision releases a little ground salt or ashes made from charred sponge into the eye, and leave that there until the next day; then treat it with what is appropriate until it heals.
And if the nail is not embedded and you cannot insert the needle, or it is not fixed in that way, then this kind of nail issue is treated with medicines, and it is healed in this manner as I have described and detailed in the division.
And if you want to incise that area, then open the belly of the patient and take a sharp, pointed scalpel according to this form: And with subtlety. And if you find that it is rarefied and mixed and penetrates into that region, then let it distill from your mouth into the horn of a goat or with a red horn or with crushed salt, and plug the nostril until the next day.
And then repeat the operation until everything that belongs to it is removed, except for the opposite abscess which should be cauterized in the wound, because when you leave that, treat the beginning of the abscess until it is healed.
And then repeat your operation on that area until it is healed.
The prominence of the lacrimal flesh, if noted in the wound as a great harm, should be suspended with an ounce; and incise that from one side, and do not complete the incision so that you do not cut into the tear ducts.
And then apply a warm and strong decoction to the lacrimal area until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the incision of a hernia and what is born from tightly adhered flesh in the wound.
Sometimes in the wounds of some individuals, hard flesh grows and covers the pupil, or approaches and presses tightly against the eyelids, binding them together from the outer parts, resembling a barrier.
More on the operation is that the patient places his head in your lap; then open the wounds of that area and gather all that flesh with appropriate hooks for this purpose, holding it with forceps or tongs; then dissect the flesh at the beginning where everything should be completed with the scalpel, and beware not to leave any wound unfinished due to your operation.
And let your incision be either with the scalpel that we have recommended in the section about the nail, or with small scissors with which the onion is gathered according to how it will come together at the end of this chapter.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And if any cause of swelling remains and there is an excessive flow of blood, and you fear an abscess, then leave the wound open and treat that abscess with what alleviates that abscess, and then repeat over it during the operation until it is healed, and similarly do in the adjoining flesh where you encountered this kind of wound.
However, you must ensure that all healing of the wound occurs either naturally or accidentally, through the use of instruments, and do not put your hand into any of these operations until you see that the limb can sufficiently endure such an operation.
Chapter XVIII.
On the collection of pus in the wound.
Pus comes from inflamed veins that are hardened over the wound and prevent proper healing, causing the wound to fester for a long time.
Therefore, at the beginning, it is necessary for you to determine if the wound in which there is pus is strong and if there is no other illness besides the pus; then you should collect that pus.
And you command the patient to place their head on your shoulder, and then suspend those veins with an ounce or two according to your discretion; and that ounce should be of fine doubling in this manner:
Or use two ounces gradually in one dose according to this method:
And then those veins should be tied with fine threads carefully, and cleanse the blood little by little until you see those veins emptied of their contents and turned inside out.
And be careful that you do not lead the contents with the extremities of the spatula; and let your operation be in the middle of the day under the sun, and be firm in your operation so as not to incise anything but those veins.
And when you have completed this, then distill into the contents at the top either green or red wine so that its acidity corrodes what remains of the sabell.
But if it is not possible for you to collect all of this at that time, then apply a plaster over the entire area with something that alleviates the pain, and leave it for several days until the pain is subdued and there is no risk of an abscess forming.
And then apply the same method to the second one until it is healed.
And this is the form of the scissors:
Chapter XIX.
On the reduction of nasal fractures.
When you treat fractures with cauterization or with sharp and burning medicine as previously described in the narration and it is not healed, then do not generate anything on it but rather make an incision over the abscess to allow its maturity, and extract all the moisture within it until the bone is uncovered.
And then, when the bone is uncovered and there is corruption or blackening on it, you scrape it with an instrument that has the following form:
And it is called a rough head, and it is made of Indian iron, and its head is round like a sieve which is made by puncturing with a file or by subtly punching (as shown in the following form).
And place it on the corrupted part of the bone, then rotate it between your fingers, and press your hand little by little until you know that the corruption is scraped off.
And this should be done several times, and then restore the area with drying and astringent causes.
Therefore, if the area is stabilized and good flesh has grown there, and the body has separated from the pus and remained like this for forty days, and it does not renew, and does not become inflamed again, and no other accident occurs, then you know that it is healed.
And if not, then the goal is not to generate anything but to reduce the fissure to the shape of the nose, and according to this method: you should expose the underlying bone using fire or sharp medicine, and once the bone is exposed, then take a splint in accordance with this form:
The tip of the instrument should be triangular, and the shaft should be gradually narrowed toward the end in such a way as described.
Then place it over the bone, near the lacrimal area; extend your hand a little towards the nostril, and then rotate your hand with the splint until it penetrates all the way through the bone. The patient will feel this as air escapes when you do so.
Therefore, now restore the area with astringent and drying medicines as has been said.
Therefore, when the flesh and the area have hardened, the material that was discharged to the outer parts returns inside, thus it becomes a lighter pus for the patient.
Chapter XX.
On the reduction of the prominence of the eye.
When the eye protrudes entirely and there is no damage or diminution to the vision, then it is necessary to relax the patient, and then follow up with applying ventouses on the neck after scarification and bloodletting; and then apply an ointment over the eye that is made of acacia, aloe, ensēs (a type of resin), and sarcocolla, and finally fix the poultice over the eye with small pieces of linen.
And the method of the poultices is to take strips of linen cloth, and each strip should be folded into four layers; and make those poultices from them.
And then place those one over the other according to the amount that the wound requires. And then apply pressure on those with a hard cloth with strong binding; and repeat the cupping with suction and scarification; and then remove the cups and leave the wound exposed day and night.
But if the bandage becomes loose, then it must be tightened.
And then remove the bandage day and night as we have said.
And if you find the wound already reduced, it is good, and if not, then repeat the plaster with the powders and binding and the cupping until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
On the incision of the uveal tunica (part of the eye).
When there is disruption in the uveal tunica, and it becomes prominent and protrudes from the eyelids like a knot of raisin, and takes on the shape of a human figure due to this, and you want to incise it, then the operation should be performed as we have recounted: you insert the needle into the base of the uvea from below to above, and then place another needle with double thread at the lacrimal part. Let that penetrate and leave the first needle in its position; then incise the area of the double thread and lift the part of the uvea around the needle with it, and tighten that well.
And then remove the needle and place over it wool infused in egg white, leaving it until the thread comes off with the grape.
And then treat the wound with something that strengthens the inside so that the illness is healed.
And sometimes, gather everything around the wound with a circle of cloth tight over a significant swelling, and then pierce it with a fine spatula to reach the core of the wound, allowing the white, watery fluid to drain out, thus reducing the swelling quickly.
And then strengthen the inside so that it heals.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of dislocations.
This illness, which is called dislocation, is nothing but a swelling that is fixed in the wound, resembling descending water, but it is not actually that.
The method of treating it is to have the patient sit on an adjusted and straight chair. Then take his head in both of your hands and move it so that you see the swelling come to different parts until it dries and does not descend, and leave the light so that the patient sees the causes just as they appear.
And if it does not descend downward, know that it is water.
And if the descent of the pus has not been prepared as we have said, then make the patient sit between your hands and take a fine spatula and use it to separate the panniculus from the continuation of the conjunctiva with the corneal tunic at the limbus (inside the black part), until the pus is drained out.
Once it is drained out, then you instill into the nose warm water in which you have mixed honey or water in which you have boiled fenugreek and honey.
And then it should be treated with other methods until it is healed.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of water (fluid) descending from the nose.
We have already mentioned the types of fluid in the division and which ones are suitable to be pierced, declaring according to health.
Now you must make the patient sit between your hands on a chair and tie their nose tightly with a binding agent.
And then place your left hand near the eyelid of his eye if the eye with the water is the left eye; or with your right hand, if the eye is the right one.
And then with your right hand take the almond, if the eye is the left one; or with your left hand, if the eye is the right one.
And then place the tip of the almond near the cornea along the thickness of the ray in the white part of the eye靠近较小的泪腺部分，然后用力压入杏仁，并旋转你的手以完成操作。
And then penetrate into the soft part of the belly and feel if the swelling has already reached because of it.
And it is necessary that the measurement of the path from almond to pupil be the same as the space from the pupil to the end of the darkness, which is the crown of the eye; for you will see with that pupil through the clarity of the corneal tissue.
And then place a cloth in the area where the water is, and then you draw it down once and then again, and if the water descends quickly, now show the patient what he sees immediately, and cover it with his own hand.
And then rest for a while; if the water has descended, then you rest again before any medication is administered.
And then when it is cut and does not descend, you extract the medication easily, and rotate your hand gradually with that; then dissolve a small amount of clear gem salt in water and wash the wound inside with it; then place a piece of cotton or stopper or wool soaked in ointment and egg white on the wound and attach it with that.
But we and those of our time place on that sore a crushed poultice mixed with egg white.
And if your medication does not penetrate the wound due to its hardness—because there are some people whose wounds are very hard—then you must take the spatula named alberid, which has the following form:
And then pierce that joint with it, but do not push your hand too deeply into the wound, and do so only to create a fine path for the medication.
And then apply the medication as we have said.
And you should complete your work by preparing the patient's dark room where they may sleep on their back, and all movements must be prohibited.
And pause in the nature of the condition so that it aligns with its natural state, and do not move their head to the right or left side at all.
And let the binding be according to its placement within the third day.
And then remove the binding in that darkened area and expose the affected sight, and show them some objects, and then reapply the bandage within seven days.
And it is not necessary to do this during the time of treatments or right before the infusion. However, it is necessary that you dilute this so that the water can easily permeate through, with great and strong attention.
But if an abscess occurs and needs cauterization, then you must remove the bandage before the seventh day, and treat it with something that reduces the abscess.
Then cleanse the patient's eye and place a treatment on their face near the eye to regulate their vision for several days, especially if it exists in the darkened area.
And then he should be laid down gently from that position and turned onto his side in accordance with the causes [of his ailment].
And know that in surgery it is not excused from the disciple to see certain things more than once, and then you should be bold during the operation.
And it has been reported to us by some of those who are from Artach, and some said that they made fire in the Ayrac, a container pierced with holes through which water is drawn.
But however I have not seen anyone in our land who has perfected this, nor have I read this in any of the books of the ancients; and it is possible that this is new.
And these are the forms of the species of medicines over which those who are ignorant should not preside:
And they are made of wax or of proper iron, and their extremities should be shaped in this subtle triangular form, the sharp end thus as that is the shape.
Capitol .xxiv.
From the treatment of flesh hanging from the nose.
When in the nose diverse fleshy growths are formed which can be attributed to a cause similar to that of scorpio motz pes, or to polyp peys; and this illness is called polypus because it resembles that type of peys represented. And if it is cancerous flesh from a wound, it appears blackish in color; and what is lion's flesh does not have a blackish color.
Therefore, in the case where the flesh is not fraudulent nor cancerous, you must make the patient sit between your hands and expose him to the sun, and unbind his nostrils, and pierce the area with a needle in those parts of the flesh. And then pull that out from the external parts, and then divide what you have grasped of those with a sharp and delicate spatula between until you know that all the flesh has been removed; so that if there remains any part due to which amputation is possible, then cut that part with one of the delicate instruments easily until nothing remains that would prevent it. And if the abscess or inflammatory swelling is accompanied by blood, then you apply what is necessary; if it is one of the malignant swellings, then you cut and cauterize that until the bloody part is amputated and all the cavities are removed.
And then it should be placed in the nose near the beginning with wine or water. But if the nose is opened and you process humidity through to the palate, then you know that it is already healed.
But if the humidity does not penetrate as it should, then you know that inside there is flesh mixed with pus over the bones of the nose to which amputation has not been successful.
Therefore, now it is necessary to introduce a thread into the area where there is some swelling, and secure it with knots, placing between each knot the width of a finger or thumb, and stretch the patient and insert one end of the thread into the nostril using your hand or another method that is possible for you.
And after this has been done, draw their fragrance into the nostril channels, and sit them on their pillow, for often repeated practices of this action make children do in schools, and it is an easy method for those who wish to perform it.
And then place the two ends of the probe, one end extending over the nose and the other remaining inside the nose, and then apply a stitch to the flesh using the pins that are in the probe, and do this until you know that the flesh is already held by the pins of the probe.
And then remove the probe, and place near the nose at the site of blood extraction a poultice, and do this for three days or more until the ointment has corroded all that is rotten from the flesh.
And then at the end of the treatment, place a lead cannula in the nose for several days until it is healed.
If you decide to use drying as part of the treatment, apply it accordingly.
And this is the form of the instrument used for nasal treatments with which oils and medicines are distilled into the nostrils:
And make this out of silver or bronze, which should resemble a small open lamp, like a small bowl, and the mouth similarly.
And if you want, make a closed tube like a cane, and the end of the instrument used for purging should be flat and open; to which you attach a handle at the rear, with which you hold it when you heat it in oil or whatever liquid or substance that is suctionable.
Capitol .xxv.
From the growths in the extremities of the nose.
Motas veguadas es nat theyl en las extramitatz del nas, e es magnificat e omentat en alscus dias entro en que mot es leg le reguardament de lu.
And for this reason, you must incise at the beginning of its appearance and remove all of it. And then place over the area where cautery or burning medicine is applied.
And if the onset of the condition is delayed until it becomes prominent, then consider whether it has calcified, become hard, dark in color, and shows little sensation; at that point, do not touch it with iron for it is a chronic abscess; because many have been severely harmed by those who incised such an abscess, causing great harm to the person who had it.
And if the abscess is somewhat recent and not dark in color, and incision is possible at all times, then treat the patient and incise it without fear, and care for the area with something that dries and constricts until it is healed.
Chapter XXVI.
On sewing the nose and the lips and the ear when continuity is disrupted by trauma or a similar cause.
Know that when you encounter a disruption of continuity in one of these cartilaginous areas, there is little hope for the operation unless it is in certain individuals.
Therefore, when you encounter any cause of these wounds, you should consider if it is a fresh wound with its own blood, and then you stitch the two edges of the wound together with sutures, and then take care of what's inside so that it heals.
And if the edges of the wound that broke continuity are already separated and each part is made healthy, then you must clean each part of its visible debris until blood comes out. And then join the two lips with stitches and tighten them, and over those sprinkle dragon's blood powder and mix it well, and place a piece of diafinicon plaster or some other consolidating plaster on top of the powder, and leave that bandage for two days or three, and then remove it and change the plaster until the pus is separated, and then treat with ointment until it heals.
And the method of stitching is that you close the discontinuity either with needles as we have recommended for suturing the abdomen, or you can also close the discontinuity with thread in a way that is known to you.
Chapter XXVII.
On the extraction of those causes that appear in the two lips within the partitions.
Often in many men within the partitions of their lips, hard swellings resembling lard appear, and some of them are smaller while others are larger.
Therefore, you must turn the lips and split each of those hard swellings entirely, and then fill the area with ground sage mixed until the blood is constricted. Then wash it with sweet wine and treat the area with a styptic agent until it heals.
Capitol .xxviii.
From the insertion of the flesh fitted into the gums.
There are many growths on the gum-fitted flesh which the ancients called alveoli; then you must suspend it with a hook or hold it with forceps and incise it deeply to its root, allowing the pus or blood to flow.
Then apply over the area some triass or other styptic or cicatrizant powders.
And if the flesh returns, then incise it again and cauterize it, because once cauterized, it will not return.
Chapter XXIX.
On the extraction of teeth with forceps.
When on the surface of the teeth, both those inside and outside, and between the gums, there are rough and sharp stones, tartar, and some growths that are blackened or turned yellow or green, this leads to corruption in the gum and causes the teeth to become loose.
And thus it is necessary that you sit the patient between your hands and place his head on your thigh, and scrape the teeth in which you see those encrustations and cause likenesses of sand among them so that no cause remains, and this does away with the blackness and yellowness and other things so that they are cleansed.
Thus, if what remains is at the beginning of the reasoning, that is good; and if not, then you repeat the reasoning on those [issues] another day and the second and the third until you arrive at the final statement in what you want.
And know that teeth require various types and different shapes of forceps according to what is prepared for your operation. And therefore, the file with which the tooth is filed from inside is different from the file with which it is filed between the teeth according to other forms, and these forms of files you should prepare, which you will see shortly:
Chapter .XXX.
On the extraction of teeth.
Here is the translation of the given line:
And when the patient is forced to have that tooth removed, you must be firmly certain which is the painful tooth, because often the pain deceives the patient and leads them to believe it is in a healthy tooth, and if you remove that one, the pain will not cease until the diseased and painful tooth is removed, for we have already seen this through the operation of the teeth.
Therefore, you must be certain which tooth is causing pain, and once you know this well, you need to scrape around the tooth with a spatula that has some efficacy, until it separates the tooth from the gum entirely. Then extract it with your fingers or with fine scissors bit by bit until it comes out completely.
And then take large, strong forceps for good grip or a strong extraction, and hold the patient's head between your hands so that you have it well secured without any slipping, and then pull the tooth straight out in such a way that you do not break it nor cause greater pain to the patient.
And if it is not easily extracted, then take one of those instruments and carefully remove it from all sides, exerting effort to dislodge it in the same manner as you would at the beginning.
But if the tooth is loose or corroded, then you must wrap that area with cloth and tighten it with a thin, sharp instrument at one end so that it does not break when you apply pressure to it with forceps.
And it is necessary that you work delicately with scarification around all parts of the gum and be careful with your strength so as not to tear that area and leave any part broken, and return to the patient for the malice to be greater than the initial pain.
And beware that you do not do what some ignorant barbers do in their stubbornness and audacity regarding the extraction of them; for they administer things we have not recommended; because often they bring great illnesses upon men which are more difficult to cure, and the roots of these remain stubbornly, or some of those, or that you must extract it along with some bones from the jaw as we have witnessed many times.
And then for the removal of it, wash the mouth with hot wine or sour wine with salt.
And if there is bleeding due to this, just as white spots sometimes appear, then sprinkle some amount of sage over the wound, and if the sage does not help, apply a cautery.
The form of the forceps and delicate tongs with which the tooth is extracted at the beginning should be long on the outer end, short in handling, and thick, so that they do not bend when you use them.
And they should be such that the thick handles ensure that when you grip them tightly, they do not bend, and their outer ends are short.
And they should be made of Indian iron, properly crafted with straight ends, and at the ends of these, there should be teeth that fit into each other and grip tightly through constriction. Sometimes, the ends of these should have the shape of the beak of a bird called a ciconia, which is a stork, and they are of strong constriction.
Capitol .xxxi.
For the extraction of teeth and the removal of broken bones from the jaws.
When you need to extract a broken tooth where some cause remains, then it is necessary for you to place something soft over the area for one or two days until the spot is softened; and then insert tweezers or forceps whose ends are shaped like the beak of a bird called stork or vulture, the form of the tongs:
The extremities of iron should be made inside like a file or rasp.
And if it does not obey to you with these forceps or tongs, then you must cut into the root and peel away all the flesh and insert the tool which is called an ataly, which is a small lever of this form:
And let one end be thick and short, and it should not be inserted too deeply so that it does not break.
Therefore, if through this the incision is forcefully opened, it's good; and if not, help yourself with these other instruments of which these are the forms: the form of the first instrument is triangular at the extremity in which there should be some thickness:
The form of the second instrument is that it should be triangular and have a finer extremity.
And already it is helped with this instrument having two prongs, of which this is the form, as follows: And with other instruments, which precede in the scraping of teeth; for it is also done with this instrument, which resembles a large onion, and this is its form:
The curved or short triangular extremity should be of some thickness and not too fragile so that it does not break.
And you should know that the instruments for moving teeth are made and similar to other instruments.
But the skilled and subtle artisan in the art finds for himself, according to what the operation and various diseases indicate to him; for there are diseases for which the ancients did not describe or leave specific instruments, due to their diverse forms and types.
But if the jawbone or other bones of the mouth are fractured, or if you can, then treat it carefully in its place with what is appropriate from the instruments and forceps which we have mentioned in the extraction of tooth roots, and assist with movements of which this is the form:
And if there is any small swelling, it should be reduced little by little, and it should be constricted or held with the mouth so that it does not escape or flee until all of the bone is fully extracted; then restore the area with appropriate medicines.
And if there is a small hole in the bone, then scrape that area around the hole and its darkness, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of prominent teeth over the others.
When the prominent teeth do not follow their natural course because their form is loose, and especially when this affects women, particularly those who are more venerable; therefore, you must consider: if a tooth is close to another tooth, and it is not possible to pull or loosen it, then root it out; but if it is not attached to another tooth, then incise it with this instrument, which has the following form; it resembles a pig's snout and should be made of Indian iron with an extremely sharp edge.
And let your incision, with which you will cut it over several days due to the hardness of the tooth, be such that it does not damage any other teeth.
And if a tooth is prominently exposed to filing, then file it with an Indian iron file, which has the following form:
And it should all be made of Indian iron and the margin should be smooth; and it should be made of finely ground points like a file with which needles are made, with which the tooth should be filed down little by little over many days with ease, so that no other tooth is worn down or damaged. And then tie that part at the end, and shave that area with sharp razors.
And if it is a tooth of which a part is broken and it hurts the tongue, then you must file that inside so that the sharpness of that fragment is removed and smoothed out, and fill it so that the tongue is not hurt and speech is not impaired.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the restoration of damaged teeth with gold or silver filings.
When you encounter front teeth that have been displaced or knocked out by impact or fall, and the patient cannot chew on that side where they eat, and you have treated it with astringent medicines but your treatment has not worked, then in order to prevent further deterioration, use gold filings to secure them, not silver, because silver can corrode and will loosen within a few days, whereas gold never changes.
And the filling should be of such fineness and thickness as can enter between the teeth; and the method is to take the filling material and place double the amount between two healthy teeth, and then increase it with two twists of the filling material between the damaged ones, or if there is one or several, until the thread reaches the healthy tooth on the other side. And then repeat the stitching within the area where you began, and hold your hand with ease and skill so that it is not clumsy.
And let your ligature be such that you tie the thread so tightly around the tooth roots that it does not slip.
And then separate the excess bile from the extremities using forceps or tweezers, and apply those in each area with care, and place them between the healthy tooth and the diseased one, so that they do not cause injury to the tongue. And then loosen that tightly bound area as if it were stretched like a Roman [thing].
And if it is loosened or broken, strengthen that or those with another thread in such a manner throughout its entirety.
And this is the form of the teeth and the figure of the reaction of two healthy teeth and two diseased ones, as you see these tied together:
And when it is necessary to reinsert one or two teeth back into their sockets in their proper places, and they have grown back as we have described, and that they fit well.
And this is not done by just any artisan but by wise ones.
And sometimes a piece of the cow's bone is prepared, and it is shaped like a tooth, and it is placed in the location where the tooth is missing, and it is tightened as we have said, and it remains and serves for a long time.
Chapter XXXIV.
On the condition of the ligament that affects the tongue and prevents speech.
This ligament that affects the tongue sometimes is natural, with which a person is born, or it is accidental and occurs due to an injury that has already healed.
And the operation involves opening the mouth of the patient, with their head positioned in your hands; then lift their tongue, and proceed to cut that nervous ligament according to the width within which the tongue is separated from its attachment.
But if there is any hardness or knotting in that area, and this is due to the healing of an injury, then you insert a tool and split that area across the width where you have cut the ligament and untangled the knot.
And be careful that no cut is made in the layer of flesh and that you do not split the artery here, causing blood to flow.
And then wash the remnants of the incision with warm water or with sour wine or with cold water; and then place a linen cloth over it; this is something that the patient should keep the cloth over the wound every night to prevent it from sealing over again.
If blood flow occurs, place vitriol powder on the area; but if the bleeding continues, then cauterize the spot with a red-hot cautery, which is suitable for this purpose. Then treat it with other methods until it is healed.
Chapter .xxxv.
From the extraction of a ranula from the tongue.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And the operation on him is that you open the mouth of the patient sixty [degrees] facing the sun and examine the swelling.
And if you see it of dark or black color, hard, in which the patient feels no sensation, then do not touch that which is gangrenous.
And if it has turned pale, where there is moisture, then you insert the finger into it and cut that area with a fine spatula, and thoroughly incise it; and if blood flows during your operation, then cover it with crushed zegi trissat, which is vitriol, until the bleeding stops.
And then return to your work until you have fully removed it, washing it with sweet wine and salt; and treat that area with the other cure until it is healed.
Chapter XXXVI.
On the extraction of abscesses from the ears and those that occur in the throat, as well as other abscesses.
When they appear in the throat area, these are glands that resemble almonds, which accumulate externally and are called the tonsils. When you treat them with what we have said about division and it is not healed, then consider if the abscess is hard, dark in color, and has little sensation; in this case, do not touch it with iron.
And if it is of a rosy color and the root is thick, then do not touch that with iron because of the flow of blood; first let that remain to ripen within, and now either you will extract that, or it will break open by itself.
And if it is of a white color, pale, and the root is thin, then that is what needs to be cut.
And the operation on it is such that you should consider, before your procedure, whether the swelling has rested from the cautery with complete rest or if it has decreased somewhat; and now make the patient sit facing the sun, with their head in your hands, open their mouth, and the servant taking between his fingers pulls out the tongue of the patient with a noble instrument of this form:
And it should be made of silver or iron, and it should be sharp like a knife.
So as you press with that the tongue and the swelling is shown to you, and you spit over it with your spittle, now take some of it and insert that into the swelling, and pull that outwards as much as you can. And here is the translation of the given line:
And here is the translation of the given line: And it is similar to forceps, but the ends of it are curved, so that the opening of each one is in line with the other, quite sharp, which is made from hardened iron.
And if this instrument is not available to you, then incise it with a spatula of which this is the shape: It should be sharp on one end, blunt on the other.
And once you have incised one side, incise the other following this same method of incision, and then the patient will be cleansed with cold water.
But if bleeding occurs, cleanse with water decoction of pomegranate peel or myrtle leaves and use similar styptic agents until the blood flow is stopped, and then treat it until it heals.
And sometimes, abscesses may form in the throat or around the ears, and incise them as I have described in the method of incising two sides equally.
And I have already treated a woman with an abscess that had formed in her throat, which abscess tended to a dark color, was somewhat insensitive, and had already closed off her throat. The woman was breathing through a narrow passage, could hardly eat or drink water, and was approaching death if it had lasted for one more day or two.
And the abscess had risen so much that it was halfway between two routes, ready to burst out through two openings.
Therefore, I carefully incised and inserted one of those needles into it, and pulled that out, and a large portion was extracted from him. Then, I cut through the part where I understood to proceed with another incision, and then I closed its mouth, and grasped its tongue, and then I inserted the needle into that swelling.
And then I cut away a large part of it, and only a little blood flowed from it. Thus, it is certain that the illness of that woman is serious, and she should start drinking water immediately, then eat food. So I did not stop incising that abscess many times for a long time, and another abscess would form in its place, which I continued to incise as long as it persisted.
So I came here and cauterized the illness of him, thus adding to the treatment; then I wandered around and did not know what God would do about that situation near me.
Capitol .xxxvii.
From the incision of an abscess when it is inflamed.
When they say there is catarrh in the throat, and it swells up and becomes elongated, then it is called perpendicular; and if it is in the part that is thick and round, then it is called buba.
When it is treated with what we have said in the division, and your treatment does not take effect, and you already see that the abscess has hardened and become subtle, then you must incise around what has been added; and if it extends to that length and is bloody, of dark or black color, and is not in the center, then you must attempt the incision, for there is fear for the patient.
And when you see it according to the manner that I have said of its whiteness and length, make the patient sit up and press their tongue with an instrument whose shape protrudes, then insert the ounce into the new area, and pull that down and cut it using one of two instruments which are called in the cutting of two halves.
And it is necessary that you do not incise beyond what is adjusted to the natural boundary of its addition, for if you cut further, you will damage their speech.
And then for the incision, use what we have recommended in the inscription of two beeswax tablets, and take care that it be healed.
But if the patient was frightened by the incision, it is necessary to use ingenuity in the cauterization of his fear, and the method of the cautery on him is only with sharp water, and that you place the head of the patient on your knee, and then press the tongue of the patient with the instrument we have mentioned, and then take the water which we have described in the chapter on cauterization, and warm it with that live cause, and hold it neither too thick nor too thin, and with that fill the concavity of the instrument which has this form:
Let the extremity of it be concave like a spoon's cavity where the medicine is placed, and place the instrument with the medicine on the ulcer, and let the patient lie on their side so that no saliva or mucus from the mouth of that person can flow down due to the intrinsic medicine, so that it does not descend by any such cause onto the throat of the patient and harm them.
And then take your hand with the medicine and apply it to the uvula for a short period of time until you see it become darkened and soothed by the action of the medicine.
And if you want, take a cloth and wrap it around the end of the reed, and submerge the cloth in the medicine, and insert the reed with the cloth into a tube so that the cloth adheres to that tube, and do this as many times until you achieve what you want from the cauterization of the grape, and then leave it there so that it dries and falls off after three or four days.
And if you need to repeat the medicine, do so, and then for the cauterization, clean around the grape with a cloth soaked in wine, and modify that which is around it with the medicine, and wash it with cold water, and treat it externally with an embrocation, and internally with decoctions until it is healed.
And this type of treatment is safer than incision and lasts longer in terms of prevention.
Sometimes the uvula is treated with something more subtle than cauterization and incision, as it can be healed through sublimation in this manner: take cinnamon, hyssop, origanum, rue, sedge arabic, camomile, broyda, and similar herbs; combine all these ingredients or some of them in a pot, and submerge them in sour wine, allowing them to boil. The pot should be well sealed with a decent seal, and place a tube in the middle of the pot on which a concave instrument made of silver or iron is placed.
And insert the extremity into the patient's mouth until the vapor reaches the uvula over the fauces, until the uvula is moved or obscured.
And then sprinkle over those dry ashes that are inside, and be careful not to perform this treatment at the beginning of the formation of abscesses, because it would overly stimulate the abscess, and you should not do this, but rather declare the abscess with a cautery.
But if this instrument is not available to you, then take a reed and attach an eggshell to the end of it, so that the patient's mouth can be cleaned, because the eggshell prevents the steam from burning the mouth.
And this treatment is good for health.
Chapter XXXVIII.
On the extraction of thorns and other foreign objects that adhere in the throat and other causes.
Dry particles adhering in the throat or fish bones or some other cause.
Then you must extract what is visible of those particles, on which you focus your sight, by pressing the tongue with an instrument in front of light, so that what is in the throat becomes clear to you.
And that which does not appear and is hidden in the throat, you must make the patient vomit before the food is digested in the stomach, because by doing this, the cause attached to the throat will be expelled through vomiting; or the patient may swallow a piece of onion or radish or lettuce, or a piece of dry bread; or take a piece of dry sea sponge, and soak it strongly with honey, then make the patient swallow that, because when it reaches the place where the thorns are located and extracted, they will be expelled. And also take an eel and bind it with honey, place it inside and carefully extract it; or take a leek, crush it thoroughly, and insert it carefully.
And if they are not expelled by those methods we have mentioned, then use an instrument made of lead according to this form:
And it should be thicker than a small tube, and at the end of it, there should be a cavity that you can easily insert into its throat.
And lift its head up, and be careful not to touch the bone of its throat, so that you do not injure it or break the bone or spine, or cause any harm with your hand.
However, the patient himself should intervene more, by his knowledge of the location of the adjacent cause and push into it, and pull his hand with the instrument towards it, all of this according to the amount that is prepared for him internally before being purged.
Capitol .xxxix.
From the extraction of bloodsucking attached to the navel.
When the bloodletting is treated with what we have said in the section of the treatment with medicines and you do not confer, consider then in the patient's belly under the sun, since you have moved the tongue of him with the instrument that we have recommended.
Therefore, if you use bloodletting, extract it with a small incision or with subtle gestures decently.
And if it is not possible for you to extract with that, then take a concave cannula and insert it into the throat of the patient, and then place an ignited iron in the concavity of the cannula, and do this as many times (until the bloodletting is complete and the leech is removed from the throat) and abstain from water for the whole day.
And then take a vessel full of cold water, open the mouth of the patient over it, and wash the mouth with it; and do not let any of it be swallowed, and move the water back and forth for about an hour with your hand, because the bloodletting leech will immediately release when it feels the water.
But if it is not cured by what we have recommended, then fumigate the patient with camphor or asafoetida using the instrument we have recommended for the fumigation of the uvula.
Do this, as it may help.
And here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And if it does not work, then you repeat the fumigation multiple times, and abstain from drinking alcohol, eat salty foods and garlic, do not drink water, and thus it is necessary that this regimen be strictly followed.
And this is the form of the instrument with which bloodsucking is performed on the groin when it is seen; and it resembles forceps in this way, except that there is some curvature to it: Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Capitol .xl.
In which is the summary of the discourse concerning swellings and their incision.
Les apostemas so motas specias, de motas manieyras, segon que ve rememoracio de lor, de quascuna en aquest libre.
And thus there are differences in puncturing and drying them by two methods, of which one is through the kind of swellings into which you insert; and by this you remove some of the moisture.
And the second method is for the areas where bodily accidents occur, because an abscess occurring on the head is different from an abscess occurring on the buttocks; and an abscess occurring in a fleshy area is different from an abscess occurring in a joint; and each of them has its own treatment by operation.
And among abscesses, there are some that should not be punctured until the pus is close to maturity or full development.
And there are other abscesses that should be treated when they are still hard, and not wait for full maturity, such as abscesses near joints. Because an abscess near a joint prolongs its development until you can drain what is inside it; the ligaments or nerves of that joint may be damaged, causing contraction of the limb; or if the abscess is close to a major limb and you delay draining it until it matures, it could affect the main limb; or if it's near the buttocks, then drain it even if not fully matured. Do not puncture one that has not completed digestion but rather one near the buttocks so that its pus does not spread within the buttocks and cause fistulas, or prevent complete healing at its site. And you must know the time of puncturing the abscess, and this is when it has matured.
And you must know that it is matured when there is the cessation of pain and the cessation of fever, and also the reduction of heat and pulse, and the sharpness at the top of the abscess, and other signs.
And you must know that the puncture should be made at the lowest point of the abscess where the pus is collected and from which the pus will come out for the healing of the prominence.
And the puncture should always be made along the length of the flesh or body, if the abscesses are in areas of the hands or feet, and in places of veins, tendons, nerves, arteries; and finally, in all other places where there is no reflection; for in those where there is reflection, use the puncture according to that member.
And when the abscess is in a fleshy area, it is better to delay the puncture until its digestion is confirmed according to the full course, as we have said; for if you puncture it before this, it prolongs the suffering of the poor person from it and much filth, and hardens the lips of it and increases its depth.
But some swellings are pierced according to the depth of the flesh or body where it is necessary, or according to what the limb requires.
And it is necessary to administer small punctures in small swellings, and large and wide punctures or multiple incisions in large swellings according to the diversity of their size.
And there are other swellings in which the skin must be depressed and incised; when it is done this way, similar to cutting bread, and once it is done, it remains so, much like when you make incisions into growths of tuberculosis or buboes.
And of those that are incised with a section having three angles; and of those in which it is incised in the shape of a miter leaf, such as the swellings on the ankles.
And there are those in which a round incision and a crescent-shaped incision are administered, similar to those methods.
But for those that are not like superficial lion swellings, you must pierce them with a superficial or flat puncture only.
And when the abscess is large and has already collected much pus, you should pierce it and do not worry about extracting all of the poison at once; first extract part of it, then dress the abscess on the next day, then extract a larger portion, and continue doing this several times according to gradation until it is completely drained.
And especially if the patient is of weak constitution, or a pregnant woman, or a small child, or an old person in decline, because the animal spirit often dissolves with the discharge of pus, and the patient can die quickly, so you must operate carefully.
Pay close attention to this chapter with great caution, and when you make the incision to puncture these abscesses, it is necessary that you clean the wounds and then assess whether the wound of the abscess is small or a flat section; in such cases, apply ointments made from lime or old goat's fat. If the abscess is large and the fissures from the incision are numerous, then you must place a dressing on each site until they heal together.
And if in the abscess a part of the chain is separated or you have hollowed that area around the circumference, then it is necessary to compress it with old goat fat or a bandage made from lime-soaked cloth, just as when you draw out splinters or thorns, moistening them; tighten that after the third day; and then treat it further with the appropriate ointments until it is healed.
And if during the time of your operation blood flow occurs, then you should administer cold water and sweet wine in which you soak a cloth, and place that over the area of the bleeding repeatedly.
And if the flow of blood persists, then you must administer treatment and cure and powders which I have recommended in various places in this our book and division.
If it is during the winter season and the location of the swelling is near sensitive nerves, then you must soak pillows in wine and heated oil, and place those on the affected areas.
And if it is in summer, and the areas are fleshy, then you must place poultices soaked with water and oil or with wine and oil, and all of this should be done until the third day, as we have said, and then you must open the abscess and clean it thoroughly and administer to its treatment whatever is appropriate for it until it is healed.
And this is what is necessary for the knowledge of the treatment of abscesses universally, but according to the method of distinction, I have already spoken about each abscess individually in separate chapters regarding its specific treatment.
Chapter XLII.
Of the incision of abscesses which come upon the nape of the neck.
On the nape of the neck, small abscesses appear, and they are similar to nodes that contain tunics within them; and their contents are particles.
And from them come swellings, and those contain a moisture similar to slime. And from those which contain moisture similar to pus, and they resemble each other; and from those which are stony and hard.
And in the incision of all of them, and in the extraction of those, there is no fear, because the extraction of those does not hinder circulation.
And the operation in the incision of those is that you express them with an instrument whose form is appropriate for this, which is called a probe, until you know what it contains.
For if what it contains is moisture, then you should divide it with an incision along its length by making a superficial cut in the following manner:
And it begins at the section of line .B. within line .G. Thus, as the humidity is evacuated, you scrape off that skin which contains that humidity, and do not leave any cause behind, for repeated occurrences return if any cause remains.
And then submerge the cloth in Egyptian ointment, if it is available, and if not, in water and salt; and fill the wound with that and leave it there for another day, because with this you corrode everything that is rotten from that membrane.
And then apply over that wound Egyptian ointment a second and third time if you need it, until you are sure there is no cause of any tear in that film; then treat the sore with an ointment until it is healed.
And if the abscess contains fatty nodes, then you should incise it in the following manner: using a section in the shape of a cross, and place your fingers between the two lips of the incision and spread it out entirely, and exert your strength in extracting the membrane that contains it.
But if your archery encounters difficulties, then do what I have first recommended to you.
And similarly treat the calcified abscess with drying and healing as we have told you; drying on a calcified abscess is lighter, because it has little blood and little moisture.
And sometimes these swellings on the head in some people are not at all due to moisture; which cause is that I once dissected an abscess on the head of an old woman and found the abscess just like a deaf stone, rough, white, which could not be crushed, and if one were struck with it, it would hurt.
But in other swellings or accidents to the head that do not belong to this chapter, such as the swellings that occur on the heads of children and around the roots of the ears, but the section of these all is a superficial section.
And stop the perforation from that lower part of theirs so that the body is relieved of the pus in the lower parts.
And then treat those areas with whatever is appropriate for healing.
Chapter XLII.
On the incision of scrofula which occurs in the neck.
Moisture and cold often cause these swellings in the neck and armpits; and sometimes they occur in other parts of the body.
And those that occur in the neck are formed by moisture generated between them, and all such scrofula is within its own proper membrane, just as in the nodes and swellings of the head, as we have recounted.
And the types of these scrofula are diverse, for some are stone-like, some contain moisture, and others are malignant and do not respond to treatment.
Therefore, in the case where you find one of good disposition upon touch, wherein the color that appears is close to the color of the swelling, and it is soft throughout, and not attached to the neck's nerves, veins, or arteries, and is not hard, you should incise that with a dry superficial cut from the upper part to the lower part of the body along a line of about 6 inches within a line of about 2 inches, and scrape it thoroughly, then extend both sides of the swelling with your fingers, or use several fingers if necessary, as we have said in swellings of the head, and extract it bit by bit.
And it is more cautious that the vein or nerves are not cut.
And let the spatula not be too sharp, so that it does not hurt your hand upon incision, or disturb the patient, and you do not cut what is not necessary to cut; for if you were to cut a vein or artery and stop your operation, then apply ground vitriol or other powders which stop blood flow, and bind up the wound, and leave within that which relieves the sharpness of the abscess so that the wound is softened and begins to become pus-filled. When the blood is constricted or blocked.
Then return to your operation before you have completed it.
And then examine with your index finger if there is any cause of the other small swellings, and then cut those out and clean them.
And if the large vein is at the root of the large swelling, it is necessary that you do not cut out that swelling from its root. Before that, it is necessary to bind that area with a strong double bandage and leave it in place so that it falls by itself without harm.
And then fill the wound with old cataplasm that you have already soaked in Egyptian ointment, and then care for it.
And if you cut out that swelling entirely, it is then necessary to bring the two edges of the wound together and sew them up so quickly that there is no remaining excess material.
But if you see that there is excess material due to the size of the swelling, it is necessary to understand how to cut at the root of that swelling, remove it, and administer stitches as mentioned.
And for those swellings that contain moisture, pierce them with a superficial puncture where you see the site of maturation, and make an incision to drain the pus at the base of the swelling, as we have said.
And then administer a puncture, using suppositories with unguents and similar substances, so that it corrodes what is rotten from the corruption. And then when you see the wound already cleaned, now you treat it with an ointment of generative flesh until it is healed.
Capitol .xliii.
Of the incision of the pus pocket formed inside the armpit.
The ancients described this incision in the abscess, and I have not seen anyone in our land who has performed it this way.
And this is the inscription of the speech of those [individuals].
And in men who have hemorrhoids, the extraction of the stone should be avoided, as this would not do good because all the veins and the larger ones of the patient are here.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Therefore, when we want to do this, we must incise the eyelid three or four times in small sections across its width between two circles in such a way that the cut is on the ciliary body, not on the cartilage, and this location is suitable for cutting because it lacks flesh and has fewer blood vessels.
And if the doctor is inexperienced, it is necessary to stretch the tendon of the ankle with force, and then cut the tendon until it reaches the canal, but avoid the blood vessels if you see any reason to do so.
And then incise the ciliary body as we have recommended; it is indicated by the section of the canal through the flame, which comes from that which is disrupted within and by the interruption of the voice.
And leave the wound open for some time.
When the hour is dreaded in which the perforation is feared, add two links from the chain of the wound, and thus only the cartilage remains.
And then administer medicines that cause flesh to grow where it needs to be healed.
And Albucasis says that the essence of the sermon we have recounted is that some of those abscesses have already blocked the windpipe of the patient, and the patient has come near to death, and their breath is cut off, and some proceed to incise the epiglottis so that the patient can breathe at the site of the wound by some respiration and be saved from death.
And by this, leave the wound open until the evil of the disease is consumed; and the evil lasts for three days; and then after that, close the wound, and care for it until it is healed.
And what I have witnessed in my practice is that a servant took a knife and inserted it into her throat and incised a part of the windpipe with it, and I was called for her treatment, and I found her moaning as one who is dying, and upon uncovering the wound, I found blood that had seeped from the small wound.
Therefore, I must confess that she had not cut any vein or artery, and air was escaping from the wound, and she treated it until it healed.
And it does not harm the servant if there is hoarseness in the voice, and after some days returns to the improvement of their conditions.
And now I say that in the section of the hernia there is no fear.
Capitol .xliv.
Of a section over an abscess that you encounter on the groin from outside, and it is called a groin hernia.
This abscess named groin hernia is a large abscess according to the body's condition, and it occurs frequently in women.
And it is of two manners, for it can be either natural or accidental.
And in the natural case, it is not a matter of curing.
And the accidental is of two manners, one of which resembles fatty nodes, and the other manner resembles an abscess, which is caused by arterial obstruction, and in that case, there is fear. And it is not necessary to apply pressure with iron unless it is in the case where it is small. And you should probe and examine it with your finger. If you find it resembles fatty nodes and is not suspended by any veins, then incise it as you would for nodes, and extract it along with the surrounding flesh and bursa; otherwise, thoroughly investigate its entire nature, and subsequently treat the area with whatever curative method is necessary until it is healed.
Chapter XLV.
On the section of various types of nodules.
Regarding the various types of nodules, I have already described all their types in the division [section or chapter] earlier.
And it is necessary that I recount thus the difference between a knot and a hernia as if there were doubt.
Thus, I say that in a hernia there is heat and fever and intense pain within until the boiling of the excess subsides; and complete putrefaction occurs at which point the fever, pain, and heat cease.
However, in a knot, there is neither heat nor fever nor pain, and it contains a solid mass which is like a lion's paw in shape.
And it is according to the color of the body, and its beginning is like a seed, and it grows in such a way, whether larger or smaller, and they are of two types, either dry or fatty containing moisture, and the colors of the moisture are spots, as I have said in the division.
Thus, when you arrive at the treatment of a knot, you must extract it and trace it back to its origin using a method called intromission, as its form will be described in the chapter that follows this one.
And it is the method of investigating abscesses and all kinds of knots, which involves taking this instrument and inserting it into the most moist part you find in the abscess, and you will rotate the said instrument little by little until you know that the instrument has penetrated the core.
And then adjust your hand according to the size of the abscess, and then extract the foreign matter and examine what has been left in the wound.
And if the current humidity, of whatever color it may be, is overflowing, then you incise it with a superficial cut as I have said in other cases of abscesses.
And if there is no humidity left in the wound from the foreign matter, then you know that it is dry.
And dry it with a cut in the shape of a cross as follows: Do as you have been taught, and suspend it with weights, and squeeze the tube from all sides easily, and protect the skin or sack, if possible, over that, and extract the pus with the knot.
But if it is broken during the operation, it is not possible to extract the pus, and sometimes this happens, and then you must extract it in pieces to ensure that none remains.
For if any of it remains, whether little or much, the knot will return as before.
And if you see that some small part remains from it, then complete the wound with some sharp and strong corrosive powders, and place over that which has become an abscess a cautery, and treat that with other healing methods until it is healed.
And if the knot is large, then sew the two sides of it and treat that with something that promotes flesh growth.
But if the pulse is contrary or non-pulsating, then apply and fill the area with a mixture that includes vitriol, leaving it for two or three days until the wound dries up and the blood boils subside; then return to incising what remains of the knot.
Chapter XLVI.
On the forms of instruments necessary for section and perforation.
Regarding the forms of the introducers, there are three types: some are large, some are medium, and some are small.
The form of the large introducer is as follows:
The form of introducing something small is this:
Here is the translation of the provided line:
And these are the forms of the experts, and they are named albedo, and one of those is called berid.
And of three spices, for among them are grain, honey, and a little [amount of something else].
The form of great experience, forms it:
The form of experienced midwife, form of it:
The form of experience little, form of it:
It seems like this text is written in a mix of languages similar to medieval Latin and Romance languages. Here's the translation based on that:
And you make round, thick needles, like large sewing needles with which skins are sewn together, and they are made of citrus wood, or of cane or iron, or silver, and the best ones are those made of citrus wood.
And the practice is done with black feathers, which they agree to use for opening the fistulas in the cavity where they are reflected, that they are reflected by their lightness through those reflections.
And of three types, for some are long, and others medium, and others short, according to the quantity of the width of the fistula and the stricture of it.
Form of the large lead weight:
Form of the experienced midwife with lead:
Form of the small lead pellet:
The forms of wounds are of various types, for some are simple ones, which have only one curvature, and they are of three kinds: large, small, and medium.
And from them are hooked instruments, and they are of three types.
And of those hooks having two curves, and of three types.
And since they have three curves, and are of three types.
And all these are necessary in their place.
Forma de unci simple pauc, forma de lu:
Forma de unci gran havent dos curvaturas: Form of an ounce having two curves: Forma de unci pauc havent dos curvaturas:
Forma de unci gran havent tres curvaturas:
Form of an instrument having three curves:
And these are the forms of the scalpels with which nodules and abscesses are cut and squeezed, and they come in three types, for there is one that is large, medium, and small.
Forma de scapel gran:
Form of the midwife's knife:
Forma de scapel pauc:
The extremities with which a section is made are sharp, and the other extremities are not sharp, and they are not placed in such a manner, but rather to ensure that there is an incision in the excoriation of the nodes without fear of puncturing a vein or nerve, and through this, the patient may be healed and find some tranquility from the burning sensation found during the excoriation of the abscess.
And these are the forms of ulcers, and they are of three types: large, medium, and small, as you will see.
Let them be made of barley and resemble the form with which alcohol is made.
And it is at the outer edge that you puncture with a hidden spatula and in that area you draw out both internal and external parts when you wish, just as you see.
The forms of spatimis, which are hidden between the fingers causing the puncture of the abscesses and the patients do not feel them, and they exist in three types: large, medium, and small. And these are the forms of those:
The forms of cupping with which the blood flow is cut off, and there are three types: large, medium, and small; the forms are as follows:
Sian faytas de eram citri, redondas am alcuna longitut, e sian subtils.
And it is necessary that these types of cupping vessels be large, medium, and small, so that through those you can quickly draw off blood flow when necessary, and at the first instance there should be no delay in treatment.
However, do not use those for bleeding in all parts of the body, and use them only on fleshy areas, such as in the creases of the arms and thighs, and in the creases of the breasts, abdomen, and knees, and similar fleshy moist folds.
And sometimes, those instruments are made in other small, similar scissor-like forms; through which blood is let when performed by phlebotomy, or proper incision of a vein or artery.
And sometimes they are made round in the following form:
Chapter XLVII.
On the treatment of men's breasts that resemble women's.
Sometimes the breasts of some men become swollen due to the abundance of sleep as they begin to grow soft, and then the breasts swell, resembling women's breasts, and become pendulous and sweaty.
And to treat this condition, you must incise those areas with a lunar section according to this form, from line B inward to line G, and then remove all the thickness, and then fill the wound with flesh-growing medication, and then sew the two lips of the wound together, and care for it until it is healed.
Here is the line-by-line translation of the provided medieval medical text:
And if you do not complete the incision of what needs to be cut due to the restlessness of the patient and bleeding, then it is necessary to fill the wound with a cloth soaked in corrosive ointment and leave that inside until it corrodes the ruptured parts of the fat, and then treat it so that it heals.
It appears you've referenced "Capitol .xlviii." which in Roman numerals translates to "Chapter 48". Without additional context or text following this reference, it's not possible to provide a translation or further explanation. If you have the content of Chapter 48 or need help with a specific part of it, please share that information so I can assist you better.
The text appears to be in an archaic form of Romance language, similar to medieval Latin or old Italian/Spanish/French. Here is a translation of the given line:
These swellings that come from a type of scrofula, which are hard and contain a kind of sac.
And among those that contain humidity; and those that contain humidity must be incised with a lunar section according to this figure: from the line of G to the line of B. And when all is evacuated that is in the abscess of the pus, then you fill it with old wool and clean the inside on the next day.
And then the cut should be closed and treated with an appropriate ointment until it heals.
And if the abscess is in the glands of the neck and from the scrophulas, then you should incise it as we have said in the section about scrophulas similarly.
And if the plague has spread to such an extent that it causes putrefaction, then apply a cautery as we have previously mentioned.
Chapter XLIX.
On the section of abscesses that occur due to arteries or veins.
When an artery is ruptured, and the chain that is above it becomes hardened, then greenish spots can cause an abscess. The signs by which it is known whether inflammation and abscess are due to an artery or a vein: for when the abscess is due to an artery, it extends in a long line along the part of the body; and when you press on the abscess with your fingers, you feel a rustling sound within it.
And that which is due to veins appears round on the surface of the body.
And to incise this abscess is an error, especially in those areas near the armpits, and in the knees, and in the neck, and in many parts of the body; it is large, therefore its treatment with iron should be avoided, and that which is in the extremities or on the head should also be avoided.
And for those who have swelling due to the inflammation of the artery orifice, make a longitudinal incision along the chain; then widen the incision with hooks and expose the artery, removing the tunics so that it is revealed.
And then place the needle and make it penetrate to the other side, and tie the artery with double thread in two places — which is a technique I have taught you for the extraction of two arteries that are in the temples.
And then widen the area between two ligaments with a spatula until all the blood is out and the abscess is dissolved.
And then administer treatment in which pus is generated between where the ligaments are; and then treat it with appropriate ointments until it is healed.
And if it is an abscess due to vein constriction, then you must hold with your hand as much of the abscess as possible with a cord, and then insert the needle into the location where your hand was, making it penetrate; and let that double thread go through until you pull it out from the other side, and then tie the abscess with a good ligament as I have said to you in the treatment of the grapevine, using both ends of the thread on both sides.
And if you fear that the thread will be pulled out, then insert the needle with the thread through all the abscess up to the initial insertion point of the first needle, and secure your threads at four places.
Then dry the abscess in the middle of it where once what is inside has been removed, then you incise the excess of the chain, and leave what is attached to it.
And then place over it the pillow that you have submerged in wine and oil, and then administer the treatment which is performed with plasters and unguents until it is healed.
And as for the treatment of the abscess that occurs due to nerve twisting.
Thus, an abscess may occur in arteries and veins, and similarly, an abscess occurs in the nerves when there is a percussion or due to excessive labor, and by similarity.
And it mostly occurs in the areas of the ankles or the heel, or in any place where the joints are painful.
And it is a severe abscess, similar in color to the rest of the body. It often occurs in larger areas and when it is tight with intensity, the patient may appear stunned or confused.
And it is not an abscess aggregated in the flesh of the body, and therefore the chain (likely referring to the spread or connection) is left off. It causes pain throughout and does not move forward or backward to specific parts.
Therefore, of those that are in the joints, it is not necessary for them to be enclosed in iron, because there they would cause contraction.
And if it is in the head or forehead, bind it with a spatum (a type of bandage). And if the abscess is small, then take it with forceps and excise that part from the root.
And if it is large, then you suspend it with an incision, and drain that, and then remove it; and close the wound with stitches, and care for it until it heals.
Chapter II.
From the incision of an abscess which you find on the cheek that occurs in the abdomen.
Here's the translation line by line based on the provided instructions and example:
And I have seen one where in its belly were two parts that resembled mushrooms more than anything else, and there was no difference between those white, tiny growths.
And already the lips of those were turned inside out and split open, and moisture was running from them all the time.
So I incised those and found one to be about eighteen inches long and the other about six inches long.
And in the operation of their incision, you should consider whether the patient is moist, and if the color of the tissue is white, moist, and of a fine texture; then you should incise it with a broad scalpel, and have cautery irons ready at hand that are heated over fire, because small repeated burnings will dry out the section and expel some blood; and if the bleeding continues, cauterize it.
And if the patient is weak and fearful, beware of incising with iron; instead, take fresh lead foil, and bind it to the tissue in the manner we have described; leave it there for two days.
Then apply pressure to the lead thread at the site of constriction; thus, continue binding the lead tightly against the tissue until it is severed and falls off on its own.
And if the tumor is of large size, then at the beginning of its treatment there is some cause for fear and terror, especially in that which is in the abdomen.
But it is possible that you can divide the tumor in half, and then cauterize it so that it does not return.
And then treat the area inside so that the wound may heal.
And be careful not to incise a tumor that is of dark color, has little sensation, and appears fixed, for that one is truly cancerous.
And I come with a reminder about cranial issues related to this.
Chapter II.
On the treatment of a protrusion at the navel.
A protrusion at the navel is caused by various reasons: it may be due to fissures in the spine that lies above the abdomen, and you should treat it by reducing the hernia or intestine as described in other ruptures; or it may be due to blood flowing from a vein or artery as previously mentioned, or due to trapped air within it.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence: And if it is due to the protrusion of the intestine, then the situation is quite different from what we have recounted previously, and as you press that area with your fingers, it becomes hidden, and then returns; and when it comes back, it is very noticeable, and there is a significant movement at the entrance of the bath and vigorous work.
And if it is due to moisture, then it is inflamed and does not hide when pressed with your hand, nor is it constricted, nor is it hard.
And if it is due to blood, then with these signs, the abscess appears with a declining black color.
But if it is due to undigested flesh, then the abscess is heavy, large, and hard, and it is embedded according to a certain quantity.
But if it is due to wind (gas), then the touch of it is inflamed.
And the operation on him is that you consider whether the prominence of the navel is due to arterial blood, or venous blood, or wind; at this time it is necessary for you to be cautious with his treatment, because in that case there is fear and dread as I have taught you in the chapter where I spoke about swellings caused by arteries and veins.
And if the prominence of the navel is due to the intestine or membrane, then you must order the patient to hold their breath and lie extended; then mark with a thread around the entire circumference of the navel; then command them to turn over between your hands on their back; then encircle with a spatula lat in the circle of the navel where you marked with the thread; then extend half of the abscess upwards by an inch; then bind around it with strong bandages or flax and do so properly.
Then press the middle of the extended abscess over the ligament and insert your index finger to find the intestine; if you have located or felt it through the ligament, then gently pull and push the intestine into the abdominal cavity.
And if you have found the membrane, then take hold of it with an inch; and cut away its excess parts.
But if it is contrary to an artery or vein, then avoid that area, and proceed with your operation; take two needles and thread them through with strong threads, and insert the two needles around the circumference you have made around the abscess in a cross pattern, making sure they penetrate; then tighten the abscess in four parts over the needles.
And if you wish, remove the needles and let the area between them where the stretched flesh can dry and fall off on its own; or incise that which is thinned out and let it drain, then treat that with whatever ointments are necessary for it to heal.
And if the prominence of the navel is of soft flesh or due to moisture, then you must hollow out the abscess as we have said and drain the blood or moisture that you find within it, and then treat it accordingly with what is needed and consolidate the area.
It seems like you've provided a section marker, "Capitul .liii.", which likely means "Chapter 53" in a medieval text format. This could be the beginning of chapter fifty-three in a larger work. Without additional context or content from this chapter, I can't provide further translation or explanation. If you have specific lines or content from this chapter that you would like translated or explained, please provide them!
The phrase "De curacio de cranc" can be translated into English as:
Here is the translation line by line:
And the ancients said that sometimes cancer is in places where it is possible to eradicate it, such as cancer in the breasts or in the thigh and similar parts of the body allocated for extraction of all of it, especially when it starts small.
But when it is old and large, one should not approach it, for I have not been able to cure anyone of that, nor have I seen another who has succeeded in doing so.
And the operation on it is when it is located as we have said, you should precede by leaving the patient and purging them of black bile several times, and then bleed that area if a noticeable swelling is found.
And then prepare the patient with preparations in which they are placed for the operation, and then incise with the instruments that are necessary for it; and then scoop out from all sides with a good sharp instrument to thoroughly excise so that no cause of its roots remains. And let the blood flow, and do not cut it lightly, and squeeze the areas, and cleanse all the thick blood thoroughly with your hand or with an instrument that is available to you among the tools.
If there is an obstruction of thick blood in a vein or artery, then cauterize that area until the flow of blood stops, and then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
It seems like you've provided a section heading or chapter number, which appears to be "Book" or "Chapter" LIV (44 in Roman numerals). If you need further translation or explanation of the content that follows this heading, please provide the text, and I'll be happy to help!
This phrase "De curacio de ydropici" translates to:
We have already discussed, in the division, of the types of water-related dropsy, and the signs of each type, as well as the treatment with medicines.
And that which is cured with iron is only the type of althitas alone, and it is not treated with iron in the case of the type of timpanists nor the type of yposarcha, for that would be fatal.
And when you have already treated this type of timpanist dropsy with medicines and your treatment does not yield results, then consider, for if the patient has already become weakened, or is suffering from another illness along with dropsy, such as in his cough or abdominal swelling similar to those conditions, then beware that you do not treat him with iron, for there is fear regarding this.
But if you find the patient to be of abundant strength, and he suffers from no other illness but only dropsy alone, and is neither a child nor an elderly person, then the method of the operation is that you lift the patient between your hands, and another servant near him presses his abdomen with their hand, pushing the water towards the area below the navel, and then take a spiked spatula according to this form:
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And then consider if the generation of dropsy is due to the intestines, because at this point you must make an incision three fingers away from the navel on either side, directly over the pubic bone.
But if the generation of dropsy is due to a liver disease, then your incision should be three fingers to the left of the navel.
And if the generation of it is due to the spleen, then your incision should be on the right side.
And it is not necessary for your incision to be on the side on which the patient wishes to lie because the superfluities do not run to that place freely.
And then pierce through the entire chain with the instrument, and insert into that section, and lift your hand with the spatula between the chain and the sinus, and you dilate that area; and if it is the quantity of a fingernail or around that size.
And then pierce the abdomen so that the spatula reaches the empty space, which is where the fluid is located. And then extract that and insert an instrument of which this is the form: And it is similar to a thin silver tube; it is made of silver or iron or lion's leather, at the lower end of which there is a small opening, and on its sides there are three openings: two on one side and one on the other side; and the extremity of it is cut according to the manner of a feather, just as you may see:
And at the extremity of the most superior pus is an annular area, for when the instrument reaches the water, then immediately they say something over the instrument, thus evacuating a small quantity of water, for if you evacuate more than what is necessary at that moment, the patient may die due to the resolution of their animal spirit, or you might bring near death which is approaching.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And then extract the instrument, and hold the water which is immediately retained by the chain that holds the tube which is on top of the syringe, and recall to you how you puncture it in such a manner.
And then repeat the procedure on the other day if the patient can tolerate it, and extract a small quantity of water, and do this for several days continuously, and be careful to avoid mistakes until only a little water remains.
And if you are concerned about the patient and leave a large quantity of water, then treat it by burying it in hot sand, induce sweating in a bath, and expose it to the sun for a long time; and treat it with drying medicines until it is healed.
And cauterize on the stomach, and the spleen and the liver near the extraction of the water, as I have recounted in what precedes.
Chapter V.
On the treatment of children whose urinary openings have not properly formed or are not perforated.
Sometimes some of the children are born from their mother's womb with their urinary opening not formed (or it is very narrow or not in its proper place).
Therefore, it is necessary to puncture with a subtle sharp instrument as soon as it is born in this manner:
And then place in the wound a subtle lead clamp and tie it there, and keep it for three days or four.
And when he wants to urinate, he should be turned around and allowed to urinate; then return him to his original position.
And if you do not hold the tube, it is possible that the urine flowing over the area may not clear this spot.
But the one for whom the tube is narrow should be treated with a lead dilator, as we have said, for several days until it is widened.
But for those in whom the tube is not in its proper place, as mentioned, which causes them to be unable to urinate properly because the opening of the urethra is at the end of the penis and they cannot urinate without lifting the penis with their hand; and it affects their generation, so that sperm cannot reach the uterus correctly, this is a serious illness.
The method of the operation is that the patient should be placed face down on their back, then extend the tip of the penis with your left hand using strong traction, and incise the end of the penis at the meatus with a sharp spatum (instrument), similar to the cut of a feather, or scrape off some part so that the middle becomes like the head of the penis, and the tube falls into its proper place as needed.
And be careful in your operation for the flow of blood, when you often encounter this; and apply yourself to it so that you stop the bleeding, and treat the wound until it is healed.
Capitol .lvi.
Of the ulcer that occurs on the foreskin at the head of the penis, and of the corruption, blackening, and adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis.
White spots occur this ulcer on the penis, and it is an elevation of soft flesh.
And of those, one is malignant and the other is non-malignant.
For the non-malignant condition, you must suspend it with a fine thread and cut within so that all of it is removed; then apply to that area submerged in Egyptian ointment; afterwards, treat it with a deflaming ointment until it heals.
And if the ulcer is malignant and of a leathery color, then you must apply a cautery near its beginning and its root.
If the ulcer is on the foreskin at the head of the uncircumcised penis, and one part of the ulcer is inside the foreskin while the other part is outside, then you must remove the ulcer that is inside at its beginning until it is stabilized; afterwards, treat the part that is outside, because when you treat both together with the foreskin, it is not guaranteed that it will not be torn.
And we have examined accidents in the genitals and in the foreskin blackening and corruption; then it is necessary that you clean all of what has already turned black and what is about to corrupt or what is already corrupted; and then apply over that, on top of this, honey, which is mixed with flour from pomegranate peel and crushed and sieved ash.
And then treat that with the other cure until it is healed.
And if there is a flow of blood, then administer a lunar cautery according to this method:
For a beneficial cautery serves two purposes at once, that is, for blood flow and for a wound when it is corrupted.
And if the head of the penis is corroded and completely destroyed, then you must insert a lead catheter into the foreskin so that the patient can urinate through it.
In the adhesion of the foreskin to the head of the penis (and this adhesion does not occur except in those whose foreskin is tight, and circumcision is not usually required; and when adhesion occurs due to a wound or an abscess), you must separate it with a blunt spatula until the bond is dissolved and the head of the penis is completely released.
And if it is difficult to distinguish those precisely, then you must scrape with a spatula some of the cause from the head of the penis and from the foreskin, and this is where the foreskin, when it is thin, is easily perforated slightly due to its thinness.
And then separate the foreskin from the head of the penis with a sharp and thin instrument, which has already been soaked in cold water so that they do not stick together again.
And then it should be treated with astringent wine until it is healed.
Chapter LVII.
Of the cleansing of children and the treatment of what happens to those who undergo circumcision.
Circumcision is not a solution to the discontinuity like other afflictions: rather, since it is of our operation and our will, and those for whom it is properly performed are children, it is necessary that we assign the best procedure and the least burdensome path to health.
Therefore, it is said that the ancients did not mention circumcision in any of their books, for they did not use it in their laws, and this is because we have acquired it through experience. The reason I have found most artisans and surgeons to use circumcision and cleansing with a lancet and forceps; and they apply a dressing with honey and anointing with oil.
And I have already examined all these methods and did not find a better cleansing with scissors and dressing with honey than cleansing with oil, because often the foreskin's double layer causes the outer one to come off, leaving the inner layer behind, which then requires another anointing and is certain to cause pain. And with the cleansing that is done by scrapers, which are digital and used by surgeons, the incision at the end of the male member is not protected, for it strongly enters into its channel.
And in the operation with a nail, if you force it too much, you will corrupt your operation. And the umbilical cord of the child is short by nature, and often it is born in such a way that no modification is needed, and I have seen this.
Regarding the modification that is done with scissors and sutures with thread, the goodness, my experience shows me, is that the scissors have a proportional blade, so that the sharpness on top is just like the sharpness below; and thus as you press your hand it follows two proportional sharp edges, and incises according to a comparison in one motion; and compression of the thread is done with a figure containing the entire cord of the penis, which prevents any error from occurring.
And the method of the first operation is that you should position the child properly, especially if it is one of those who can barely understand a little, so that you only tie the thread on his penis just enough, and leave it there until the next day.
And then make the child happy in every way that is possible for you to do, so that it receives comfort and understanding. And then make the child sit between your hands, prepared and not showing any sign of disgust; and hide the scissors in your hand or behind your back so that the child does not see them or any other of the instruments.
And then insert your hand into the penis and blow into the tube, and pull that inside so that the head of the penis is set back in place, and then clean it from what is added to it due to dirtiness.
The form of the scissors for modification is as follows:
Let one end of the scissors be uncut and the other end cut, so that the tip of the nail is not missed, and let the length of the two sharp ends be equal to the length of two equally sized handles.
The mistake in modification is that you might accidentally remove the intrinsic chain entirely or part of it where you should incise.
Therefore, you must stretch that area of your instrument with your nail before the inflammation of the spot and incise it according to equality.
And if you cannot hold it with your fingernail, then extract that with a hook and incise that.
And if three days have passed and the swelling remains under the foreskin as an abscess, then you should wait until the abscess ripens, and then easily drain it, and incise it according to what is prepared for you.
And be careful of the head of the penis, for it should not be affected by that.
And thus treat it with what consolidates the wound, using powders which we have mentioned in the treatise on powders.
And if it is incised too much on the scrotum and you observe parts above it, this should not harm him.
And thus treat it with what we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LVIII.
On the treatment of urine retained in the bladder.
Retention of urine in the bladder is caused by obstruction made by stones or frozen blood, or pus or flesh growths, and similar to those we have mentioned regarding the methods of treatment in the division.
And if it is not dissolved by what we have said and the cause becomes very strong for the patient, then you must administer extraction from them with an instrument called a syringe, of which this is the form: It should be made of silver and its tube should be thin like a reed, similar to a bird’s quill in fineness about one palm and a half long, at whose end there should be a fine canal.
And the method of urination extraction is as follows: take the tube doubled and tie it well at one end with wool or cloth; insert the ends of the tube into the opening of the syringe, and cut with scissors any excess part of the wool if necessary, but insert it forcefully into the canal. Then suck on the syringe with force and use egg white.
And place the patient on the bed, and moisten the bladder and the penis with oily substances, olive oil, and warm water.
And then gently insert the syringe until it reaches the root of the penis; and then bend the penis upwards at the base; and then push the syringe into that area; and then continue to push it until it reaches the bladder, and this should cause the patient to feel that it has reached the intended spot. If not done according to this order, the instrument may go astray due to the tortuosity of the path.
And then extend the bile with the wool little by little, for the urine soaks the wool.
Then extract that and use the urine for treatment, and apply a catheter; do not stop doing this and use a catheter until the bladder is evacuated and the patient finds relief.
Chapter .59.
Of the quality of cyst irrigation with clamped instruments and similar tools which are appropriate for this.
When you encounter ulceration or abscess in the bladder, or congealed blood in that area, or obstructed pus, and you want to distill water and medicines into it, then use an instrument called a catheter, and this is its form:
And here is the translation of the provided line: And in that place three burns are made: two from one side, thus as you please.
Here is the translation line by line based on the given instructions and similarities to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French:
Therefore, if you want to draw out moisture from the bladder, insert the end of a tube into the moisture, and pull with that what is pushed up into the parts above, for the moisture is drawn into the cavity of the tube.
And then insert the tip of the catheter into the urethra as we have recommended in the circumcision; and then expel the moisture with what you use to do so, for that moisture reaches the bladder quickly, and the patient feels it.
The form of the subtle catheter with which the bladder is catheterized is as follows:
And it is made of silver or brass, the tip of which resembles a small feather, and there should be a canal inside.
And then take a bladder from an animal, and place in it the moisture you wish to introduce into the bladder, and then tie it tightly with a double thread between two points, and warm that moisture over fire.
And then insert the tip of the catheter into the urethra.
And then press your hand on the bladder containing the moisture with适度的力度，让病人感觉到那液体已经到达了膀胱。
And if the bladder is not present for you to use, then take a piece of parchment and make a circle from it; and perforate all around its circumference; and then pour strong pitch into those holes so that it is well mixed; and then attach the circle as if it were an adhesive, so that you can place upon it whatever you wish of the moistures, oils, and waters.
And then you attach it to the instrument and use it in the same way as you would with the bladder, pressing with your hand inside so that the moisture reaches the bladder.
Chapter 60.
On the extraction of stones.
We have already discussed in the division the types of stones and their treatment with medicines, and the difference between stones formed in the kidneys and those formed in the bladder, and the signs of each.
And we have discussed the stone in which the operation is performed by hand, and incision.
And the stone properly formed in the bladder is that which is lodged within the bladder.
And I am narrating that with clear exposition and abbreviation.
Therefore, it says that stones formed in the bladder mostly affect children; and one of its signs is that the urine excreted from the bladder resembles water in its fineness, and appears in that sand; and the patient rubs his penis, and often feels pain, and then it becomes erect; and with this you should move your buttocks around in bunches of these.
And it is the practice of healing children who are within that period having reached fourteen years; and it is a difficult cure in the elderly. More in the young it is felt because it is among those [affected].
And of that one where the stone is larger and the cure is more difficult; And if it is small, it is contrary to that one.
Here is the translation of the given sentence line by line into English:
And then the patient should be lifted by their feet and shaken and jolted gently so that the stone descends into the neck of the bladder, or jumps from place to place a few times.
And then place that clyster between your hands prepared, and the patient's hands should hold their own body parts, so that the bladder is made to tilt towards the area below.
And then pour that out entirely from the outside.
Therefore, if you feel the stone in the space, then you should immediately treat it with surgery.
And if you cannot remove it entirely with your touch, then you must anoint your left index finger with oil, if the patient is a child, or your middle finger if they are a mature adult, and insert that into their anus. And pour out the stone inside while your finger remains in place. And gradually guide that (the stone) little by little into the neck of the bladder.
And then press with your finger at that spot and expel it from the interior parts towards the area where the section is.
And command the attendant to press the bladder with their hand; and command another attendant to extend the testicles upward with their right hand, and with their other hand hold the cord that is below the testicles, at the location where the incision is made.
And then insert a blade in this manner, which has the following form: And then divide that which is between the anus and the testicles, not in the middle but closer to the left thigh; and let the incision be made on that stone with your finger inside the anus, and make a transverse incision so that the outer part of the cut is wide and the inner part narrow according to how much the stone protrudes as possible, but no more, because you will feel with your finger in the anus when the stone should stop being cut, and it is released due to necessity.
And know that some stones have angles and edges, which make their expulsion difficult because of this.
And from that, this is like a grain, and it is round, and it is made of the light excrement.
Therefore, if this is the case where bones and cartilage are involved in the fracture.
And if it is not already perforated, then you must bind over that area, or press on that spot properly with your fingers, the tip of which should be like a file used to scrape stone, and do not withdraw from it; or insert into it an intricate instrument with a curved end.
And if you cannot act on that area, then slightly enlarge the wound, and if you see blood flow, bind it tightly with powdered vitriol.
And if there is more than one stone, then at the beginning you press your hand to the opening of the bladder, and then incise over it; and then slightly push near that area; and similarly do so if they are more than two particles.
And if the stone is very large, then it is mistaken to incise that area with a large cut, for you cause one of two outcomes in the patient: either death or continuous urine dripping, because the area is not fully healed.
And administer the expulsion of what is dislocated internally, or manipulate the fracture with forceps to extract it in pieces.
Therefore, once you have completed your operation, then fill the wound with pieces of aloe and dragon's blood, and strengthen it. And place over that cloth dipped in oil and wine, or in oiled and washed water, so that the swelling may be softened by heat.
Then recline the patient on their back, and do not loosen the bandage within the third day.
And when you have loosened it, wash the area with water and some oil, then treat it with a fine plaster and a soothing ointment until it is healed.
But if in the wound you encounter a hot swelling that is hard and corrosive, and of such appearance as if the blood were frozen in the bladder, thus obstructing urination (and this is known by the discharge of blood with urine), then insert your finger into the wound and extract that blood, for if it remains, it will cause corruption of the bladder and putrefaction.
Then wash the wound with sweet wine, water, and salt, and oppose every kind of infection with what is suitable for its healing until it is healed.
And throughout the entire healing process, you must keep both thighs tied and apply the medicines that are placed on the area.
And if the stone is small and is in the flesh of the penis, and it has been embedded in there, and urination is obstructed, then cure that without resorting to surgery, because many are accused of performing surgery for this treatment; and already I have expressed this, which is that you take an oiled iron probe, of which this is the form:
From the triangular extremity, sharp, inserted into wood.
And then take honey, and apply it with that to the penis after removing the stone so that it does not return to the bladder.
And then insert the tool into the penis, penetrating easily until the perforator reaches the stone. And rotate the perforator with your hand on that stone little by little, and you will pierce through until the other end penetrates; for the urine will be released immediately.
And then press your hand on the part where the stone breaks outside of the penis, for it is fractured there and flushed out with urine, and the patient is healed.
But if this treatment is not suitable for you due to some reason that prohibits you from doing so, then apply honey below the stone and more honey above the stone. And then make an incision over the stone on that penis between two bindings. And then extract it. And then loosen the bandage and modify the clotted blood that has formed in the wound.
And it is not necessary to have a bandage of wax below the stone, except to prevent it from returning to the bladder, and another bandage above it otherwise, because when the wax near the protrusion of the stone is loosened, the chain returns to its place and takes the wound with it.
And for this reason, it is necessary for you when you remove the wax above, that you lift the chain to the parts above, or return its full length, and take the wound as we have said.
Chapter LXI.
On the extraction of stones from women.
Stones in women are rarely formed.
But if a stone does occur in any of them, then the cure for it is difficult and is prohibited by many methods.
One of the reasons is that the woman's affected area is virginal (or tight).
And the second is that you do not find a woman who is so knowledgeable as to describe herself to the doctor when she is chaste, or if she is among women with husbands.
The third is that you cannot find a woman well versed in this art, especially the operation by hand.
And the fourth is that the site of the incision above the bladder in women is distant from the location of the bladder, for which you need a deeper incision, and there is fear [of complications].
And if necessity forces you to do so, then it is necessary that you take a woman who is very skilled in medicine, though she is rarely found.
But if you are deprived of that, then seek someone who is very skilled and subtle, or present a woman who is well-experienced in women's affairs, or a woman who has some knowledge in this art.
Therefore, present that person, and command them to do everything you instruct, starting with the examination of the stone; this is done to determine if the woman is a virgin, then they must insert their finger into her and check the stone.
Therefore, if you find that [condition], compress it with your finger, and then command him to urinate on that spot.
And if she is not a virgin, then command the midwife to insert her finger into the woman's vagina and search for the stone, while placing her left hand on the bladder, and compress that area with good pressure.
Therefore, when you find it, you must gradually pull that from the opening of the bladder to those parts with the power of your strength until you reach the root of the thigh.
And then incise at that position in the middle of the thigh where you find the tendon of the leg from whichever side it is present and insert a stone into that part, and do not let the said stone be removed from that place.
And the incision should be small at the beginning; then insert the probe into that incision, and if you feel the stone, now adjust the incision according to the amount by which you know the stone will be expelled from it.
And know that the types of stones are various: for among those, some are small and large, sharp and rough, long and round, and having ridges.
Therefore, you should know the various types of it through what you understand about that which you want to address.
And if you see blood flow, apply powdered vitriol to the area and leave it there for an hour until the bleeding stops, then resume your operation once the powder has been washed away.
And have prepared with you the instruments which are used in the extraction of stone in men, so that you may be assisted by them in your operation.
And if you see a flow of blood and know that the expulsion of blood is from an artery that has been cut, then place powder on the area and press it with cushions and tight binding; do not repeat this action; leave the stone there and do not remove it, for fear that the patient might die. Then treat the wound.
So when the sharpness of the blood has diminished over several days and the area becomes weak, then return to your operation before the stone is completely expelled.
Chapter sixty-two.
On the surgery for an incarcerated hernia.
An incarcerated hernia is nothing but an accumulation of moisture in the white sac, which is placed below the spermatic cord containing the testicle, and this sac is called the tunica vaginalis.
And sometimes it occurs in the proper tunica vaginalis, which nature prepares near the testicle, before it becomes another testicle; and it is the spermatic cord between the white sac that we have mentioned, and this is nothing but a hernia.
And the generation of this hernia is due to weakness which affects the groin area, because this material accumulates in those areas, and sometimes it occurs due to blows inflicted upon the groin.
And this humidity has various colors, for the color of it may incline to yellow or to bloody, or red, or be black and feculent, or be clear white, and this is what exists.
And the signs by which it is known where this water accumulation is as follows: for if it is in the white part that we have mentioned, then the swelling is round declining slightly in length like an egg shape, and the color appears, because the humidity contains it from all sides.
And if the humidity is in the proper fat tissue, then the swelling becomes round with parts of eggs and because of this, one thinks it is another egg.
And if the humidity is between the testicles and the white membrane, then apply a poultice there.
And when you want to know the color of the humidity, then observe the color of the humidity in the swelling with a probe whose form is previously described; and according to what is seen on the trace of the probe, judge of what is inside it.
When we come to the treatment of anemia, then it is necessary to command the patient to be bloodlet if this is possible for you, and turn the body of the patient completely.
And then lay them down on their back on some kind of support slightly elevated, and place a soft cloth underneath.
And then sit on the left side of him, and command the assistant to stand on his right side, who should stretch out his arm from one of two sides to the region of the genitals and to the part below the navel.
And then take a broad spatula and split the region of the genitals from the middle point along the length towards the penis.
And make the incision straight and evenly distant from the line where you should cut the skin of the genitals, until you reach the white membrane inside.
And retract that area, observe it carefully, and be cautious not to penetrate it; and when you retract it, make sure it hangs loosely and examine it meticulously with your retraction as much as possible.
And then puncture the fully water-filled membrane with a wide incision, and extract all the water.
And then separate the two lips of the incision with forceps, and extend the bladder upwards towards the upper parts; and do not touch the chain that contains the genitales, and cut into the bladder in such a way as is possible for you. And cut that part entirely or in pieces, especially its delicate side, for if you do not examine the incision meticulously, there is no guarantee that the water will not return.
And if you proceed with the operation from outside of his hernia during the time of your procedure, then once you have completed the section of the ciphac (possibly referring to an incision or a part of the surgical process), return it inside, and then stitch together the two lips of the scrotum's opening, and then treat that as you would other wounds until it is healed.
And if you find the hernia corrupted by another disease, then you must cut the vessels that are near the suspensory ligament, remove the hernia, and then treat it as we have said before.
But if the fluid is divided into two separate parts, then you should know that there are two hernias; therefore, incise that part in the same manner as you did with the other one; and if it appears to you that it is necessary to operate, then do so.
Then you should clean the blood and insert wool soaked in oil or oiled wool into the incisions; place over the outside another piece of wool that you have soaked in wine and oil, and spread this over both testicles and the navel of the abdomen; then place cloths folded and pillows on top, and bind them with a bandage according to this form:
And then two cloths are taken and filled with carded wool according to this pattern; and the ends with which it is pressed with coth or wet wool are made, and they are attached with straps in the waistband of the pants; one end goes from the buttocks between them, and the second takes hold at the crotch area, and two ends over both thighs and two ends on both knees, and all bindings should be adjusted in the waistband of the pants.
And sometimes this hernia is treated artificially with a cautery instead of sectioning with iron; and you should take a delicate knife-like cautery and incise the cord of the intestines with it, igniting it as we have recommended until the white membrane containing the fluid is revealed, and then you apply the cautery in the following manner: And it is shaped like the Greek letter gamma (γ).
And then pierce with that cautery, and ignite it until all the moisture is expelled.
And then extend the membrane with hooks, and squeeze it with hooks, and cauterize it with a delicate ignited cautery; and incise it as much as you can until you completely remove it; and be careful of the area so that the fire does not touch it.
And know that this operation is safer and results in less bleeding, and is better than an operation with incision.
And if this treatment causes inflammation or bleeding during the incision or cauterization, then you must address whatever issue arises through a cure that is appropriate to the situation as described.
But if the patient is weak and does not withstand a second operation due to its horror, then administer perforation as I recommend here; this is when it is confirmed that you should do so, based on what we have said about the indications, that the hernia is acute.
Then you must place the patient on some raised chair, then pierce the abscess at its lowest part with a broad scalpel, and perform the incision according to the length of the body.
And make the opening wide enough so that all the fluid can drain out.
Then place something over the area and bind it there, allowing the remaining fluid to drain out. And then treat that which is inside so that the wound may be healed.
And if there is an obstruction to the discharge of water at that time, you pierce it: and this is done only when the white membrane in the opening of the wound causes an obstacle and prevents the discharge of water. At that point, you must insert a pin or instrument into the wound with which the water from dropsy is extracted, as previously described; or apply a small device to the compression of the wound.
And know that the water returns and accumulates again after about six months or so; and when it has accumulated again, it should be pierced according to the same method, so that the patient may thus spend their days.
Chapter LXIII.
On the surgical section of a fleshy hernia and its treatment.
Know that in the surgery of this hernia, there is great risk of fatal danger in major operations; therefore, in my opinion, it is better to opt for its reduction and save it through a safer method.
And I am recalling the operation in that case and the specifics of the abscesses.
Thus, I say that abscesses form in bodies where the veins are involved, and this happens for various reasons: either due to an excess of sharp bitterness that is poured into the veins, or by percussion.
And the color of the abscess is according to the color of the body, and it is not noticeable in the pain, and it is a severe abscess.
And often the abscess is hardened, of which the color is dark, and there is no sensation in it.
And sometimes it is caused by the constriction of the arteries, and by the inflammation of those, as has already been understood in the recall of it, or by the inflammation of veins.
But that which is caused by the inflammation of arteries is known by the dispersion of the abscess when you press it with your fingers; and it should not be touched.
But that which is caused by the inflammation of veins does not disperse when pressed with your fingers for any reason.
And it is possible that on this type of condition a section may be made and on the other flesh; thus you incise the cord of the testicles, then stretch the scrotum upwards towards the parts above, extract that from the white membrane, release the suspensory ligament of the vessels, tie them up, and incise the suspensory ligament after you have released it completely from all parts of the scrotum.
And if the scrotum is already consolidated with those fleshy parts, then you must extract the scrotum and incise it.
And if there is adhesion due to some cause within the membrane, or between the vessels, then you must release all that adhesion and incise it with a circular incision.
But if there is a growth of flesh in the location of the adhesion that is behind, then you must incise all of it and extract the scrotum as we have said.
Therefore, once your operation is completed, fill the wound with wool infused in rose oil and wine; then treat it with other treatments until it heals.
Capitol .lxiv.
For the given line:
Vit is an abscess enveloped by some sort of membrane resembling a boil with softening of the testicles, and it makes difficult any exercise or walking for the patient.
And in the treatment of this disease, there is fear due to the recollection of what preceded it.
However, one must speak of the operation that follows the initial procedures.
And it is said that you must place the patient on an elevated chair; then pull down the sac containing the testicles; then grasp the spermatic cords with your fingers using cloths that are proven to be gentle on the penis; and have another assistant help, and stretch them vigorously.
Then make an incision with a sharp, broad spatula across the spermatic cords where the vessels are exposed.
Then squeeze from all sides as we have mentioned in the extraction of the arteries that are in the temples.
Then insert a needle with double thread into those areas, and tie one end of the thread at the front where you made the incision for the abscess, and tie the other end at the back. And then incise those in the middle according to a straight section along the length of the body, and extract what has been added by the foul and corrupted humidity.
And then treat the wound with a method used for other wounds where you want pus to be generated so that it cleans out the vessels which will be dyed by one of two humors, for it is not harmful by doing so.
But if you accidentally affect all the vessels, then it is necessary that the testicles be extracted or that the testicles be cut off along with the vessels, so that they are deprived of all nourishment due to the incision of the vessels, and that they be removed, or be cut off so that they are no longer useful.
Chapter LXV.
Here is the translation of the provided line:
The appearance of this hernia is due to a section that extends from the spine across the abdomen towards the groin area of the belly, because extending intestines from that rupture affects some of the intestines.
And this rupture is either of the abdomen or due to exertion by him, and these two types occur for various reasons: either by impact, or by jumping, or by crying out, or by lifting something heavy, or by similar causes.
And the sign of this, when it is due to an extension of the hip joint, is that it happens gradually over a long period of time, and does not occur suddenly, and there is a swelling similar within where the groin compresses the intestine.
And the sign of it is when it is due to the section of the spleen, for at the beginning it causes sudden severe pain; and there appears an inflammation different from the previous appearance around the area, and this is due to the protrusion of the intestine, and the body of it extends beyond the spleen.
And sometimes it happens that the intestine protrudes through the membrane, and this type of intestinal hernia is called zirbal.
And sometimes it happens due to gas, and at times the intestine splits open, and here it gets trapped, causing great distress to the patient, and sometimes it leads to severe and significantly worse pain when pressed.
And in the treatment of this kind of illness with iron, there is fear, so it must be avoided in such cases.
And the method of the operation for this is that you command the patient to push the intestine back into its cavity with their hand; if it obeys and returns, then have them lie on their back between your hands, and lift their chest.
And then hold the cord that connects the spermatic cord above, and cut through the entire length of the spermatic cord; then insert two hooks into the edges of the incision according to what is needed to open the incision with those.
And if the section is according to the quantity that it is possible for you to extract from that the pus may be expelled.
And then separate that sac which holds the cord of the testicles, until the white hard part of each side is revealed.
And then you insert your finger into the area where the testicle lies, between the white sac that is beneath the spermatic cord and the second sac, separating it from the adhesion that is at the back of the scrotum.
And then hold the spermatic cord with your hand towards the outer parts, and with this action extend the white sac upwards using your left hand, and lift the scrotum with the sac to the section area; and command the assistant to stretch the scrotum upward while you break the adhesion at the back completely.
And feel with your fingers to ensure there is no cause for the intestine being wrapped in the hard white sac. But if you find any cause for it, then you push that part back into the abdomen.
And then make an incision at the part below the scrotum where blood and pus will flow out, as we have described in what we have said.
And then apply wool soaked in oil and place it on the wound; administer the bandage that we have described (and sometimes the white scrotum is cauterized, which we mentioned near the beginning of the fear of blood flow, for such occurrences often happen) and leave the bandage until it falls off by itself.
But if the treatment is delayed, then bathe it with warm water and place it on the area until it falls off as we have said.
And then treat the wound with another treatment for wounds until it is healed.
It seems like you've provided a section marker or chapter heading, specifically "Capitul .lxvi." which translates to "Chapter LXVI" in English. This indicates the beginning of Chapter 66 (LXVI in Roman numerals) in a text. If you have more content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to share!
This phrase "De hernia ventosa" can be translated into English as:
In this hernia, none has been seen who dared to undertake its cure with iron.
And the first ones said that it is done as we have recounted in the hernia case with the thread; which is that you tie the vessels near the section where there is ease for him; and then dry out in the middle area around the abscess, using what opens that up, while the vessels fall.
And treat the plague as we have said until it is healed.
Chapter LXVII.
Of the disruption that occurs in the ankles.
Sometimes, as we have said, a rupture occurs in the ankles, and you should examine the area.
And do not attribute any cause of the hernias to the groin; and if you do attribute a cause, it is minimal; and it returns at all times.
But if the condition persists for a long time, there is a fixed rupture in the spine where the hernia descends into the spine; this happens due to the extension of the spine which occurs in the ankles as we have said, which causes the spine to stretch and then soften, and the area becomes inflamed, and you should examine it.
And the treatment of it is with a cautery, as was mentioned earlier in the description.
And sometimes it is treated with fire according to this method: the patient lies on their back between your hands, and then you dry the inflamed area of the rupture by drying it horizontally according to the quantity of three fingers.
And then apply the white cloth that is under the belt so that it is uncovered.
And then take the probe and place it over the prominent part of the spine, and press that against the front of the abdomen.
And then mark the two prominent points at the end of the spine's segment, and align those points with each other using a suture.
And then extract the end of the thread, and do not incise entirely through the skin, nor extend the wound, nor cause any other harm as I will teach you in the treatment of intestinal hernia.
And then treat that with the treatment of wounds, and when you incise the abscesses, cleanse that area and restore the wound before it solidifies; for the skin contracts and the prominence of the rupture is not adjusted.
And cautery is better in this area, for it is more conducive to healing.
Chapter LXVIII.
On the softening of the spermatic cord.
Often the spermatic cord is softened in some men because the flesh between them is softened, and this is attributed to its care.
Therefore, it is necessary for one who is skilled in its treatment to have the patient lie down on their back, and to incise the entire softened cord over the natural cord; then to suture the two edges together.
And if you want, in the beginning, soften the excess of the loosened ligament with three or four heat applications and with a firm suture.
And then cut between the sutures; and then treat for the healing of other wounds until it is healed and the pus subsides.
Capitol .lxix.
From the context provided by the medieval medical treatise, it seems that "castracio" is related to the act of castration. Here's a translation attempt for the given line:
Know that in our law castration is excommunicated, but for a reason it seems necessary to me to remind you of it in this book; and there is no need to remember it except in two ways, one of which is so that this may be part of the knowledge of the doctor when questioned about it, who knows the cure for the one to whom it happens; and the other way is that we often have a need for castration of other animals for our use by them, such as mules, oxen, and pigs, and similar beasts.
And thus I say that castration is performed in two ways: either by attraction, or by cutting through incision.
But in the one that is done by attraction, the method of the operation is to have the animal immersed in hot water until its testicles are softened and become loose and hang down. Then take them with your hand while they are still dissolved and do not let them appear to the touch.
But in castration performed by incision and cutting, you must hold the animal and press the cord of its testicles with your left hand.
And then apply the suspension device, and make an incision on each bone with a cut between two joints.
And then incise that pus which you have squeezed out. And do not leave any cause on those with sciatica except the subtle sciatica which is on the veins.
And this method of castration is better, which is done by atrophy, because atrophy leaves no cause from the testicles for the animal to desire copulation.
And then treat the wound until it is healed.
Chapter LXX.
On the treatment of hermaphroditism.
Hermaphroditism in men occurs in two ways: one is when it appears in the space where the scrotum of the testicles is, between the two testicles, resembling a female vulva with hair.
And sometimes urine flows from that area in the scrotum of the testicles.
In women, it is of one kind: the female vulva above the penis appears as two male testicles slightly to the right at the opening, like the foreskin of a man and two testicles.
And the cure is of three types: two for men and one type for women. And it is necessary that you incise those tight muscles so that the swelling of that area is released, and then treat them with the cure for other afflictions.
And in the second type for men, where you urinate from an area located in the region of the testicles, there is neither cure nor operation for it.
Chapter XXI.
On swelling and protruding flesh due to causes in women.
Swelling appears suddenly due to natural causes, during which it is pressed and treated with care; and sometimes it is enlarged in some women to such an extent that it spreads similarly as in men and even extends to intercourse.
Then it is necessary that you hold the excess swelling with your hand or with scissors and incise it.
And do not delay in making the incision, especially near the region of the genitalia, so that it does not cause a flow of blood.
And then treat that with the treatment for wounds until it is healed.
New flesh is flesh that grows in the wounds of the mother until it fills them, and it often appears on the external parts resembling a tail (and for this reason, some early practitioners called it "tailed disease"); therefore, we must incise it as we would lentigines, and treat it until it is healed.
Chapter LXXII.
Of the treatment for arthritis.
Alratica es que le conh de la femna no sia perforat, o sia le trauc petit. And it is either natural or accidental.
And accidental [pain] is due to illness that has preceded it, and that which is caused either by improperly fitted flesh or by a subtle or thick foreign body.
And it is caused either in the region of the womb, or on its sides, or on its upper part, or on its lower part, and you prohibit coitus, pregnancy, and childbirth, and strictly forbid menstruation.
And the knowledge of that is gained by observing the midwife, if the obstruction is visible, it is clear; but if it is not visible, then you seek that with your fingers or with a probe.
And if the obstruction is by subtle phlegm and approaches both lips, then you should cut and break that obstruction.
And you place cushions under both labia, and then place your index fingers of both hands inside.
And the woman is on her back, her thighs spread apart, and then spread the two lips with force so that that subtle barrier is broken and the obstruction is opened.
And then take wool and soak it in oil and place that on the area, and keep it for a day so that the incised area does not become hardened.
But if the barrier is thick and dense, then you must incise it with a spatula or with a myrtle leaf.
But if the obstruction is due to flesh, then suspend it with forceps, and incise it.
And use the medicines that stop blood flow from bites, such as hellebore, dragon's blood, and enses, mixed with egg white.
And then administer a wide lead cannula so that the affected area does not become slightly hardened.
And keep it for several days and administer dried calf's horn.
And then it is treated with the other method of consolidation until it is healed.
And sometimes it happens in the major growth of other flesh, and then you must incise according to this method. But if this is due to a chronic abscess, and the chronic abscess that is in the main area should not be treated with iron in any way.
Chapter LXXIII.
On the treatment of hemorrhoids and tumors and red boils that occur in the area around women's genitalia.
Hemorrhoids are understood to be from the openings of small veins through which blood continuously flows; and when hemorrhoids become old, they harden.
And I have already mentioned in the division the types of those and the signs of those, saying thus those that receive cure and those that do not receive cure.
Therefore, I say that hemorrhoids and tumors when they are in the region of the large intestine and do not appear to the senses, then surgery should not be performed on them.
But those that are near the opening of the large intestine and can be felt, those are the ones that can be treated.
And you must put the woman in cold water and then extend the tumor with forceps or with a rough cloth, and incise them with the scissors.
Then sprinkle on them to stop the flow of blood one of the powdered substances used for incising, such as gallnuts and similar items.
Then fumigate their feet for an hour, and then place them in cold water.
And if the flow of blood persists, then have them sit in a decoction of sumac and pomegranate rinds and walnuts and similar items.
Then take flour of oats, mix it with honey and sweet wine, and make a poultice with that for the back.
And if the blood is separated, that is good; and if not, cause adhesion with two cupping glasses, and on the breasts perform scarification.
And then take wool and submerge it in the juice of coriander or in the juice of angelica or in the juice of guarravier with fermented wine and apply it to the area; and then treat the place with ointments until it is healed.
And cure that which is inside so that it may be healed.
It seems like you've provided a section marker, "Capitul .lxxiv." which translates to "Chapter LXXIV" or "Chapter 74" in English. This likely denotes the seventy-fourth chapter of a text. If you have more content from this chapter that needs translation or explanation, feel free to share it!
This phrase appears to be in an old Romance language similar to Medieval Latin or Old French. Here is the translation into English:
Here is the translation of the provided line: And I have already spoken of these diseases and their types and the signs thereof, and their treatments in this section.
And I must say in this treatise about an abscess that comes on the breast when it is one of those abscesses from which pus can be collected, and if you want to know how the operation with iron is performed.
Then you must consider whether the pain of the abscess at its onset is acute with percussion and phlegm and fever, and sometimes that reddening occurs, and if you press on it there's a feeling, then do not treat it with puncture, and cure it with what aids maturation until the acuteness of the symptoms ceases.
And now you must have the woman sit on a chair that has two footrests; and she should recline on her back and position her feet towards the lower part of the belly, with her thighs spread apart, and place her arms under her head, and bind them with suitable bandages.
Then the midwife should follow the right path and administer the instrument with which the opening of the mother is dilated, the form of which will be described in the following causes.
And when you want to administer this instrument, you should insert it gently into the entrance of the mother's vagina, and the part of the instrument that enters the mother should not be larger than the entrance of the vagina and should guide the patient. And if the instrument is larger than the opening of the uterus, then you must place pillows on the texture of the uterus's opening so that the entry of any instrument into the uterus is prevented.
And it is necessary that you stop the flow that runs through the upper instrument and that the minister holds the instrument and rotates the flow until the opening of the main area is exposed.
And when the pus appears and is touched with the hand and it feels hot and wet, then you must dry that area by scraping off the top of it with a spatula.
And when the pus is evacuated, then you must place on the wound a cloth soaked in rose oil or olive oil that has some astringency; and apply a bandage to the incision at the site of the main area.
And place outside the wound and over the perineum clean wool submerged in water in which mallows have been boiled.
And then it should be treated for about two days with an ointment that you must apply until it is healed.
And sometimes the wound and the affected area that is infected are washed with water and honey, then with water in which a piece of iris or longwort has been boiled, and then return to using the ointment.
And if the wound is inside a swollen area of the body, then you must abstain from treating it with iron, instead cure it using what we have mentioned in the section.
Chapter LXXV.
To teach the midwives how to treat unhealthy embryos when they appear according to an unnatural form.
It is necessary for the midwife to recognize the signs of a natural childbirth from the beginning. This is so that when you see a woman expressing the parts and desiring to smell the air, and she becomes restless due to what is happening during labor, and hastens the expulsion of the embryo, then you know that this birth is according to a natural form, with the head coming out first, followed by the body either hanging or suspended from the navel.
Therefore, when you see those signs, then it is necessary that the patient’s belly be compressed so that the embryo descends easily because when they descend on their head, tell them the second part [of the process], and clean them of those excesses with a good cleansing.
Here is the translation line by line:
When there is a necessary cause for the midwife to be wise and subtle in all those matters, and that she guards against error and deception.
And I am showing all the figures of those [conditions], and what mechanism is in them by which they are signified by that and stand upon that.
When the seed is ejaculated on a woman's head due to natural exercise, and when it is intense for the woman and done in a difficult position, and sometimes the power of the man is already weakened, then one should apply this remedy, or let women take it, and evaporate its semen with fenugreek juice and humid oils.
And then the midwife inserts her finger between the small bones of the spine and splits it with that second finger, or she uses her nail to scrape away the moisture within. And press the woman's abdomen until the fetus descends.
And if it does not descend, then the woman must be treated with a mixture of psyllium mucilage and fenugreek mucilage.
Then command the one attending her to press and make her sneeze with pepper; and hold her mouth and nose for about an hour, for the fetus will come out soon.
And if the two hands of the fetus come out first at the beginning, then you must gently reduce them back little by little. But if it does not obey the instrument, then place the woman on a chair and lift her feet up, and then shake the chair on the ground; and the woman should be held so she does not fall due to the shaking.
And if the hands are not brought back inside and the fetus dies, then cut those [hands] off and extract the remains of the fetus or tie the body of the fetus to its hand with a cloth and pull it out evenly, for it will come out soon.
When you are working on the patient's feet, then you must press them down, and then fold the cloth slightly, and then smooth it out, and then take one of their feet and stretch it little by little.
When you have thus entered between the thighs, then you command them to strain, and cause that to be expelled with effort, for it will be purged if God wills it.
And if it is not purged by what we have recommended, then you gradually return the cloth until you place it in its natural position again, for it will be purged with a gentle insertion at that point.
And if it is not resolved by all that we have recommended, then take some alum and dissolved gum, and pound everything in the mortar with good pounding, and then apply this mixture to the woman's cervix, at the lowest part of her abdomen. Then have that person sit in tepid water until the hypochondria (the areas beneath the ribs) are warmed.
And when you see that the parts of him are softened, then perform fumigation with myrtle and apply it to him. And when you have the sub-fumigation for an hour, then make her sit on a chair, and then make her sneeze and open her mouth wide, and lift her up from that position, and press the lower part of her abdomen with slight compression, because the matter will soon be expelled.
Extract the obstruction longitudinally using one of your fingers. Attempt to reduce the swelling with your hand, but if you cannot do so, then elevate the woman and help her walk.
And if she cannot walk, then have her lie down on the bed, and vigorously shake her thighs with percussion, and then administer ointments that I recommend, made from mucilaginous substances.
And if the childbirth has occurred, then have her sit on a stool, and work on reducing the swelling, aligning the obstruction according to its natural form, and make the woman sneeze and command her to strain as it is being removed.
Exuding from the neck over his body spread out his arms and the surface of him is on the side of his mother. It is necessary that the midwife hold the hand of the fetus and then turn it little by little, so that this happens with ease.
And when it is mixed and thoroughly combined, then apply over his nose what we have recommended of oil and poultices.
And then you command them to moan little by little, and once you have done that, place that poultice on a plate and command them to lean over the right side, and then command them to be compressed; and make that person sneeze with conditions. The exit of the prepared fetus over the side.
When they say to remove the horribles from the main area according to this method, consider it, and then you cut with your nail into the second layer so that the humidity is evacuated.
And if the hernia is hanging over the face and neck of the patient, then you incise that part of the navel area so that it does not get trapped and cause death.
Then push the hernia into the parts inside where you need to place it, and instruct the woman to compress herself several times, and it will come out on its own with a light emission, if God so wills.
The outcome of twin births or multiple fetuses. Know that twins are often born, and sometimes three or four are born, though this is rare and seldom happens; however, their causes are natural, not supernatural.
And count those, even if they are multiplied, as a second entity, and they are separated by a membrane. Distinguish them entirely at the navel of each of them. And sometimes they come out on their own just as one hernia would with a light natural emission, and they often emerge in this way without causing harm, as we have described.
And if some of them are difficult to deliver and lead to what we have said about unnatural presentations, then you should treat them as we have described.
And if the midwife is skilled and does this with ease and subtlety, and with care, and is inventive according to every figure according to how it is prepared by the bringing of health.
Remembrance of what is formed in the womb from embryos and abortions.
Here is the translation of the given text:
And all of this must be known by the midwife who often sees something similar to this, and therefore she applies herself to it in the way that is necessary.
Capitol .lxxvi.
From the extraction of the fetus when it is dead.
When you treat a dead fetus as we have described in the section on medication and it has not been expelled, and you must use manual intervention, then you need to consider whether the woman is of sound health and not subject to any of the conditions that could lead to her harm.
Then the woman should be placed face down on the bed with her head lowered and her thighs raised.
And the minister should hold her in two parts or tie her to the bed so that her body does not extend during the extraction of the fetus.
Then you should moisten the birth canal of the mother with humid oils and with a mucilage of coltsfoot and fenugreek and its seeds.
Then anoint your hand with those oils and mucilages, and then gently insert your hand into the mother, and then search with your hand for the place where you can grasp the fetus with your fingers.
And the appropriate places for this are: then you consider if the device is prepared so that it descends upon his head, and now you insert the hooks into his nostrils, or in the neck, or in the mouth, or in the palate, or under the beard, or in the collarbone, or in the areas near the ribs, or under the hypochondria.
But if the ailment is in the patient's feet, then it occurs in the heels or in the middle of the back.
And it is necessary to hold the probe with the right hand, and place its curvature in the spot that is between the fingers of the left hand, and insert the hand easily and place the probe in one of those places we have mentioned, until it reaches the swollen cause.
And then place and keep another person in the appropriate position next to him, or a third if necessary, so that the traction is equal, and not just according to its straightness alone.
And it should be massaged all over, so that the patient's discomfort is alleviated just as it is done in dental procedures for the extraction of a tooth.
And one must apply to the area between them so that the extension is softened; and if any part of it is retained, then one must have the midwife anoint some of her fingers with oil and skillfully insert those fingers and rotate with them what is retained.
Therefore, if a part of the fetus is stuck, then the positions should be changed until it becomes easier; do this until the entire fetus is delivered.
But if one hand is extended before the other and it is not possible to reduce it due to its contraction, then a cloth should be wrapped around that hand; then extract it until all of it is removed, and incise it either at the joint of the hand or at the wrist.
And in this way you must do it with the other hand and with both feet.
And if the head of the boil is large, or you encounter constriction during the exudation, or if there is water tightly sealed in the top, then you must insert between the fingers and split the head to drain the water, or use an instrument called “alundat” to scoop it out. The form of this instrument will be shown along with the forms of other instruments in the chapter that follows this one.
And similarly, if the boil has a large head by nature, then you must incise it with a lancet, or take it out with an alundat as we have said; and then remove the bones with forceps.
And if the head has emerged but is constricted by the skin, then it should be cut open so that the moisture within the foot can be drained out.
But if it is not complicated and does not require exudation, then you should incise the head as soon as it becomes possible for you to do so.
And if the lower part of the abdomen is swollen with an abscess or edema, then you must pierce that area to drain the fluid within it.
And if the condition affects the lower legs, then the attraction of it is slight and the direction of it towards the mouth of the vein is mild.
And if the abdomen and feet are constricted, then you must extract that with cloth which you will have wrapped around your hand, and cut open the abdomen and feet so that what is inside may flow out.
More if the other limbs remain and the head returns, then the midwife inserts her left hand; but if the mother's mouth is opened, then she inserts her hand into the womb area, and with that seeks the head, and pulls it inside the mother’s mouth with her fingers, and then inserts one or two ounces, and pulls it in with those.
And if the mouth of the womb is constricted by an abscess that has occurred at the opening, then it should not be disturbed; first, you must administer an effusion of moist and fatty substances. And administer plasters; and follow up with baths that soften and moisturize.
And if the procedure is on the patient's side, then it should be sutured: and administer what we have said to the fresh wound.
And if this is not possible, then it should be cut into pieces and extracted.
And it is necessary that you do not leave any cause within the second layer.
And when you have completed all your operations, then administer what we have said about the treatment of the swellings that occur from the incisions.
And if bleeding occurs, then bathe in styptic waters and administer the other treatment.
And I have seen a woman whose belly contained a dead fetus, and soon after became pregnant again, and then another fetus died. It happened to him that a swelling occurred in his abdomen; and it swelled inside where an incision was made, and he began to discharge pus.
And I was called for his care, and treated him for a long time, but the plague did not heal.
Then I placed some strongly adhesive plasters on him, and drew out a bone from him, and after passing several days, I drew out another bone; and I was very surprised because there were no bones in his abdomen.
And then I thought that they were the bones of a dead fetus.
Then I treated the plague, and extracted many bones from him, the woman existing in his very delicate conditions, and he lived in this manner for a long time, cured of a small part of his arm.
And I do not intend to be strange, but rather because in this lies knowledge and assistance for the doctor who administers treatment with skillful hands.
Of the forms of the instruments that are necessary to extract the fetus.
Form with which the mother is cut open:
This is the form of a stretcher on which the legs are tied, with two loops at the two ends of two feet. However, this loop should be finer than the strap, and it can be made of leather or willow wood.
And the width of each piece should be two digits and the margin of each by two is one digit, and the length of each is one and a half palms; and in the middle of the two pieces are two joints made from the same material which are already fastened, each of whose length is half a palm and a little more, and the width of each is two digits or a little more.
And these two additives should be inserted into the mouth of the mother so that it is opened with them when you rotate the two prescribed instruments.
Forma autra semblant de aquela pus subtil e pus leugiera:
Make it of pieces of oak or of sticks according to the resemblance of forceps. And yet at the extremity of his two additions thus as often, and the length of those additions is each one palm, and the width of each is two fingers.
And when you want to open the womb with those methods, then you make the woman lie down on the bed with her feet hanging off, and open what is between her thighs. And then open your hand with the instrument just as you would with scissors, evenly according to the amount that you want from the estimation of the mouth of the mother between which the midwife does what she wants.
The form of dizziness which the ancients called:
Form of expulsion with which the fetus is expelled:
Forma de amisidat2 am le qual es conterit le cap gran
And it is similar to a forceps which has teeth at the end, like pincers, and sometimes it is made long like a forceps according to this form, like pincers, which have teeth like those of a saw with which it is cut and compressed. It seems that the phrase "Forma de amesidat pauc:" might be a mix of languages similar to medieval or old Romance languages (such as Old French, Old Spanish, etc.). A possible translation into English would be:
Form of an ounce having a spine:
Form of an ounce having two spines:
Forma de spatum havent dos extremitatz am le qual le cap es abscindit:
Forma de dos espatums latz:
All those instruments are exercised, and when more types of those are multiplied and prepared by the artisans, it is lighter for their operation and better suited to people according to their quantity.
And do not use those instruments anywhere you should prepare yourself, for the necessity of those is not excusable.
Of the extraction of the tonsil.
When the tonsil is preventing swallowing, then you should command the patient to hold their breath, and then make them sneeze with force, and place your hand over their mouth and nose, and if it is expelled by this means, it will be good.
And if not, then take a reed and pierce the top to create a small hole, and place in it burning herbs such as calamint, rue, anise, chamomile, Arabic scammony, and cinnamon bark. All of these herbs or some of them should be submerged in water in the reed, and place that over fire.
Then place a cane tube in the mouth of the reed, and keep it there until the vapor reaches the cavity of the mouth.
Then make her sneeze as we have said, and the tonsil will be expelled quickly.
Here is the translation of the provided text line by line into English: Before it is necessary to move the right and left sides with ease.
And if the mouth of the wound is constricted, we have already recommended the treatment with sneezing and with medication using herbs.
But if it is not expelled by all the causes which we have recommended, then be careful not to strain excessively in attempting abstraction. However, it must be that what has been squeezed out from him reaches the mouth of the wound and then apply a unguent and tetrapharmacum; for this will make it rot within a few days and dissolve, thus being expelled.
However, when it rots, the bad humor rises to the head and to the stomach, causing harm to the patient; therefore, it is necessary to administer fumigations and appropriate treatments for this condition.
However, some of the Ancients have already prescribed fumigation with southernwood and dried figs.
Method of using an instrument to fumigate a woman suffering from retained menses and secondary infertility:
Sia fayta de veyre o de eram.
And let the narrow end be placed in the container and the wide end over the fire, and the fumigation should be placed over the embers of the fire.
And hold that inside so that the sub-incineration may be consumed and repeat another [process].
For the treatment of the unperforated infant's anus.
Motz enfantz naysso e les culs de lu no so perforatz, les quals ya ciphac subtil e opilat. Then it is necessary for the midwife to pierce that spot with her finger; and if not, pierce it with a sharp spatula, and be careful not to touch the membrane.
Then place over that wool soaked in wine and oil; then care for it with an ointment to ensure it heals.
But if you fear it is blocked, then place a catheter in the tube for a few days, and remove it when the child wants to urinate.
And it may happen that the anus is blocked due to consolidation of an ulcer or an abscess; then it is necessary for that consolidation to be incised, and then it should be treated with what we have said about treatment and the use of lead.
On the treatment of fistulas that occur below.
The fistulas that occur in the lower part below are narrow and thick, most of which appear near the anus externally or in the space of that part.
And it is a fistula or multiple fistulas.
And when that swelling is old and comes from moist white phlegm or subtle putrefaction, and sometimes these fistulas penetrate deeply.
And those penetrating are known by what is expelled from them through excretion and flatulence; and sometimes the patient uses excretion, and strongly it expels those worms.
And some of those fistulas found in the space penetrate into the bladder, and into the flesh of the penis; and some of them penetrate into the joint of the thigh and into the area near the hip.
And that by which a penetrating and non-penetrating fistula is known, is that you insert your index finger into the anus, and introduce a slender probe of wax or iron into the fistula when there is no tortuosity.
And if there is tortuosity in that area, then insert a slender probe of lead or horsehair until you feel the probe or the hair with your finger.
And if you do not feel anything with that probe and do not find any sign of discharge, worms, or gas as we have said, then you know it is non-penetrating, and then apply treatment accordingly.
And when the fistula penetrates into the bladder or into the urethra of the penis, then its significance is the discharge of urine from there and the prevention of that area being consolidated with medication.
And if it penetrates into the joint of the thigh or into the bone and causes pain in the area, then the sign of this is that the probe goes through there without tortuosity into the bone, causing pain in the region of the affected part; and that pus continuously flows from it; and that medication does not help, nor can it be consolidated with ointment.
And in all those fistulas not every cure is complete, and the cure of those is the work and vanity of the inexperienced doctors upon whom they rely.
And in that which is not penetrating and not old, healing with iron is hoped for according to what I will recount to you, and this which has already been proven.
And it is that the patient lies between your hands upon his back and raises their thighs towards his chest, with the knees inclined towards the belly, and then insert a lead probe, or an iron one if it is in the twisted fistula, until you know the location where the probe reaches.
And if the patient feels pain around the neck, then you must insert your index finger into the neck.
And if you feel in your hand the attempt already by itself to penetrate openly, or what you feel between your hand and that skin or flesh, then you know certainly that it is penetrating; and then do not work on that area, for there is no cure there, as we have said.
But however some say it is healthy in some men temporarily.
And of the treatment by which improvement is hoped for in him, you ignite a fine cautery according to the width of the fistula, as was previously mentioned, and insert that ignited cautery into the fistula until it reaches around the neck; then repeat this action two or three times until you know that all those fistulated tissues resembling feather quills have been properly adhered together.
Then treat it with poultices wrapped in bandages until all the adhered tissues come out, and then treat it with medicines that generate and consolidate the flesh. If it is healed, that is good; if not, it will never be cured by any other treatment.
And if the probe is inserted and does not penetrate your finger which is in the anus, and between that finger and the probe, there is a kind of flesh or pus membrane, and turn the fistula so that it lies on the surface of the chain. Now dry the chain from the beginning of the fistula, and you will dry it with the probe, placing it inside the fistula until the drying reaches the point where the tip of the probe ends, and through this process, it is freed and cut.
And then clean those fistulated flesh which resembles a bird feather quill and do not damage any of them for any reason.
And if blood flow should come between you and your operation when you are cutting those tissues, then the best thing to do and the lightest instrument is to cauterize with fire or with sharp medicine, for a cautery with fire fixes two good things: it is an adjustment of those tissues being joined together, and a cutoff of blood by drying out the humidities.
Then treat that area with cloths wrapped in boiled or finely ground linen until the place stops bleeding, and then treat the wound with ointments that generate and consolidate tough flesh.
And thus medicines in which there is styptic and drying power; when it is restored, it is healed and you do not fear recurrence.
But if the fistula has already penetrated into the rectum and extends from the surface of the body, then insert your finger into the rectum and examine it with that.
And thus if you feel resistance and between you and it there is merely a veil of tissue or flesh, and penetration is blocked, then the operation should not be performed but rather through means of faith and hope.
Here is the translation line by line of the provided text: And sometimes the fistula is treated in this manner: it is when you insert the probe into the fistula, and it is on the side of the buttock around the surface of the body with the chain and at the margin of the buttock, then take a probe with a perforated end, which is thus like a needle for preparing the cores in this way:
And insert into that wound wrapped with five leaves or around it; then try to insert a leaf into the fistula until you reach its cavity.
If it is necessary to penetrate the margin of the anus from inside, then you extract the gall from that place as if you were inserting your finger into the anus; and you pull out the end of the gall and align both ends equally, and squeeze each one, and leave this for a day or two, and when it is necessary to cut the gall in the flesh, tightly bind that part so that the flesh which is between the two ends of the gall can be incised and removed.
And then treat the wound before it is fully consolidated and healed.
And if the openings of the fistula are not penetrating, then make them penetrate in whatever way you prepare, but not so deeply that you injure the tendon, for it is not for you to do this so as not to cut the tendon; and then treat it until it is healed.
The method of using a spiked spatula with which the fistula is split: the curvature of which is sharply pointed and the other part is not sharp, so as not to injure what is not necessary, just as is sometimes done.
On sewing hemorrhoids in which blood flows at the incision of those.
Hemorrhoids are treated in two ways, for they can appear around the anus similar to coal, or they can be like pieces of raw meat. And of those, some are small and some are large, and blood flows continuously from them. They are numerous, and they can be outside the anus, and at its extremities.
And however those that are related to the anus are due to a lack of moisture in the months, during which yellow water or a little blood comes out continuously, and according to the color of the body.
And the treatment for that which is inside the anus is to command the patient to sit and to strain such that the anus stretches and the hemorrhoids appear to you. Then you cut and suspend with hooks or hold them with your fingernail, and then incise those veins at their roots.
If the nails are not held in place by moisture and softness of those areas, then take those with rough cloth or wool batting, and extract them using tweezers, and then cut into them and sprinkle some powders that are appropriate near the incision, so that they can act there instead of cauterization; or cauterize them according to what is detailed in the chapter on cauterization. And then treat them with other treatments until they are healed.
And if the rectum does not expel [properly], then use a clyster with a small opening, and wash it with water that is in the colon and which allows for slight expulsion when the patient exerts themselves.
But if the hemorrhoids are outside the rectum, then their cause is slight, and you should take hold of them with your fingernail or use tweezers to grasp them, cut into them, and then treat them with what we have said until they are healed.
And for the one who requires an incision, you must suture them in the following manner: take thread wrapped and insert it into a needle, then pull out the hemorrhoids to the upper parts, and make that penetrate with the needle at the edge of the other part. Wrap both ends of the thread on the side further from the needle, doing so transversely; tighten the hemorrhoid with strong pressure, and then knot the thread and remove the needle.
And do this for all [affected areas], and leave one untouched and do not sew it up, so that the excess blood may flow out from there.
And then place over the buttocks a cloth soaked in oil or ointment; and put that on the wound and command the patient to lie still. And then place that inside the container; and when it is cooked, treat those with ointments or other treatments until it heals.
And when they are old and no longer respond to that medicine, then you must scrape those areas with the tip of a spatula or your nail until they become moist and the scabby pus on top is removed, which prevents them from healing; then treat those areas until they consolidate.
Then you remove those areas with more forceful scraping than the first until they bleed and are raw; then treat those areas until they heal.
Know that alamermar, which is like a nail, and it is not just any round spot according to the color of the body resembling the head of a clove, and it appears all over the body but mostly in the areas near the feet and toes, and because of this pain, people suffer from it.
And then it is necessary to incise what is in the area around the nail, and hold it with scissors or forceps, and root it out from its base; then treat that area.
And if you want, cauterize the wound that is described in the preceding chapter.
More like a wart is a small, rough, tubular, round prominence on the surface of the body, and white spots appear on the hands of children.
And the cure for it is that you stretch and incise that area, or that you bind that area with a thread or with cloth inside which feces are placed. And if you want, cauterize it, as we have said, with fire or with sharp medicine.
And the formica is a small hairy or large fistulated prominence on the surface of the body moving in the urine, and when the cold encounters it, it causes pain resembling an ant bite, and it forms around the body.
And the cure for it is that you take a quill from an eagle or a vulture, and let it be strong, and place that over the blister so that the circle of the quill contains the affected area; then rotate your hand with the quill until you cut out what is within the circumference of the blister, and press that into the flesh's swelling, and eradicate the blister from its root.
And if you want, do this with a reed or iron tube according to this method:
Let the part above the tube be tapered and closed (that is, unperforated), wrapped in such a way that when the patient holds it on their finger, the rotation of that (tube) is facilitated.
And if you want to cauterize the blister, do so as mentioned in the cauterization of atrophied tissue in the chapter on cautery.
On the shape of the instruments that are used to give chrism.
Sometimes chrism is made of silver or lead or molded or hammered reed; and sometimes it is made in small and large sizes according to those to whom it is administered, for that which is administered in the treatment of small children should be small; and for those whose anuses are inflamed or painful, the chrism containers for them should be small.
The form of large and small chrysters:
The head of the cannula above which the bag is tied should be wide according to this manner; and it should be at a distance where the bag is tied thus as usual.
And the lower extremity of the pus which is inserted into the rectum should be closed (that is, not open) to prevent leakage; and on one side there should be two channels, and on the other side one channel, and the width of the channel should be according to the thickness of the rays, with the thicker ones being a little wider.
And the bag in which the medicines are placed should be made of animal bladder or sheepskin, and its mouth should be one palm wide.
And it should be pierced with several channels as described; and the space between the channels should be about the thickness of a finger.
Then insert strong raw fiber, made from ten fibers or so, into those channels; and adjust the bag with it. When the bag is placed on the patient, it should be tight at the top of the catheter between two distinct points with strong compression, and then catheterize each channel with it. However, the quality of catheterizing with it is that you fill the bag with medicine, which should be warmed according to the quantity tolerated by the patient; be careful that it is neither too hot nor too cold.
And then the patient is laid on their back, and raise their legs up and place them on a pillow or a cushion; and then anoint the tip of the cautery with oil or egg white or fenugreek mucilage or similar; and then gently insert that into the rectum; and then the minister should take the bag and squeeze it with both hands and forcefully until everything inside the container is evacuated into the intestine; and then remove the container and the patient lifts their legs to the wall.
And if the medicine forces it to excrete, let it do so as much as possible; and if one sleeps with that for an entire night, it is better for recovery.
And if you treat those suffering from diarrhea and the discomfort caused by it, then you should repeatedly apply the cautery until it is healed.
And if there are hemorrhoids or abscesses in the anus, then use a gentle and strong enema, of the kind used to cleanse children.
Of the treatment of the plagues.
Here is the translation of the given line:
Therefore, it says that the plagues are diversified according to how the plagues are made and according to the location upon which the plagues fall.
And the causes for many times plagues are made as such: by throwing of stone, or incision with sword or knife, or打击与枪矛，或用棍棒，或用箭矢，或类似众多原因的此类行为。
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And I am recommending the treatment of some diseases for which you should apply this reasoning and rule to other ailments.
And I begin with the simple headaches, for the discussion of the compound ones will come at the beginning of the third chapter.
Therefore, when you encounter a simple headache in the head and it is not due to a fracture, then consider: if it is caused by a blow or similar, and has already stretched the sinews so much that it becomes a severe pain and you fear that an abscess might form, then be careful and perform a venesection of the cephalic vein immediately, do not delay this; extract according to the amount of strength in him unless there is some prohibiting cause for venesection, especially if the blood from the pain is small.
And the venesection should be performed on the opposite side of the affected area; and ensure that the patient is protected from relapse and from wine and heavy foods.
But if some reason prohibits due to delicacy, then reduce the food intake and avoid meat and wine.
And place on the affected area, if an abscess forms, some wool soaked in olive oil or in wine that has been stypticized.
And if you are sure of an abscess, then place it over the wound, if it is recent with its own blood and the air has not changed that powder which I will mention shortly.
And if the air has already changed that condition, then place poultices on it until it is healed.
And if the wound is large or is due to a separation and similarity, and the edges of it cannot be brought together with pillows, then bring those edges together with stitches as I will describe regarding the stitching of them.
But if the wound has already exposed the bone and sinew, and it is not retained by anything but a small suspensor, then incise that area and subsequently treat the wound with medicines and restore the flesh near the wound site. Command the patient to eat foods rich in nourishment: soups and formed cooked items similar to them until it is composed (healed).
And if you find putrefaction in the wound that does not adhere to the bone, then you should incise all of that rotten part and remove it, and subsequently treat it.
But if in these wounds there is an artery or vein from which bleeding can occur and it cannot be stopped by medicines, then you should probe the artery. If you find that it has not been cut, then incise it with a spatula or ligate it. And if necessity compels you such that what we have said does not work, then cauterize until the bleeding is stopped.
And if these sores are simple and small, then the cause of them is light; in such a way that you powder over those this powder, which solidifies before the air changes them.
And the method of the powder is as follows: take oil from vipers one part, dragon's blood two parts, unextinguished ashes three parts; let all be well ground and sifted, and with it fill the wound, and apply a good binding so that it adheres well to that area, and let it coagulate with the blood.
And then bind that above with poultices and leave it like that, and do not unbind it while it is thus, until it is free from swelling, because the medicine will not be removed from it until it is healed.
And sometimes this is done with just a cautery, when you do not have vipers and dragon's blood available.
And this method of operation is performed on large wounds when it is necessary to place it over them and keep them tight, especially fresh wounds with their blood, which have not been altered by the air.
And if the air has altered them, especially during summer, then this powder method is not intended for use. Instead, treat them as we have said, by placing certain ointments or powders made from flour mixed with water and honey over them until they stop putrefying; and then continue to treat them with other remedies until they are healed.
And if you encounter a fracture in the bone due to an injury and it is small, then you extract that with gestures.
And I will speak of the treatment for skull fractures in what is venomous.
Of the ailments of the neck.
But if the ailment affects the neck, then there is no difference in treatment, and it is similar to a simple ailment of the head.
But if the nerves or arteries of the neck are cut, then if it is a nerve, no treatment should be applied that causes strong astringency, such as zinc and vitriol, which bind and contract those nerves. And do not apply any source of cold to the ailment, for the substance of the nerves is cold and their continuation is connected to the brain, which is the most sensitive part of all the members.
And if it is treated with mild medicines, such as washing with warm water, sometimes infused in oil, whether boiled or unboiled, and thyme when washed with warm water, along with other small stones according to this method, and apply moist ointments.
But if the ailment is severe, then administer stitching or compress the edges of it, and then treat it with powders until it heals.
And if in the wound there is depth or you encounter rotten flesh in its lowest part, then pierce it at the deepest point.
But if in the wound an artery is already cut and bleeding occurs, then separate or dry it out, ligate it, or cauterize it if the situation necessitates such action.
But if you have already cut the vertebrae of the neck or all of it, and the veins of the neck are saved, then you should sew the edges of the wound over the bone of the neck without touching it; first align it and return it to its natural shape, then secure it with proper binding, and leave it for several days; then treat it with ointments that have astringent and stimulating properties until it is healed.
But if the wound has caused a protrusion in the bone, then you should percuss it; and if there are fragments of bone within it, extract all that you can; leave what cannot be easily removed until the wound becomes putrid, and let it separate on its own so that the protrusion is alleviated.
And if the wound is recent, then sprinkle over it the powder that has been recommended. And if an ulcer forms in the wound, then treat it with the method which will be remembered and discussed later in its own section.
If it is a puncture from a lance or a sword, and you measure the depth of the wound, then consider whether gas escapes when the patient breathes; if so, know that the wound is mortal.
And if the wound is not deep and it is fresh with its own blood, then you should apply powder to it within the first hour; do not strain it so that the blood is not retained in the depth of the wound and returns to the heart, which could harm the patient. Instead, apply an attractive ointment and cleanse it twice a day.
And if the ointment is not available to you, then apply a piece of cloth to the opening of the wound to absorb the moisture that comes out; and have the patient sleep on the side of the wound so that what is inside can drain out.
More if three days or more have passed since the plague and you do not see in the patient spasms, nor a bad heart tremor, nor constriction of the breath, and you observe other good signs from him, then know that the plague is safe; and then treat it with poultices and with other treatments until it is healed.
But if the healing of it is unnecessary, and it has been open for a long time, then know that it has become a fistula; therefore, treat it according to its chapter [meaning to follow specific guidelines or procedures for treating a fistula].
And if the plague is caused by a cut from a sword or knife, and it is simple on the surface of the foot or back, then treat it with stitching if it is large, or with powder if it is small.
But if it has already caused an inflammation in the bone and parts of it are embedded, then you should probe the wound and attempt to extract those pieces if they are separated. But if they are not separated, then leave them inside until the wound becomes pus-filled, which will make their extraction easier.
And for other accidental plagues in other members, the aid in cure is the aid of what we have said.
Of the ailments of the abdomen.
The discomfort that occurs in the abdomen can be either severe, slight, or moderate.
And a small rupture is made difficult by another method, and it is known that their reduction is more difficult if you do not attend to their insertion into their proper place immediately, because they swell and become thicker, making the insertion difficult.
Therefore, the best rupture is moderate, because in that case, the reduction of the intestine is not difficult, just as it is difficult in the two previously mentioned types.
And know that the suturing of the abdomen is done in four ways, but two of these sutures are common and similar to the sutures used for other ailments of the body.
And two other specific sutures are similar to those used for other ailments, but they are more specifically applied in the suturing of the abdomen.
And I recommend to you each with explanation and declaration.
Thus, it is said that when the hernia is small and some part of the intestine protrudes because of this, and it becomes difficult to reduce it, then it happens in one of two ways: either due to the smallness of the tear as we have said, or when the intestine swells due to the coldness of the air.
And thus, when it is so, then you must warm that area by soaking a sponge or cloth in warm water alone, or boil water with squill, cyperus, and spic, and apply it to the hernia until the swelling is resolved.
And sometimes it is done in the way that has astringency, and it is better than plain water for reducing the swelling.
And thus, when you see the swelling resolved, then moisten the hernia with water in which mullein and mallows have been boiled, for this alleviates the internal part of it with little effort.
And if it is necessary to use the instrument for this treatment, then cut the rupture slightly with an instrument with which you usually incise hemorrhoids.
And the first cure is better when it is appropriate that there be no drying, and no occupation to dry near necessity and deficiency.
From the instrument, make its form dry:
One part of the sharp wound, and the other part not-sharp, and the extremity subtle, and it is not as subtle as a spatula, rather it should be slightly blunt.
And thus when the swelling has increased and you have taken out the intestine, then it is necessary that its reduction be according to its natural form, in its proper place, if possible over this, for it is better.
And when the disruption is wide and in the lower part of the belly, then you must make the patient lie on their back, and raise their hips higher than their head; and if it is in the upper part of the belly, then you raise the head and feet higher than the other parts.
And similarly, if the disruption is in one of the two parts of the belly, then always focus your attention and consideration on this so that the part where the swelling is becomes higher than the other.
And thus you must administer this in severe swellings and in moderate swellings as well.
And in small swellings, apply what you have prepared, then have the minister place it between your most compassionate hands, who holds the entire disruption with their hand and brings the edges together, then sew from one side to the other without any gap.
And this is the common method of suturing: first take a needle, or as many needles according to the quantity of the width of the wound; then leave the extremity of the disruption of the ring finger untouched; hold the needle firmly so that you do not insert thread into both ends of the chain. With both ends of the suture that is left from the chain parts inside, make it penetrate through one part; and you have already brought together both ends of the chain and both ends of the suture, thus making four rows.
And then strengthen the double thread around the circumference of the needle, and sometimes on both sides together, and then join the two lips and the wound by a neat approximation; and then leave the thickness of a finger and put another needle there, and then tie that with thread as you did with the first needle; and do not stop doing this if it is necessary until you have completed the entire compression of the wound.
And let the needles be of moderate thickness between thick and thin, for thin needles easily penetrate the flesh; and thick ones are difficult to insert into the wound, and therefore they should be of moderate thickness.
And it is not necessary to insert the needle at both ends of the wound too deeply, so that the flesh is not cut too easily and the wound can close before its consolidation.
And let the stitches not be too long so that the wound is not prevented from healing.
And then sharpen the ends of the needles so that they do not disturb the patient during their sleep; and place on the stitches small pieces of cloth from all sides, which hold the ends of the needles; and leave them until you know that the wound is already healed.
And these types of sutures with needles in this manner are more suitable for small wounds, where only one or two needles suffice for the suture or around those areas.
And the second suture is communal: it is that you administer with a suture the four extremities, of the chain and two extremities of the spine, at once, with a needle on which the thread should be wrapped equally in fineness and thickness.
And then when you have penetrated these four extremities with the needle, withdraw the needle from that same part where you began, so that the thread pulls the pus from the deepest part to the surface of the wound, so that the suture is like stitching cloth together with which the cloths are held tight.
And pause between each suture the width of the smallest finger.
And this suture is known to men.
And with such a suture, I sewed the wound which was inflicted on a man in his belly which had been struck by a knife, and it was a disruption of the wound larger than one palm, and it extended around two palms from the center area of the intestine and there was a disruption in the middle of the member; and then I returned it after the intestine had protruded for fourteen hours.
And the wound was consolidated in about fifteen days, and I treated it until it healed; and after that, he lived for many years, and his condition improved.
And the other doctors had judged that he would not be healed; and yet, he was healed by a miracle, for I did not treat him with ointment, for there was no place to find ointment or any medicine, but instead placed on the wound an old cloth twice a day and washed it frequently with honey water until he was healed.
But I will describe two types of suture specific to the narration of Paraula.
And you begin with a chain suture, and insert the needle from the outer part to the inner part.
And so when the needle penetrates into the spine and at that moment it is inserted straight and along the entire length of the body, and leaves the tip of the syringe in which you have inserted the needle; and make the needle penetrate from inside to outside at the other end of the wound.
And when you have made that penetration, now you make another penetration at the same extremity of the wound from the outside part to the inside part; and leave the extremity of the needle in this position, and penetrate the needle into the other extremity from the inside part to the outside part.
And make the penetration with that needle with which you penetrate into the needle at the extremity of the wound that is on the inner part so that all of it penetrates.
And then begin from this side of the wound and sew that with the end which is on the shirt on the other side, and extract the needle from the chain which has penetrated, and then return it into that chain and sew the end of the shirt which is on the other side with this extremity of the thread; and extract that from the chain which belongs to the patient.
And do this once and another time, and do this once again between each other time until you sew everything that is outside according to that example.
And the sum of this method of suturing is that you sew with a suture of sinew with which you sew the skin, ensuring that you sew the wound once from the part of the extremity of the chain, and leave the other side until you have completed it.
And here is the translation of the provided sentence:
Cover that you place the needle at the end of the incision from your side of the outer part, and make it penetrate to the inner part in that area, and leave both ends of the suture; then rotate the needle and make it penetrate from outside to inside through both ends of the suture.
And then rotate those flaps, and make each part inside penetrate the outer part at both ends of the wound except where it is on the opposite side.
And this method of suturing is better than common thread suturing, and it is a suturing that precedes记忆。
This is the section about Gout.
And if the wound is called alcus (a type of hernia), the abdominal suture is corrected using two needles, so that you insert a thread into each one, and begin with the insertion of the needle on your side, and make it penetrate through to the other side according to the suturing method where the threads are evenly stitched.
And know that when a rupture occurs in the middle of the abdomen, then缝合它比腹部其他部位的破裂更困难。
But the treatment of plague medication is judged by other plagues.
Here is the translation of the sentence you provided:
And if the air has already altered the wound, then apply ointments to that area which you have at hand before they form hard stone and expel the bile, and consolidate and observe them; and then treat it in the same way as the treatment of other wounds until it is healed.
And if you do not have the medicines at hand, then apply something to that area immediately, as it begins to exude pus and becomes old, and change that twice a day, just as you are taught, until it is healed, for you would not need other medication in many cases when the wounds are simple.
But if you fear that the wound may spread to the major limbs, then you must soak lion's wool in high-quality tempered oil or in anointed oil, and apply that around the areas between the joints and leave them wrapped.
And if there is pain or putrefaction in the intestines, for this often occurs, then treat it with a styptic black tear (likely referring to a type of medicinal agent), especially if the corruption has spread into the intestine and has penetrated into its cavity.
And know that the one that is of the large intestine has a lighter healing process than the one that is in the small intestines.
And it is difficult to heal when the intestine which is called “gegunu” does not receive healing from any kind of medicine; and this is because of the great number of veins that are in it and because of its size where these veins are, and because of the subtlety of its body, and because of its proximity to the nature of nerves.
And if what you process from the medicine is cloth, and you obtain that fresh, adjust it according to your prescription with which you similarly treat the intestines.
But if it has passed into the space and is already green or black, then when you bind that with a thread over the area that is discolored, to cause blood to flow, because in the cloth there are veins and arteries.
Then cut what is another layer of the ligament, and place the two ends of the thread hanging from the part where the medicine is outside, so that the attachment of the cloth and the discharge of the arm from the medicine are relieved.
Remembrance of the plagues when they occurred in the intestine.
When an intestinal rupture occurs and it is small, it can be restored in some people; for this reason I saw someone who had been wounded in their abdomen with a lance strike, and the wound was on the right side of the stomach, and the wound was old and had become a fistula, causing gas and bloating.
Then I considered the treatment of him already because he was not confident in his own recovery, but stopped subtlety intervening within what fire heals and the area is consolidated.
And I put that you see the area already stabilized, beware of the patient suffering an adverse incident in his abdomen; and he does not suffer from this unfortunate accident by falling into bad habits eating and drinking, then bathe moderately and exercise with his duties.
And already some experienced ones have said that when there is a small ulcer in the intestine, it must be treated in this manner: you should take ants with large heads; then adjust the two lips of the ulcer and place one of those ants with its mouth open over the two lips of the ulcer; thus when it grips onto them and tightens its mouth, cut off the head of the ant, because it adheres and does not dissolve.
Then place another ant next to the first one, and do not cease to do this with ants placed one next to the other according to the quantity of the entire ulcer.
Then reduce that and sew up the ulcer; let those heads remain attached inside the intestine until it is healed; and do not cause any harm to the patient.
And it is possible that the intestine be sewn with fine thread made from the gut of an animal attached to it, as it is finer than a needle; you should take the end of this gut thread, and let it be stripped of flesh, then tie the end of it with thread wrapped around, then insert that thread into needles and sew with that the intestine, and reduce that in the disruption.
And this method of sewing with ants is nothing more than a secondary way of faith and hope.
But if the inflammation is large and widespread, especially if it is in one of the delicate intestines, for then there is not a remedy but subtlety, and it is not a complete cure.
Of the treatment of sciatica and fistula.
Know that any plague or abscess when it becomes corrupted and old, and turns into an ulcer, and is not consolidated, continues to discharge pus constantly and does not heal, then, in whatever part of the body it may be, it is universally called a fistula, and we call it azukem.
And truly, a fistula is a hardened, whitish swelling that is painless and has a cavity like the hollow of a bird's feather; therefore, we call it alcus rizatz, which means hollow.
And in some people, there is moisture that discharges pus; and often this moisture is stopped for several hours. And at times this moisture is thick, scanty, coarse, and fine.
And it has shown all those causes and their signs, and the cure of them through medicines in this section.
And it is thus necessary that I make you understand the treatment of fistula, which is done through surgical means with my hand.
And you should know that fistulas can occur in all parts of the body; for among them are those that affect large veins and arteries, or nerves, or the spine, or the intestines, or the bladder, or some of the ribs, or some of the vertebrae of the back, or any of the compound joints such as those of the hand and foot; and these are the ones that relate to the proximity of the main limb and its likeness.
And thus, those fistulas that follow this manner are among the diseases difficult to heal, and do not receive proper treatment; the occupation associated with them is labor and ignorance.
And if there are some fistulas whose depth does not reach the locations mentioned, and you hope for and trust in their healing, and wish to understand them better, then take a thread of linen or iron, and if the fistula runs straight, trace it using this method.
But if the fistula is twisted, then investigate it with a thin lead thread, for lead, because of the lightness of its body, is flexible and conforms to the twists.
And if the fistula has horrifying growths, it is not possible for you to determine its nature by touching.
So cleanse the orifices through their own openings, for the moisture with which you cleanse that area should come out of the other orifices and flow from them.
And then inquire carefully in whichever way you can to know if there are bones or nerves here, and whether the cavity of the fistula is deep or close, or if it is a fistula that has multiple openings and is located over all this with the full extent of your strength, through your examination, with which you examine the patient, and the discovery of the pain should be compressed by your hand on the area, along with signs and accidental causes leading to the abscess.
And when you have stood over all those causes with true understanding, now proceed to the treatment based on confidence: it is that you consider now whether it is an apparent fistula close or in a salty place, deep from a joint, or from a nerve, or from an artery, or from a vein, or from one of the places which I have told you about.
Now you dry the fistula as was said before about the discharge from it, and remove what is in that filtration and of corrupted flesh, and what has grown in the openings of the flesh, or of tissue and similar things, and treat that inside so that it may be healed.
If the fistula is of great depth and straight, then you must incise it as much as possible in its entirety, and subsequently remove all of its corrupted flesh; and then apply poultices wrapped with sharp medicines, and insert those into the cavity of the fistula, which you have probed with an iron instrument.
And do this several times until the sharp medicine corrodes all that is rotten in the cavity of the fistula from the corruption.
And then restore it with ointments that will generate healthy flesh until it is healed.
But if it is not healed by this method, then you must cauterize it as we have recommended.
But if the cause of the fistula is bone and you must confirm this, then you should investigate it and dry it out as we have recommended, provided that you do not interfere with any vein or nerve or main part of the limb, as we have said.
But if the bone is exposed and there is some corruption and blackness in it, then you must scrape it until all the corruption is removed; and then treat it with something that will cause flesh to grow until it is healed.
And if the arm is not healed and thrown away as it should be, then you know that you have not completely eradicated the corruption; and then you examine further and carefully analyze the cause of it and clean it thoroughly with your final strengthening remedy, and then restore it.
And so if it is healed, well and good; but if not, then you know that that corruption is in the deep recesses of the body, which has not been reached, and then there can be no remedy for that except to abandon it.
And if the corrupted bone is small, or it is within your ability to pull it out, then you should pull it out with delicate forceps which are suitable for this task.
And if there are multiple bones, then carefully extract all of them, and do not leave any behind due to any reason, using your strength.
But if any cause of moisture hinders you, and at the beginning there is neither fear nor error, then incise those ligaments or flesh if they are present, and free the bones.
But if it is not the time to set the bones, then apply something to the wound that can help heal the wound, and leave that within so that it surrounds those bones with flesh and ligaments, and take care of the wound so that it does not become hardened, and keep the section you have incised in your operation constrained.
However, if you fear, apply to the wound something soaked in crushed garlic with oil, or a cloth soaked in Egyptian ointment, or any of the green ointments, for when those ligaments will heal and the bones are separated from them through ablation, and such traction is alleviated.
If it is a large bone such as the thigh bone or hip bone or similar to those, and only the surface of it has been corrupted, then scrape away that darkness and corruption solely from behind inside until it is removed, and then restore the wound.
But if a large part of it is corrupted and the corruption has already reached the marrow of the bone, then it is necessary to close that area and cut inside at the place where the corruption has spread, and then treat it until it is consolidated.
And I recommend to you what happened to a man in his thigh so that you may use this as an example and guide for your operation.
There was a young man, about thirty years old, to whom pain occurred in his thigh. The corruption spread from inside the body until it reached the thigh, and it was an abscess filled with pus, and there was no external cause for this condition.
And then the condition persisted for a long time due to the mistake of the doctors until the abscess was opened, and pus began to flow from it. His recovery was slow until his thigh became fistulized, with multiple openings through which pus and bodily fluids continuously drained.
And then many doctors treated it for about two years, but none of them knew much about the art until I was called.
And you see his chest and the materials that were flowing from those orifices due to a great wound; and already the body of that man was entirely discolored and its color was yellowish.
And then I insert the probe into one of those orifices and bring the probe up to the bone.
And then I carefully examined all the orifices and found those that lead to the chest from all parts.
And then I prepared and made an incision on one of those orifices where I discovered a part of the bone, which was corrupted; it was already brittle, corrupted, and discolored; and a part of the chest that had penetrated into the marrow was already corrupted.
And then I treated that which was discovered and prepared of the exposed bone.
And I ensured that only the corruption in the bone was what I cut away and treated, which I had already identified.
And then I applied the restoration of the wound with consolidating medicine for a long time, and it was not consolidated.
And then I repeated the procedure and re-examined the bone beyond the initial exposure, and found continued corruption with the bone.
And I will address that which appears to me from that corruption, and then I was perforated to perform the cure of it and its restoration, and it is not restored.
And then I uncover on the other side and do not cease to cut the bone little by little particularly and perforate its restoration, and it is not restored until I cut around about a palm of it, and that which is extracted along with its marrow, and then restore that using medicines, and it is lightly consolidated and healed.
And iteration in the operation and section of it is not necessary except due to the disposition of its frailty and the lack of tolerance and fear of death, for sloth affects at all times by the excess of evacuation causing fainting.
And thus it is healed by complete healing, and there is no place where bone has turned into hard flesh; and its condition is well established in its body, and the function of it returns; and it is transformed in its conditions, and does not cause any contradiction in movement nor harm in any way.
However, if there is a protruding bone in an already injured part of the body, then you must cut it according to this method: take a ligament and tighten it at the end of the protruding bone, and command someone to pull on it; use a thicker woolen bandage than the first one; then wrap the bandage over the flesh that is below the bone, and stretch the extremity so that you pull the flesh apart, thus exposing the flesh over the area where you wish to cut, ensuring that the saw does not touch the flesh.
And place a stick or board under the bone properly, for when you do this, it is not forbidden to use the saw without cutting the corrupted flesh.
And it is necessary to gradually apply the binding over the corrupted area, because if corruption is in the cavity of the bone and does not appear on its surface, and may require another binding session.
And if the bone is corrupted and not prominent, before one part is connected to the other, and the corruption is in the middle or in some part of it, then you uncover all the flesh from every side; then place a stick under it, and then bind that first part where the corruption is until the binding of the other part is continuous.
And let the binding be according to the location of the corruption a little, as we have said.
And if the corruption is in the joint, incise that corrupted joint, and bind the bone where it continues to the other part.
And if the corruption is in the continuation between two joints, then it is not reasonable but rather a complication.
And if the corruption is in the palm of the hand or foot, it is very difficult; however, you must investigate how the corruption appears to you, and you should open that area, and clean it according to whichever method is possible for you, and with every complication be corrected by you, unless there is a vein or nerve that would oppose this.
And you should know what are the incisors and the saws used to cut these bones, which vary according to the position of the bones, and the preparation of those, and the thickness of those, and the subtlety and the size and the smallness of those, and the hardness and their rarity; therefore it is necessary that you prepare every kind of instrument suitable for that operation.
And you should know that this operation requires knowledge of the type of instrument you will need; when you have great study and long experience and understanding of the methods of this art, and testimony of the ways diseases manifest, because then you already apply what is appropriate from the instruments to every illness.
And I advise you, at the end of this chapter, to list the instruments with which you will work simply and with which you will proceed in your practice, which you will test on others. Form of the saw:
Form of another saw:
Forma de autra serra gran:
Forma de ray: Make the head of this vein in the shape of a star-shaped nail head, and the points on it should be according to the form of the asterisk marks.
And it is not appropriate that only the ends of the joints be rubbed when they are corrupted, or if the large opening is wide.
Form of a smaller razor:
It seems that the provided text is a mixture of languages similar to those in the Romance language family. Let's attempt to translate the given line into English:
Forma de serra autra decentment fayta: sia fayt arc de lu pus sobira e la acuitat de lu de ferr, e le membre de lu de boys punhal descentment fayt. The provided text appears to be in an archaic form of a Romance language that has elements reminiscent of Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Based on this style and previous translations, "Forma de lu:" likely refers to some aspect of medical treatment or anatomy related to the body ("lu" seems akin to "lo" meaning "the" in these languages).
Forma de razori en la qual ha concavitat:
Forma de razori autra subtil:
Form of another curved tool for treatment:
Forma de rasori petit semblant a tenta:
Form of incisors or smaller tool:
Form of another incision tool; this resembling a saw, and the end of it is like a pair of scissors, and it is applied in various places along the line of the bones:
Forma de ray lo qual conveneys a rasio dequel que es perforat dels osses:
And the end of it is triangular and has a sharp point.
And it is made of Indian iron, and similarly, all the causes we have mentioned for razors, scissors, and saws apply.
Of the incision of extremities and the suturing of bones.
Extremities may decay either due to intrinsic or extrinsic causes; if you have treated that corruption with medicines for healing and the cure does not work, or sometimes the corruption spreads to a member without any apparent cause, then you must incise that member where the corruption adheres, so that the patient might be saved from death or severe malice which is a greater defect than the loss of the limb.
And the sign of the one to whom this happens is that the member turns black within, as if already burnt by fire, or it may turn black before the corruption spreads throughout that member and affects the whole body. Therefore, be quick with the incision of that area.
And similarly, if the corruption is caused by some venomous creatures such as marine scorpion, viper, or toad and similar.
And if the corruption or the affliction is in the extremity of a finger, then you must incise the finger and do not give space for the corruption to spread into the hand.
And similarly, if you access the hand, then you incise it at the base of the palm, and do not give space for corruption to enter within the arm's palm.
And if you need to do that, then incise the arm between the elbow and the joint.
And if the corruption spreads further and extends around the knee, then at that point it is the death of the patient; and administering any other treatment for this in cure is an amount of virtue.
And similarly treat the foot when corruption invades the toe of the foot, then you incise it between one of the joints.
And if you take hold of the instep of the foot, then you incise the entire foot. And if it enters into the knee, then you incise the leg between the joint of the knee.
And if the corruption has already spread over the knee, then there is no remedy but submission, and leave the patient to death.
And the method of incising or amputating the limb is that you tighten the bandage at the part just below where you want to incise, and place another bandage over the area; and have an assistant extend a bandage on one side of it, and another assistant extend a bandage on the other side; and you separate the flesh between the two bandages with a spatula so that all the flesh is exposed; then proceed to incise or amputate.
And it is necessary to place cloth on all sides so that the area does not touch anything, and that the patient receives a well-adjusted and properly cauterized lesion.
And if bleeding occurs while you are operating, then you cautetrize the area appropriately, or place some powders that stop the bleeding on it; and then return to your treatment until it is completed.
And then bind the injured limb with a suitable bandage, and care for it until it is healed.
And I remind you of what happened to a man in his foot, this accidental event which I and you recall, which is that an accident turned his foot black due to burning that resembled fire combustion.
And that accidental corruption first affected his toe and then spread to the entire foot.
And then that man prepared himself for various pus to come out as part of the healing process by applying force to the member because of the intensity of the pain and burning he experienced, and he cut that foot up to the joint, and fire [cauterization] healed it.
Long ago, that same corruption occurred in the index finger of his hand.
And then he came to me, and I perforated it to expel that excess with what was placed on his hand of the medicines, followed by cleansing his body; and the excess did not stop but began to spread to another finger and then throughout the hand.
And the patient begged me to cut off his hand, and I did not want to do so, hoping against the reaction of that excess, and more than fearing the incision of his dead hand, for the strength of the patient was in grasping.
And after he was dismissed by me, he returned to his land and it came to me that this man prepared and amputated his entire hand, and he was healed.
And I have added this narration only to be helpful regarding what can be done for this illness, and its meaning by which it should be understood and according to which it should be acted upon.
About the treatment of the sinuses and the quality of enemas with medicines.
When an abscess occurs in fleshy members and the space of the abscess is prolonged until it collects pus, and then it breaks and perforates, and the pus is discharged from it, leaving the place empty as if it were a vessel, and the skin above it resembles thin cloth, and no serious corruption has occurred, nor has it affected the bone or nerves or ligaments, it is called a sinus, and it is not referred to as a fistula.
However, if the space is prolonged to the point where corruption affects some member, then it is called a fistula and not a sinus.
And the treatment of it is to incise that skin entirely as it twists, especially when it becomes thin like cloth, and ensure that it does not adhere to the area due to its corruption.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And when you consider the sinus, and if it is large, and the arm that you use should be of fragrant odor, then cleanse that with an Egyptian medicine which is made of sweet oil, wine, and ziniar in equal parts, and they are mixed together in a vessel, and heated over the fire until the medicine becomes warm and reaches the consistency of honey.
Then take the amount that is necessary and dissolve it in water and honey; cleanse the sinus with this mixture, strengthen its opening, and leave the medicine inside for a quantity of two hours.
Then extract that with a scraper; do this for several days until the sinus is cleansed and the pus is completely removed.
And sometimes it is cleansed with ashes water when this medicine is not available to you; take the ash of vines, put it in water; then mix that and cleanse the sinus with it until you are confident that it has been thoroughly cleaned.
And if the patient does not tolerate the Egyptian medicine or the ash water, then cleanse it with water and honey, and mix in ground ziniar, and cleanse it with a mixture of wine and honey, for the property of honey is to cleanse and wash, and the wine makes the sinus adhere better, especially when the wine has an excess of astringency and dryness.
And when you do this several times and are satisfied that the sinus is already cleaned out, then cleanse it with something that promotes flesh growth.
And it is that you take some unguent of diafinicon and dissolve it with rose oil and astringent wine; or that you administer it as an enema mixed with certain medicines and other ointments that have the properties which I have already written about in the treatise on ointments.
And if the sinus opening is narrow such that theclyster tube cannot be received, then you should gradually enlarge it with a small tool, and place linen wrapped in Egyptian ointment or basilicon ointment over it until it has been enlarged.
And similarly, if the opening is wide, then you should sew the lips of it together and leave enough space for the enema to enter additionally.
And if the orifice through which the blood flows is raised towards the parts above, then dry it at the lowest point in it so that the blood can flow into it, because when the blood is compressed in the depth of the sinus, the flesh is generated within it.
And if it is not possible for you to dry the sinus within the area around the lower bone as you wish, then you must prepare the limb with a preparation that allows the fluid to flow out lightly according to what is prepared by you and ensure that no cause of swelling remains retained in it.
But the one that is over the sinus opening should be changed frequently so that what is retained in it of the fluid comes out. And so that you may know whether what flows out of it as fluid is too much or little, or if it is digested or undigested.
And with this you should consider the location of that vein, if the patient feels pain there or not, and if there is an abscess in it.
And as your treatment is prolonged in this manner, and you see the material that is placed over the sinus orifice already adhering, or about to adhere, then on the second day, or the third day, you should loosen it, and when you remove the dressing, change the cloth and renew the ointment.
But if from the sinus near that space there is a subtle virus, then do not despair of its adherence, for its healing is approaching, for in some people, the generation of flesh on their wounds takes time, and in others, the opposite occurs.
And if for many days the sinus continues to discharge undigested matter, then you know that the sinus is not adhering; and if the adherence of the sinus is delayed and this prolongs the cause, then you should adjust by drying out the medications. If the medicines are moist in their substance and virtue, they should be dried like diafinition ointment, when the excess addition of grease is properly adjusted.
And the most recent method of treatment is to take some ointment made from diaphyton and dissolve it in rose oil, and apply that ointment onto the affected area as if it were smeared on its surface, then massage it into place, and use it thus.
And it seems in that action, when there is no arm [affected], take ointment of diaphyton and honey which has been boiled until thickened, and use it; or take myrrh and aloe and ashes, mix everything together, powder it over the honey while it is on the fire, then spread this over a cloth and apply that to the swelling; and spread that with the honey which you have cooked until thickened, powder it over a cloth and bind that [cloth] tightly.
And sometimes they are administered with long-leafed aristology [likely a misnomer or archaic term], roots of celestial lilies (and it is indeed the celestial lily), flour of rue, and centaury. Use these simples or mixtures, crush them, sieve them, and powder them over the honey that has been boiled; then use it thus.
And if the swelling persists and is not healed by this treatment, then you know that the corruption is in its vein. Then make an examination of the bones or other hard members or ligaments; then cure it with a fistula treatment, as was said above.
For the treatment of boils and inflamed nails, and for the addition of a finger incision and amputation.
Panarici is an abscess that arises from under the nail of the toe or finger, and often appears on other fingers as well. And when it prolongs without proper treatment, or becomes a chronic abscess, or corrupts, it can cause pus to ooze which corrodes the base of the nail, then corrupts the entire area, and through its corruption affects the bone causing a foul smell, and makes the tip of the finger or toe crooked, turning its color dark.
And so when you have that abscess as we have described in the division and your treatment does not work, then you must incise with an iron all the excess that remains of the nail, and then cauterize the wound near it, for pointed cautery is helpful in this.
But if the bone is sound and the nail is healthy, and the edges of the nail are already pressing on the flesh inside, causing it to pierce and hurt, then you must place a thin splint under the angle of the nail that is piercing the flesh, and push it up. Then incise that part of the flesh easily, and apply caustic and corrosive medicines over what remains of the flesh until it is completely removed; then treat it with ointments until it heals.
And if the corruption has already entered into the bone, then you must cut into the bone and extract it, for it will never be healed as long as the corrupted bone remains within.
And if the corrosion and corruption have spread to the finger, then you must cut it at one of its joints according to which allows for better recovery, and then treat it until it is healed.
But if the nail has suffered trauma or friction, and there is intense pain in it, then at the beginning you must bleed the patient, and then dry the nail with a sharp spatula using a transverse cut from top to bottom. Be careful that the cut does not go deep into the flesh beneath the nail, for you would cause severe pain to the patient, and it may lead to excessive growth of flesh around the area; then treat that spot with something that alleviates pain.
However, the finger that is born with a lot of flesh in many men is mostly fleshy, and to a great extent it involves the bones or the nails.
And some of them are born in the root of the joint, or its birth is in some nodes of the said [joints]. More than those born in certain joints do not suffer, and those who are affected in the strong joints are more afflicted.
And of those that are born fleshy, the incision is light, and it is so that you should incise that one from its base with a spatula.
But for that which is born in the root of the joint, the cure is difficult; and therefore beware of amputating it.
But in one where it is born between the toes, you must incise the flesh at the beginning with a round incision around the bone, and then cut it with one of those appropriate saws, and then treat what is inside so that it heals.
But consolidation which occurs between the toes due to continuous friction or by nature at birth, or by consolidation from an injury or combustion from fire, or similar causes, then you must dry out that consolidation until the toes return to their natural form.
And then place between the cloths that are infused in rubbed oil so that they are not lightly consolidated, and separate them or place a thin sheet of lead between them until it is consolidated as required.
And similarly, if consolidation occurs in the fingers with the palm, then you dry out that consolidation according to how it is prepared and conforms to the shape of the member.
From the inscription of vices, those are varicose veins.
Vices so son varicas, e so venas envolutas grossas plenas de superfluitatz melencolicas las quals veno en motz dels membres del cors, e le major adveniment de lor en las cambas, e majorment en las cambas dels itinerantz e dels laborantz e dels portantz.
Then it is necessary that you administer purification of the body from black bile several times with strong expulsion, and then bleed the patient from the basilic vein.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
The sectioning (bleeding) of the patient is done in this manner: at the beginning, wash the chest with warm water so that the thick blood, which is feculent from the chest, may dissolve. Then bind the patient's chest tightly at the highest part of the thigh towards the side of the knee with a bandage. And then cut the vein at one place, or two, or three places widely. And then draw out the black blood with your bare hand from below the chest upwards and downwards until as much blood comes out as you wish and it is sufficient for what is needed, and which the patient's strength can tolerate.
And then apply water to them, and command him to abstain from foods that generate black bile.
And repeat the treatment by phlebotomy when the veins are full and this is noted in the patient.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And then dry the chain at the right of the vein by drying either in the leg or in the buttocks you should remove pain, or in the lowest part you should remove the swelling.
And then tie the chain with hooks and squeeze the vein from all sides until it appears to the touch, and you should observe how that which you are doing turns to black.
And then when you remove and from the chain you take that white thing which is a cord.
And then you place that area under which it is elevated and tied from the chain, and suspend that with an ounce of ointment lion.
And then make another incision near that incision by three fingers, and then stretch the skin above the vein where it appears.
And then lift that and incise it at the back section below the ankle, and then extract that and lift it until it is severed by the second incision, and then remove that from the incision above it.
And do this until you extract that from the incision that is the highest of all the incisions, until it is completely severed; and then incise that.
And if you cannot extract and lift it, then insert a needle with a strong double thread and tie that and pull it out, or insert the probe and rotate your hand in all directions until it is loosened. And be careful that it is not cut; for if it is broken, it will be difficult for you to lift it out, and harm will come to the patient because of this damage.
And once all of it has been completely removed, then place on the wound site wool soaked in wine and anointed oil and unanointed oil, and care for it until it is healed.
And if the vein is contracted with tortuosity to which it coils in parts, and is not straight as we have said, then you must make incisions along all the parts of its tortuosity and at the points where it coils, and then suspend that part with hooks while you elevate it entirely.
And be careful with your incision so that you do not cut into the vein and do not damage it, for it will be difficult for you to repair it; and use your discretion in this matter.
The given text appears to be in an archaic or constructed language that borrows heavily from Romance languages. Here is a translation of the provided line:
No es a lu accuitat ayssi cum als uncis ni es de aguda extremitat per so que no plague la vena; e es de grossa flexibilitat leon, quar si era subtil, inscidira la vena per la sua subtilitat; habantz es en lu superflua grosseza ayssi cum havem dit.
Of vein extraction from the leg.
This vein is generated in the thighs in warm lands, such as in Al-Andalus in the land of Arabs and in the warm and dry lands of India with little moisture, where there is no grass or tree.
And it is also generated in other parts of the body besides the thighs.
And its generation is from putrefaction that comes from the blood, just as serpents, worms, lice, and other worms are generated between the blood and the flesh inside the body.
And the sign of susceptibility to the occurrence of this vein is that there is a violent inflammation in the thigh where it appears; then, the area becomes blistered; and subsequently, the vein begins to emerge from the site of that blistering, resembling a root of a plant.
And then when the end of it appears, you must wrap a piece of lead, weighing one drachm, over it, and attach it so that the lead hangs suspended from the thigh.
And as many times as you find any cause outside of the parts, wrap that in lead and seal it. And if the wound is prolonged, then you cut away a part of it and wrap up the remainder; and do not cut that which has adhered until it comes out, for if you cut that which is contracted, it goes into the flesh and causes abscess and putrefaction in the area and a bad ulceration.
For this reason, it must be treated carefully and extracted bit by bit until it is completely removed from the wound, so that no part of it remains in the body.
And from this vein, it has emerged in some men that its length is about five palms and ten, and I have heard of one reaching twenty palms.
And if it is cut during its treatment, then insert the needle into the channel of it and pierce that with a long channel through the flesh until all that is in the material is evacuated, and apply putrefaction to the area for several days with medicines; then treat that according to the cure for abscesses.
And this vein sometimes has branches, and especially when it approaches the joint of the foot or in the foot, and comes out with multiple openings, and a branch emerges from each opening.
And thus treat that as we have said in the division and with what has been said above.
Regarding the section on worms generated under the skin and it is called bovine disease.
This disease is called in some places the bovine disease because white spots appear on the buttocks and it is a kind of worm that is born between the skin and the flesh, and moves throughout the body up and down, and is felt moving from one member to another until it breaks through the skin and comes out.
And its generation is by the putrefaction of some humors, just as worms, serpents, and worms like roundworms and ascarids are generated in the belly.
And it is feared because of its malice, for when it moves through the body and rises to the head, reaching the eye, it can cause a strong irritation in it, entering and destroying the eye, which results in white spots.
And thus when you want to treat it and extract it, you do so based on its movement and appearance as felt, and then you must bind what is above it and below it with strong bandaging and constriction, and then dry it out and extract it.
And if it is embedded in the flesh and you do not find it, then you place a cautery with fire on the spot where it remains, and the greatest fear is corruption of it by which the area becomes corrupted as we have said.
May si tu vezes aquel esser pervengut al cap prop del huel, lahoras strenh sobre le sobrecil am fort strictura, e aprop secsa sobre lu, e extratz aquel; e cove que·l malaute use de mondificacio del sieu cors am medicinas evacuantz humors putridas malas, e guarda se de viandas generantz putrefaccio.
From the phrase "De sectione super aegritudinem nafir," it seems like this is discussing a procedure or treatment for a specific ailment. Here's an attempted translation based on the structure and the context:
This disease is called nafir in our land, and it is pain that comes to some members, and then moves from member to member.
And I have already seen that second thing which I am about to recount. I was called to see a sick woman in a village, and after uncovering her arm, I saw a small swelling in the vein of her arm. After staying there for about an hour, I observed that this swelling moved just like a worm ascending from one place to another, though more lightly than expected, as if it were quicksilver moving from place to place.
And then it moved to the pain in that area and entered the muscle, and then it stayed there for about an hour.
And then it moved to the other arm before reaching the other side of the body.
And then it returned to me, moving throughout her body as I observed; and I was greatly amazed by its transformation and the speed at which it moved from one member to another. And I had seen this before in my other patients in the same manner; however, I have observed many cases where the pain is transferred from one limb to another. But do not examine this with the fingers as in a woman.
And I do not think it to be anything else but that it is because of this that the woman was weak, or rather of dry body and exposed veins, and in this way she feels this altered wind.
And it is necessary that this reverse cure does not appear in those who are delicate and have a moist body with engorged veins.
And when you want to cure him, and the patient feels that pain, at this time it is not apparent to you by smell as we have said, then press on that area lightly and cut into where that compressed air or gas has risen, and cauterize the spot.
And if you do not feel it with your hands, then treat it by shaking the body and expelling air, and medicate those areas with foul-smelling pills and pills of senna and similar substances.
From the extraction of arrows.
Arrows are diverse according to their types, and according to the areas of the body in which they strike, for their diversity is such that some have large tips, others small, concave, or blunt points; and there are those with three prongs, and those with barbs; and among them are those with crossbars.
And the signs of injury to the skull are when an arrow strikes it and penetrates the bone, piercing the dura mater which is over the brain; for there follows severe headache, blindness, vertigo, burning in the eyes, inflammation and burning of the tongue, spasms, confusion of understanding, vomiting of bile, sudden loss of speech, destruction of voice, and a white moist substance like powder oozing from the wound site, making the skin around it appear wet.
And therefore if these signs appear to you, then abstain from the treatment and extraction of the arrow, unless it is outside.
And the signs of the arrow when it strikes the heart, so that it is near the left nipple, and you feel that it is fixed in a hard place, and not in a soft area; and strongly, the movement of the arrow resembles the pulse's movement, and black blood flows from the wound, and there is coldness in the extremities, and cold sweat, and fainting; therefore, know that death comes swiftly.
And the signs when the arrow has wounded the lung are spitting of frothy blood from the wound, and the vessels near the neck become inflamed, and the color of the patient changes, and they expire a large breath, and they seek a draught of fresh air.
And if the arrow strikes the membrane that is in the feet, and the pain is then near the small bones, and there is great swelling with intense pain and sighing, and not all the muscles of the limbs are affected.
And if you catch an arrow in the stomach, then immediately remove any indigestible food from it.
And if the arrow is embedded in the belly, and it is stuck inside, make some incision at the wound site, or the fabric, or the intestine that is ruptured, and there is no hope for the extraction of the arrow.
And if the arrow hits the bladder and urine comes out, and some process from it causes something to happen outside, and severe pain occurs in the patient, then you know that it is mortal.
And the other members, such as the face, neck, jaw, shoulders, arms, vertebrae of the back, collarbone, thigh, chest and similar parts of the body, are saved according to the greater dispositions when the arrow does not find a vein or artery and is not a venomous arrow.
And I will recount to you what I have seen about the nature of these arrows, so that you may understand this in relation to your treatment.
The cause is that in one case, an arrow was embedded in the lacrimal of the eye near the base of the nose, and I extracted it from the other side, leaving the groove of the ear intact, and he was healed, without any harm to his eye.
And I extracted another arrow from a Jew, which had embedded itself in the groove of his eye, leaving the eyelid somewhat intact. The arrow was already hidden, and only a small part of it could be reached to which I attached a handle, as it was a large sharp arrow of the Turks, with a lion-shaped iron head that had no grooves.
And it is beneficial for the patient, and not accidental that a bad accident happens to him in his health.
And I extracted another arrow from a Christian man who had been shot in the throat, and it was an Arabic arrow, which is the kind with ears; then I cut around that between two cartilages, and it was already submerged in his throat; then I manipulated it carefully, and then I removed it, and thus the Christian was healed.
And I extracted another arrow from a man who had been shot in his abdomen, and he was thought to die because of it; however, after thirty days had passed and there was no change in his condition due to any other causes, I cut around the arrow and manipulated it, and he was healed, and no further adverse incident occurred to him.
And I saw another man in whom an arrow had lodged in his back, and the wound had become solidified over it; and after nearly seven years, the arrow was embedded at the root of his thigh.
And I saw a woman in whom an arrow had lodged in her abdomen, and the wound had become solidified inside her, without changing her condition, and the woman did not experience any harm in any of her natural functions.
And you see another man in whom an arrowhead has lodged in his face and the wound is settled and you break off the arrowhead, not finding any pain here, and similar cases are like this.
And extract the arrow from the man of the king's princes that was embedded in the middle of his nose and had slightly shifted to the right side, and the entire arrow was hidden.
And I was called for his treatment shortly after the arrow wound within three days.
And then I found the arrow wound to be quite deep; and then I explored it with a fine probe, but did not feel anything; however, he felt a prick near his right ear, and then I suspected that this prick was due to the tip of the arrow.
And I applied a poultice with a plaster that has attractive and digestive properties, believing that the area will become inflamed so that the location of the arrowhead becomes apparent, as it rests on that spot.
And there was no significant accident at the location where the arrow had reached; and I continued with the plaster on it for many days, and no accident occurred; and the wound healed during this time, and the patient recovered from the injury for many days until one day he felt the arrow inside his nose and reported this to me.
And then I applied an acute corrosive medicine to the wound for many days until it opened up, and with a probe, I examined it, and found the tip of the arrowhead, which was attached to the bone.
And then I adjust in the wound opening with that sharp medicine until the tip of the arrowhead becomes visibly apparent to me, and I proceed with this method for the duration of time between four months.
And then increase the heat and make it possible to insert the scissors into it, and remain there without feeling any emission, because I did not cease to delicately and ingeniously work on that in various ways of skill, until one day I managed to grasp it firmly with forceps that were made appropriately, according to how their form will be shown at the end of the chapter, before extracting it; and then restore that wound.
And some doctors judged that the nasal cartilage cannot be restored, but I restored it and the wound was consolidated, and the patient was healed completely, and there was no failure in any cause.
And I recommend to you the quality of extracting certain arrows for which you should pause and consider the meaning behind what I have not said, because the parts of this art and the definitions thereof are not understood through mere narration nor are they fully grasped by the book alone.
And the wise artisans compare a little with motion; and with what is present over what is absent; and they find new operations and novel instruments by tracing back to the foreign causes of the art when such accidents occur.
And therefore I say that arrows are not removed from the limbs in which they are embedded except in two ways: either by attraction of the place into which they enter; or by the opposite at the other part.
And that which is pushed out from where it entered, or is a discharge coming from the flesh, and is thrown out and expelled.
And if you do not obey the urgency of the time when you cut, then it is necessary to leave it for several days until the flesh around it rots, and the attraction of it is lessened and its exit is eased.
And similarly, if it is embedded in bone and you do not obey the urgency, then leave it for several days and repeatedly move and agitate it every day, and it will be expelled.
And if you do not obey the urgency for several days, then it is necessary to perforate around the area of the discharge in that bone from all sides with a fine awl until the area is enlarged enough, and then extract it.
And if the arrowhead is already embedded in the part of the body and is hidden from feeling, then you seek it by touch, and if you feel it there, then pull it out with hooks that are suitable for extracting it.
And if you cannot reach it due to the constriction of the wound and the length of the probe, and there are no bones or nerves or veins here, then you should work on enlarging the wound so that it is possible to extract the arrow.
And if there are earrings with which it is held, then you should free the flesh in which it is embedded from all sides using every means you can; and devise a method for this, if you cannot extract the flesh due to the fracture of the earrings or their torsion inside where they are stuck.
And when you administer the extraction of the arrow in any location where it is lodged, then you should use the strength of your hand and forceps in all directions until it obeys; and be careful with subtle skill so that the arrow does not break and that the extraction is not made difficult for you.
And if you cannot do it at that moment, then leave it for several days until the parts surrounding it can soften, and then repeat the procedure when it has become easier to handle. But if bleeding occurs contrary to expectations, then you should administer what we have said about treatment in the previous chapter.
And observe the source of the injury, whether it be from a vein, nerve, or tendon, and administer any means possible to prevent the arrow's penetration; and do this with ease, calmness, slowness, and firmness as I and you have recommended.
And therefore, reverse the arrow so that the patient is positioned according to the figure in which you should place the extraction of the arrow, for it is more beneficial. But if this is not possible for you, then administer whatever is possible according to the figures.
But for arrows that are embedded from the opposite side or have already protruded partially outside, or if the tip of the arrow becomes sticky due to the sensation of the part above the previously mentioned chain and it swells; then you cut on that area; and make the cut according to the amount that the forceps can grasp; then pull it out, for it is made to come out easily this way.
And if it is retained within the bone, then you twist the tool according to the opposition where the arrow presses into the bone, and widen it as you insert further, and then extract it.
And if not, leave it for several days, and then repeat the process until it comes out.
And if the shaft of the arrow is in there, then you push it out with it.
And if the shaft has fallen off and you want to administer an impulse, then insert it; if it is deaf (blocked), use a concave instrument so that it enters the cavity of the arrow's head and then push it out with it.
And if the arrow is concave, then you push it out with a strong instrument inserted into it, for the arrow is loosened by that.
And if the arrow is embedded, then you must hollow out all the flesh in which it is lodged, if that is possible for you, and then treat it with whatever is appropriate.
And if the arrow hits in the feet, or in the stomach, or in the bladder, or in the side, and it is close enough that you can touch it with your hand, and it is possible for you to cauterize over it, then cauterize over it and be careful not to injure any vein or nerve, and extract it, and then cover the wound if necessary, and treat it until it is healed.
Form of forceps with which arrows are extracted:
Let the ends of them be like a bird's beak, which are made like pincers so that they grasp the arrow without letting it go.
And of those, various special sizes are made, large, small, and medium, according to the size of the arrow and its thinness, and the width of the wound, and the constriction of the area.
And in this way, so that the internal part of the patient is relieved in the concave sagitta and is pushed with it.
Of course, let's translate the given line:
Here is the translation of the provided text line by line into English: Here is the translation of the provided sentence line by line into English:
And in the foot and thigh there are three veins; one of those is placed at the curvature of the hound's ear on the outer side; and the second is sophena, and its location is on the inner side of the domestic leg; and the sciatic vein, and its location is on the outer side of the wild leg; and in the thigh are other veins similar to those.
The treatment of veins near the ears is for ancient and emigrant catarrhs, and scaly and ulcerous old diseases of the head.
And the quality of bleeding those is according to what I recommend to you: it is that the head of the patient be shaved, and the head of the patient be rubbed at the back of the head in the location of both veins with a wide cloth with good friction; then bind the patient's neck with a bandage such that both [veins] appear and their locations are near the ears in two places close to the head; and seek those with your finger, and if you feel the pulse of those with your finger, here is the sign by touching.
Then you take the lancet, which is sharp, and then insert it into the vein until the bloodletting reaches the bone. Then elevate your hand with the vein and the bandage to the parts above and incise the vein with a sharp incision. And let the length of the incision be the width of two fingers together or around that; and let as much blood come out as you desire.
Then bind it with pillows and leave it until it is healed.
And already at the beginning of the book, the incision and its cauterization have been discussed.
And of the two arteries that are in the temple, the help of bloodletting is for the ancient migraine and similar evils and frequent ophthalmia and the excesses of acute humors poured into the eyes.
And the quality of bloodletting those [veins] is according to what I recommend to you: have the patient tilt their head forward until the two veins appear prominently at the surface, and make sure that your finger can feel their pulse; and then you may proceed with the procedure.
And then you lift the skin above the vein with your index finger at the parts above it, and insert the bloodletting instrument next to it, elevating the vein upwards; and incise it in the same way as you have done for the other two veins; and let the blood flow according to the quantity needed.
And then loosen the compression on the patient, and place your finger over the vein for about an hour; then apply a cloth and powder to it and bind it tightly with strong pressure, and leave it until it is healed.
And already preceding is the recollection of them, and of those the inscription, and the attraction at the beginning of the book.
And thus the treatment of venesection from the frontal vein is near to the venesection of the cephalic vein for old diseases of the face and migraine and fever and foul ulcers.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is as I recommend to you: so it is that the patient holds their neck with a band until the vein appears; and then take the instrument which is called a lancet, of which this is the form:
Place the tip of the instrument that is at the end of the probe over that vein and strike it with a peg or with another implement in the manner described, and let the blood flow according to the quantity you desire; then close the puncture wound of the patient and ensure that it heals properly.
And sometimes it is opened with a flebotomi (bloodletting instrument) of the leg, but the flebotomi should not have a sharp end like other flebotomis; rather, its end should be flat, and you should perform the bloodletting transversely because the bone is very close and strong, and it could break if the flebotomi were too fine.
However, the treatment of the two veins that are near the tear ducts of both eyes for eye ailments caused by itching and inflammation in the eyes, and for facial illnesses.
The procedure for bloodletting is that the patient should hold their head with a bandage, and then perform the bloodletting, while you stand above their head.
And the bloodletting should be performed transversely, a little along the length with a small bloodletting instrument, because there is no flesh in that area; and if the instrument is too fine, its end could easily break.
And then let blood as much as is necessary for you, and apply to those cuts, and bind them for one night, and then loosen them.
And the nasal venesection is suitable for acute fever and violent heat, and for illnesses of the face and migraine and inflammation that occur in the face, especially when they are chronic.
And the quality of the bloodletting is such that the patient holds their head and then you place your left hand under their nose, and take a fine long bloodletting instrument and insert it into the middle part of the tip of the nose according to straightness, for the vein does not appear to the senses here, and the blood begins to flow immediately.
You must withdraw your hand with the small bloodletting instrument little by little and let the blood flow according to your need; then bind it for one night, for it is easily restored.
However, bloodletting from the two gums is beneficial for alleviating swelling and the onset of leprosy and various other diseases, impetigo, and nasty corroding ulcers, such as herpes.
And the quality of the phlebotomy for those is that the patient should hold each one in their own arm with a ligature; and the surgeon stands over the head of the patient, and the patient sits on a seat.
And then perform venesection on the vein with a small, wide-bore lancet little by little; and then extract blood in a timely quantity or according to what you find necessary for that situation; and then do likewise with the other vein.
And then loosen the ligature and strengthen the two veins with a medium tight tourniquet so that the patient is not suffocated, and leave it in place until the wound is healed.
And the treatment of venesection from the larger veins helps with small abscesses and pustules in the mouth, corruption of the gums, and bad ulcers and cracks, as well as bad ulcers that are in the nose and around it.
And the quality of the venesection from those veins is such that you make the patient sit in front of you, and tie a band around their neck. Then separate the lips and look at the two veins, one on the right side of the lip and the second on the left; the indication for each is by the darkness of each of both, and this is more evident where small black veins are around them. And then incise each with an oblique incision.
But if there is doubt left in you, and you do not know which one it is among those, then you should proceed to the incision of the larger one, and from that, the pus clearly manifests.
And make the appearance of the two veins that are on the lips above.
But for the two veins that are below the tongue, the treatment is to perform phlebotomy of the cephalic vein for premonitory signs in the throat, diseases of the uvula, and other illnesses of the mouth.
And the quality of phlebotomy for those veins is that you should place the patient between your hands facing the sun, lift their tongue, and look below the tongue where one vein is on one side and another vein is on the other side, and the color of each is tending towards black.
And then phlebotomize each one; be careful not to linger with your hand during the phlebotomy of those veins, because below those are arteries.
And the veins that are bled from in the calf are those through which it is customary to bleed all men, and their bleeding is performed in two ways: either they use a lancet for bloodletting with a sharp olive-shaped tip; or they cut with a lancet blade, and this method is called alnessil, and this is its form:
Here is the translation of the given line:
And this flebotomi is of lesser width and has a finer tip, and it is suitable for flebotomy of fine veins that contain thin blood.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And it is necessary for the phlebotomist, when performing phlebotomy on that area, to be very careful and cautious in doing so because there lies an artery; if he makes a mistake and punctures with the phlebotomy needle, he will cut that artery and cause a flow of blood, therefore it is necessary not to perform phlebotomy there with a piercing instrument but rather with a cutting one first.
And if the vein does not appear by clear manifestation, then you must leave that area and move to another, or seek some other part of the arm; or perform phlebotomy at the end of the arm where it is visible; and proceed with phlebotomy using a cutting method as we have said.
But if you wish to perform phlebotomy on the patient, then before constricting the arm, touch the area between where you know the pulse is located, and then press on it with your thumb; and then stretch out the arm and cut the vein using a concave section with a cutting instrument as we have said; and be careful not to hit the artery's location by any space due to percussion.
And when you see that by tightening the bandage, there is swelling in the place where you have pressed with your finger, then that swelling is due to the artery, and therefore it should be avoided.
And if you see the blood flow during phlebotomy as thin as a child's urine and the blood is fine red, then know that it is arterial blood; and then you should press and place your finger on it for a long time; and then remove your finger, and if the blood flows continuously without interruptions, then strengthen the arm and leave it be.
And protect the patient from catching a cold, and place them in a warm environment and do not let that harm them for several days until they are healed.
And if the blood flow is not stopped, and sometimes medicine is not available for this purpose, then you should incise the artery, if it appears to you; for the extremity is contracted, and the blood flow is interrupted; or that you take a piece of lint (or flax), and prepare that, and take one half and apply that over the vein with tension using a bandage and with poultices until the next day.
And if the blood flow is stopped, that is good; and if not, then treat it with methods previously mentioned for remembering the location of powder applications to stop the flow of blood.
And stopping the blood flow is difficult in many situations due to the small location of the wound and the possibility of bandaging the arm.
However, for the dark vein, phlebotomy is beneficial for drawing blood from the upper part of the head and from the lower part of the body; because it is composed of branches of the basilic and cephalic veins, as we have said.
And the phlebotomist must avoid that which is over-sensitive in the patient's phlebotomy, because there is a nerve there; and if the puncture of the phlebotomy hits this nerve, it will cause stupor to the patient, and it is difficult for them to recover, and many are not completely healed. And this nerve sometimes appears to the touch; and if it is hidden from some people and is subtle and not easily seen, then you must hold the phlebotomizer with which you perform phlebotomy using a section of annellus (possibly referring to an instrument or technique), and avoid the nerve with your skill.
And if the vein is between two nerves, then you puncture the vein along its length.
The benefit of phlebotomy of the cephalic vein is that it draws blood from the head and helps with ailments of the eyes.
And it is proper in this case, if you want the phlebotomies to be performed with an olive phlebotomizer or a myrtle phlebotomizer; for it is the safest of all veins, as there are no arteries or nerves nearby.
However, sometimes an abscess can be present in some individuals, when phlebotomy does not occur at the first attempt, but do not hit that abscess repeatedly.
The first thing you should know is that phlebotomy is administered only for the preservation of health and with hope and caution regarding the onset of diseases. Phlebotomy should be performed on one of the veins in the arm, specifically: cephalic, saphenous, or basilic. Additionally, phlebotomy should be carried out at the beginning of spring, on an empty stomach in spring and autumn, and in winter close to meals when signs of repletion appear.
And if a phlebotomy is performed, it should be done on the third day or at the earliest in the morning after three hours have passed.
And for phlebotomy which is administered, only when it brings convenience and necessity to do so, whether at night or during the day, at any hour and in any time.
And it must be that a child is not circumcised until they are 14 years old, and a pregnant woman should not be circumcised except between the fourth month and the seventh, and elderly women who have already passed 60 years shall not be circumcised.
And when someone wishes to undergo bloodletting in any manner, it is necessary to cleanse their intestines before the bloodletting with a strong cathartic, if there are any retained fecal matter inside, so that the veins do not pull excess substances into the blood during the bloodletting of the cleansed intestines, which should not corrupt the main limbs.
And bloodletting should not be performed on patients who are newly pregnant or drunk, nor when they are suffering from a disease or intoxication until those conditions have been alleviated, nor if they suffer from dropsy. Moreover, bloodletting should be avoided near colic pain and vomiting, and near the abdomen, and near excessive intercourse, labor, exercise, fasting, or sleepless nights, and any cause that diminishes their strength, whether bodily or otherwise.
And also consider the purification of humors before this if the blood is thick, through food and drink, and through medicines if it is possible to do so.
And then enter into a bath if there is no cause prohibiting it, or be exercised by some exertion so that the blood may be refined.
And perform phlebotomy (bloodletting) on him in the morning around the hour of terce (approximately 9 AM), as we have said.
And it is necessary that the foot of that person be protected on that day from all evil accidents, such as distress, anger, fear, and from all bodily exertions, such as excessive labor, hardship, and similar things.
And in his seat, let there be present the causes according to the use which it is customary for people to have with aromatics and fragrances and with balms and similar things according to the quantity of possibility.
And follow the phlebotomist onto a cushion that is higher than the cushion of he who is to be bled.
And then pull out his arm, and the phlebotomist should rub that area with their hand two or three times; then tighten the ligature with a strap and wrap it around twice.
And let the binding be moderate, for if the binding is not equal, or the binding is due to excess, then it prohibits blood flow; or it should be softened, and then it prevents the escape of blood from the body.
And before the binding, it is necessary that the person who is to be bled should rub their hands together until the veins are swollen and can be distinctly felt.
And then the phlebotomist should anoint their lancet properly with a little olive oil; and then place their index finger of the left hand on that vein, at the spot where they want to perform the phlebotomy, so that the vein protrudes slightly, and the pulsation can be felt clearly, as one would feel a cord under the skin. The veins that are full of air will contract when the lancet is placed upon them; those veins should not be opened, for if they are, the vein will narrow.
And therefore, for this reason, it is necessary that the phlebotomist be firm and attentive in all these matters.
And then remove the flebotomi [likely referring to some form of bloodletting tool], but if the vein was properly opened in one go, that is good; and if not, you repeat this another time after leaving that spot a little alone, or apply a compress over it, if the area is not inflamed.
And if the area is inflamed, or the patient feels faint, then you should wait for one or two days, and do not tighten the binding, because it could attract more inflammation quickly, nor should they enter into a bath.
And then repeat the bloodletting if necessary.
And if the opening is small and blood flows subtly, and you fear that not enough blood will come out as desired, then you repeat the bloodletting in that area slightly adjusted to the opening, and do this with a compress before the area becomes inflamed, because in many people, an inflamed area requires a smaller opening.
But if you find that area already inflamed, then do not repeat the procedure there, because it will not help and may cause harm; instead, apply a part of an oil bandage over it, because it alleviates the body from blood. And it is better in this place to use oil and other ointments.
And similarly, administer a mixture of oil in all phlebotomies with which you bleed the veins to prevent the flow of blood from the body, and use theriac, aloes, and sage when placed on the area where the blood is refined and coagulated when it becomes thick.
And if a large abscess is generated at the site of phlebotomy, it often happens that this occurs, especially in someone who has not been bled except on that occasion, or near the surface of the vein, and then you should cool it down by placing a sponge soaked in water and salt, slightly warmed, over the area for about an hour, as it dissolves [the abscess].
And it is necessary to do this near the emergence of blood from that vein with the completion of the bleeding or from another vein.
And if some blackness or greenish color remains in the area for several days, do not worry about it; and if you wish, apply to that area some mixture of aloes and myrrh dissolved, or some mixture of juice from mint or calamint or something similar.
And when white spots indicate abscesses or swellings, perform bloodletting from a vein in the basilic region.
And then place your hand on that area, and if you find softness there, apply pressure to it, because that prominence is evil and bad; and then be careful not to press on that for any reason we have mentioned, for fear that blood will flow from the artery.
And make a poultice with something that is styptic, so the area becomes hardened, and then treat it with another cure until it heals.
And it is necessary to extract blood from every person according to the quantity of their strength and according to the prevailing color over the blood as it appears.
When the blood is black, then you should let it flow until it becomes warm; and similarly if you find it thick, then you should let it flow until it becomes thin; and similarly if it is sharp (acrid), until the sharpness of it is reduced.
And it is necessary for one who is full and strong and has the need for blood extraction in a single session that the venesection of the vein be enlarged and the venesection be wide.
And in that which is cold, the opposite should be done of what was mentioned, and it must be expelled through frequent warm baths, and the treatment must be strict.
And the best method administered in venesection is that the incision should be transverse, not a puncture.
And this method of venesection is safe from blood flow and nerve damage, and it is more praiseworthy and safer than venesection according to latitude and longitude.
And it is customary for fainting to occur before bloodletting, and you must treat this before the bloodletting with a little piece of bread infused in pomegranate juice or simply heated honey water; and extract the blood in three or four stages.
And if it is chilled due to composition, then take before the bloodletting an infusion in myrrh syrup or in aromatic honey syrup with spices such as pepper, cinnamon, ginger and the like, or in an aromatic and sweet-smelling syrup.
And if you encounter fainting due to bloodletting, which is caused by the loss of much blood, then it is necessary that they drink water and an aromatic syrup; and use aromatics with ale, and anoint their feet with that.
And use the other causes that we have mentioned in the section on fainting due to evacuation.
And for those who wish to thin their blood and dissolve it gradually, it is suitable for one from whom bloodletting is a significant evacuation, and its property is cold, which evacuates the blood little by little, according to the strength of its virtue over several continuous days.
But for those who wish to thin their blood and draw it a second time, and whose body is strong, this should be done approximately seven or nine hours after the first bloodletting.
And if one wants to draw blood from the body in the opposite direction of where it declines, it must be done on the second or third day.
And here is the translation of the given sentence:
And when you want to release the arm and evacuate the blood a second time, since the vein's orifices are already closed and it has become difficult for the blood to flow out, do not press on that area with great force and extend it slightly bent, for this is too harmful.
They place the incision such that it is opened gradually; or they remove this with the sharpness of the lancet which coagulates the blood in the opening of the vein; or they apply some theriac alfarach, or sage, and press that with light compression until the blood has been fully expelled.
And if the vein is inflamed, then leave it alone and do not touch it until the inflammation has subsided.
And if the necessity arises to perform secondary bloodletting and it is not avoidable, then you should bleed that area at another location on the same spot or in the other arm in a different vein.
And the vein called the "sinew of the arm" is incised at the site of the fossa or basilic vein, when those are not found or are hidden, as it is composed of those veins.
And the quality of the bloodletting is such that the patient should dip their hand in warm water until the pulse reddens and the vein becomes clearly visible.
And then apply moderate tension on that area with a bandage; and then perform the bloodletting transversely, neither laterally nor longitudinally.
And let the incision be wide, and perform the bloodletting such that you make it slightly above the joint of the hand.
And if you need to stop the flow of blood, then soak your hand in warm water and let the blood run into the water until you achieve your goal.
And if you were in the days of summer, then you are excused from the repetition of placing the hand in warm water, and instead the body is immersed in warm water during the winter season.
And the phlebotomy of this vein is safer than that of all other veins, because there is neither pulsating vein nor nerve here.
And the phlebotomy of the vein in the right hand is relevant to diseases of the liver.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that you stretch your hand with a ligature or with your hand, after which you place it in hot water until the vein is swollen and clearly visible to the eye; then perform the phlebotomy across it; and if you cut through it entirely without damaging anything around it.
And be careful not to end the procedure with your hand during phlebotomy, because it would leave the nerves of the fingers exposed and without flesh.
And then wash the hand in warm water and let the blood flow into it, for if you do not wash that hand in warm water, the blood will clot at the opening of the vein, and it is prohibited from flowing.
And when the blood is drawn according to the necessary amount, then you place oil and salt on the vein so that it does not close too quickly; and similarly, you should do this along the entire straight path of the vein.
However, the benefit of performing bloodletting from the left hand is that it is beneficial for illnesses of the brain.
And do similarly in the bloodletting of the eye as you have done in the other [procedure].
And the benefit of bloodletting from the vein saphena is for illnesses in the lower part of the body, such as ailments of the uterus, and for the retention of menses, and for diseases of the rheumatism and ulcers of the thighs and old sores on the legs, and for similar kinds of illnesses.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient should immerse their foot in warm water and perform friction on it until the veins become visible; then tie a bandage around the ankle; and at the site where the vein becomes clearly apparent, you should place your finger, from which point it branches out across the surface of the foot in several directions.
And thus perform the incision to drain the pus from the largest branch or leave it in the chest area below the ankle and the swelling, whichever is better and more effective.
And if you perform a puncture on the surface of the foot, then be careful of the nerves that are located there on the surface of the foot, and carry out your puncture in such a way that you do it across, as if you wanted to cut through.
And let the puncture be performed thus.
But if bleeding is prohibited; then you should soak the foot in warm water and let the blood flow into it until it is evacuated.
And if the puncturer makes a mistake on the first attempt, then repeat the puncture slightly higher up, for the area is salty; and do not fear any mischief, but be careful of the nerves as we have said.
And similarly, do the same with the poultice on the other foot.
And regarding the sciatic vein, the location, as we have said, is below the ankle bone behind the outer part of the leg.
And the treatment of the puncture is for hip pain when it is caused by blood.
And the quality of the phlebotomy is that the patient enter into a bath, and hasten and strain the thigh of the patient on the side of the ankle above the talus with four fingers under a long thin bandage, for it appears only by this.
And so when it appears, then you perform trephination on that area according to each tool at your disposal and across the transverse plane, which is better; or incise that area through an incision or cut that area through a section, for the location of it is shallow.
And it is in many men moderately veined; and if you find that one, and it does not appear to the senses as a whole, then perform phlebotomy on some part of it, which appears on the back of the foot behind the area where the ring finger would be.
And be careful of the nerves, and let as much blood flow as you wish.
Then loosen the constriction and place a pad over the area of the phlebotomy, compressing the area tightly, for it heals quickly.
Regarding ventosation and the qualities of using those methods.
Ventozas so de corns, o de eram, or de veyre.
And bloodletting is performed in two ways: one of them is by incision and extraction of blood, and the other is bloodletting without incision.
And this bloodletting without incision is done in two ways, either with fire or without fire.
And the bloodletting sites that are performed with incision and extraction of blood are fourteen places on the body, among which one place where bloodletting is applied is alnocrati, which is the back part of the head; and another site is on both sides of the neck; and bloodletting from the chin below the jaw, below the mouth; and bloodletting from both armpits; and bloodletting from alohoster, which is above the end of the spine; and bloodletting from both elbows, which are on both arms; and bloodletting from both calves; and bloodletting from both thighs.
And bloodletting does not extract blood from the small veins scattered in the flesh, and by doing so, you do not weaken them, just as it happens with phlebotomy; nor should bloodletting be performed with or without fire in any disease caused by repletion until the whole body is evacuated.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence:
And thus when dealing with any of those causes, and particularly if it is in the third month or a bit later, then I command that ventilation be performed more than two or three hours after the day has passed.
And the treatment for ventosuction of the neck is that when you apply pressure to the head and cause it to sink into the pillows; but it must be close to the evacuation of the whole body.
And this cupping is in the location of the cephalic vein incision.
And it is not good that he uses it who has a cold constitution, or in whom there is catarrh, for it brings great harm to him.
And for this reason, it is not suitable for old people to use it, and in the heads of those who have cold illnesses.
But for those on whom it is continuously applied, forgetfulness may occur; therefore, you must command the cupper to pause his hand slightly from the cupping at certain intervals to prevent the generation of forgetfulness.
However, cupping with alcohol is used instead of phlebotomy of the saphenous and basilic veins: therefore, it is applied for asthma, constriction of the lungs, rupture of lung tissue, cough, and congestion.
And the alcohol cupping should be slightly removed, for if it is left in place, it can cause weakness in the body and stomach.
And cupping with alhagdahan (likely a type of herb or substance) is applied for accidental pains in the head, ophthalmia, migraine, suffocation, and pain in the tooth roots; and it is used instead of phlebotomy of the basilic vein.
And you must command the surgeon not to press his hand too hard during the incision so that he does not pierce the artery and cause a flow of blood.
And the swelling of the chin comes from alcohol in the mouth, and the corruption of the gums, and it resembles the diseases that are in the mouth, and it is located where the tracheotomy would be, between the two lips.
And the swelling that is caused by the two spatulas should be treated with cataplasm, which is made by the accumulation of warmth.
And the inflation of the two parts inside the veins contributes to the benefit of phlebotomy from three veins, which are the basilic, saphenous and cephalic, because those attract blood from all those smaller veins that are in the flesh, and those small veins from other larger veins until the attraction reaches the three veins.
And command the blood-letter not to proceed too much in scarification, for the area is devoid of flesh, and leave its nerves and arteries untouched.
And it is a cupping where suction is applied over the thighs and extends to the hemorrhoids of the anus and the pus-filled ulcers.
And you must command the blood-letter to make a large wet-cupping, and that it be of an area where strong drying is needed; and perform subtle cupping movements and apply superficial incisions with scarification.
Here is the translation line by line for the given source sentence:
However, fever weakens the whole body and causes fainting in many people.
And for the treatment with cupping, it is commonly applied to the cupping points on two sides of the back.
And the quality of the placement of the cupping is such that you place the cup at the beginning and draw out the fluid quickly and not for too long, but place them lightly and remove them gently so that the humors come to the surface evenly. And do not stop repeating this process until you see the area become red and swollen, and the coagulation of blood appears.
And then you should scratch the area and gradually repeat the suction, and also take into account the condition of the body.
For that person who has delicate skin and few pores, you should scratch them once and not more, so that the area does not become ulcerated.
And instruct the cupper to deepen the scratching slightly and increase it a little, and perform the suction with ease.
And if there is thickening in the blood, then you must scarify twice, for in the first time the path for the refinement of the blood and its moisture is opened. But in the second examination obtained from the extraction of thick blood.
And if the blood is very thick, then a third incision should be made so that it can achieve the last stage.
And finally, when we want to extract blood slowly or in small amounts, a scarification is enough for us.
And if we want to extract a lot of blood, we do so with extensive scarification; and if we know that the blood is thick, then we must use deep scarification.
And the term "scarification" refers solely to the depth of the cut.
And if the vein is thick, hard, dark, and its pores are narrow, it is necessary that the areas for cupping be anointed with more soothing, opening, and resolving substances; if it is summer, such as aloes oil or violet oil, or double almond oil, or hawthorn oil; and if it is winter, then narcissus oil, or lily oil, or camomile oil, or blood oil, and similar ones.
And if the excess is thick and cold, then the oil should be amber oil, or balsam oil, or aloes oil, or anise oil, and similar ones.
And if the area where bloodletting is performed has large pores and tender flesh, then it must be prohibited to use oil, and it must be ensured that the places for the bloodletting around the site are washed with warm water or cold spring water, or with water from a cypress tree, or with water from dew, and similar things to those.
And for the one whose blood has too much humidity, wash their bloodletting sites with sour wine, or with water from myrtle and sumac, and similar things to those.
And for the one whose excesses are thick, wash their bloodletting sites with old wine, or with water from thyme, which is marjoram, or from an infusion of dill, or chamomile, and things similar to those.
And it must be ensured that bloodletting is protected before bathing; often, it must be administered just before the bath by one or two hours, and it must be arranged for the patient to rest near the site of bloodletting.
What is necessary is that the bloodletting site be regulated before the actual bloodletting.
Consider the following translation for the given sentence:
And limit their foods as much as possible, and serve them poultry meats, and foods seasoned with herbs, and similar things.
And for those whose condition is hot, it is necessary that they drink herbal infusions of fennel or aniseed infusion with seeds, and sumac, and wine moderately aromatic between old and new; and it should be recommended to them to use moderation in drinking and eating, and avoid foods like pork, hemp, beans, small birds, and pigeons.
And it is necessary that on the day of bloodletting and venesection, the drink should be more than the food.
And it is necessary to give certain people in specific hours thyriaca alpharac, or medicines of musk, such as mastic, or alcelita before bloodletting or before venesection or afterwards, so that the main limbs are comforted and the blood is made more subtle; and they should not take that which is heated.
And the bloodlettings that are performed by scarification should be done on areas such as the liver, and on the spleen and gout, and on the navel, in the regions of the joints, and at the pit of the stomach, because these parts cannot withstand scarification directly upon them.
And it is not desired for these but rather the attraction of blood from the member, just as we place a bloodletting on the nipple in the illness of nasal bleeding; and we use this to dissolve cold and viscous humors in the member, just as we place [it] on the abdomen and navel; because this rarefies the member, heats it, and removes pain when resolving those humors.
And it is already placed over the lungs when you encounter their obstruction or pus, for by virtue of strong attraction, it helps to clear the obstruction and eliminate the pus from its place.
And similarly, it works when placed over the liver to expel harmful air trapped within those areas.
And these suction cups are administered with only suction; and sometimes they are applied with heat.
And sometimes they are applied filled with warm water in illnesses related to air or gas.
And this is why the cupping vessel should be filled and made larger, whether with hot water alone or water in which suitable herbs have been boiled.
Form of cupping administered with fire: the diameter of the opening should be two fingers wide, according to how we have formed it; and the quantity of air should be half a palm; and it should be placed on his side, in the location that is along the circumference, halfway around; the hole should be small so that a needle can enter into it.
It should be made of hard wood or citrus, with thick edges, smooth, equal, and clean so that it does not move the member from its position on it.
And in the middle of the transverse bar of wood or iron, a candle should be placed with fire.
And this cupping device should be larger than the one we have recommended; and it should be smaller than that according to the illnesses and the age of the person using it.
And the cupping devices for children and those who are weakened are different from the cupping devices for young adults and those with larger bodies.
And the quality of placing this cupping device with fire on the member is to extend the ember with fire from decent wood in front of a small candle of wax, and place that in the middle of the transverse bar at the center of the cupping device, so that the fire is lit around it without burning the patient's body.
And then it is placed on the patient's limb, and the finger is on the spot we have mentioned, such that when we have the cups and do not want to hold the finger so that vapor comes out over that spot, then the cup will dissolve immediately.
And then apply heat to the joint according to its condition, and repeat that if you need to do so.
In the case of cupping that is administered for pleurisy, it should be done with water in which there is no crosswise or submerged wood, and it is only filled with water, then placed on the limb just like that.
And this is the form of it: The larger the cupping vessel, the better, because it can hold a greater quantity of water.
Chapter XCVM (97).
Bloodletting is not administered on many parts of the body but only on those parts where cupping cannot be positioned due to their small size, such as the ear and gums and similar areas; or on parts devoid of flesh, such as the fingers and nose and their likes.
And the quality of the leeches that you have found should be used if they are from clean waters, free from putrefaction.
And then they should be left day and night in fresh water until they become hungry, and ensure that no impurities remain in their bodies; then the body should be purged at the beginning with phlebotomy and cupping; then rub the patient's limb until it reddens; and then place them on it.
And when they are filled and spilled.
And if it is possible to suction the area with a cupping glass, it is more beneficial for healing.
And if not, then wash the area with wine and then with clean water; and let it be rubbed and squeezed.
And if the flow of blood continues to the application of leeches and it is still oozing, then soak a cloth in cold water, and place it over until the oozing stops.
And if the blood is flowing heavily, then sprinkle vitriol powder or gall and similar astringent substances over it until the bleeding stops; or place the pods of cooked broad beans over the area and leave them until the beans adhere to the site, and the bleeding ceases.
And it is necessary, if repeated applications of leeches are required, to change them when possible.
And if leeches are prohibited due to suspension, then rub the area with fresh blood or insert a needle into the spots until blood flows; and then apply them, for they will adhere as soon as they sense any blood.
And when you want them to fall (meaning for something like boils or swellings to rupture), sprinkle a little ground alum, or salt, or ashes over them, and they will rupture soon.
Thus begins the section of the third part: on restoration. This chapter is frequently necessary in the art of medicine; it is about the restoration of fractures and dislocations in the bones.
O, son, know that this chapter is boasted by foolish doctors and common ones, and those who for some time have not regarded the books of the Ancients nor read a single letter from them.
And for this reason, this method of the knowledgeable is kept private in our land; and I have not forgotten it at any time nor entirely; and I did not adopt what follows simply, but through extensive reading of the books of the Ancients and study to understand them, from which I extracted their knowledge.
And then I directed myself to experimentation and study throughout my life.
And I have already described in this chapter all that my knowledge contains and on which my experience has passed; since I have summarized this for you and freed it from the length of elaboration; and I have summarized this at the end of summarization; and shown this at the end of declaration; and formed various forms of treatments that are administered, as is done by adding to the declaration, just as I have done in two previous chapters.
Capitol primier.
Here is the translation of the provided sentence: Cover therefore we must speak in the preface of this chapter the summaries of the sermon; and the chapters to the understanding of which at the beginning it is forced upon the artisans and stands on the truth of those; such are you and those who are quick who knew or learned this noble art other than you.
And therefore it is said that when you encounter a fracture or dislocation or twist or sprain, then at the beginning you should apply trepanation or extension to it, or both together, unless there is some prohibiting cause, such as weakness of strength, or if the one who has suffered the injury is a child, or an elderly person in decrepitude, or if it is during a time of intense heat, or of intense cold.
Then one should be content with food such as fresh herbs and the meat of birds and crabs; and we prohibit heavy meats and filling oneself with foods that fill the veins with blood, until you are sure of a matured abscess cautery, and if you do not fear an effusion of matter into the limb.
And then return the patient to their original regimen with which they were accustomed.
And therefore as the broken bone begins to heal, then the patient should be fed nutritious foods that are rich and heavy with viscosity, such as foods made from baked wheat with water, rice, beans, fish, cow's stomachs, eggs, fresh cheese, thick wine, and similar items. With this regimen, fracture coagulation occurs more easily and better.
And know that bones that crack in men who are in their prime and in the elderly cannot be continued and consolidated according to their nature due to the dryness of their members.
But nature itself adjusts and you should bandage over the broken bone from all sides with something similar to glue in which there is a thickening substance that adheres and strengthens that within which they are simultaneously conglutinated and bonded together, until strength and firmness come, just as fire at the beginning, until nothing prevents it from completing its work.
And for this reason, it is necessary to stop the foods of the patient, foods which are heavy and viscous and large, as we have said.
And know that the types of fractures are diverse according to the diversity of the limbs, for a fracture of the bone of the head is different from the fracture of the bone of the shoulder; and the fracture of the bone of the foot is different from the fracture of the bone of the back; and similarly all other limbs are different among themselves.
And I will include a recollection of every type of fracture, explained in its own chapter distinct from the other.
Note the diversity of fractures within itself. And the types of bone fractures are diversified within themselves; for there is an arched fracture, which occurs in the stars [likely referring to the wrist or carpal bones]; and sometimes a fracture follows the length of the bone: and these are the fractures of the phalanges, metacarpals, and proceeding and non-proceeding adductors, just as it is done on the pen when it is prepared for writing, and there is a fracture with inflammation and disruption at the head, and there is a small fissure fracture.
And each type has its own remedy or treatment in the restoration, which will be recalled separately in their respective places.
Sign of a bone fracture. And by this is known a bone fracture: its deformity, and that prominence and change in appearance when you touch it, and pain when you press it with your hand.
And thus when there is no apparent deformity in the location and no pain is found with your touch when you move the bone and the patient does not experience great pain, then there is no fracture here.
Sometimes there can be a deformity or small crack, in which case you should not manipulate it with your hand and through compression; sometimes place on it some medicines of which recall to mind around that moment when you need to apply them to the area; and then bind it tightly with a subtle bandage.
And know that when the area is bent but not split into two or any other condition that does not affect its stability, such as when the entire part of its connection remains intact, then you should begin at your earliest convenience to correct it, sometimes letting an abscess form first.
And if an abscess forms, then leave it for several days until the abscess subsides; and then treat it in whatever way you can with care and ingenuity.
And know that the restoration and healing of the flesh is quicker than that of the bone where the injury occurs.
And then strengthen that second part so that the memory of it returns.
But if the injury is in the bone, then it is necessary to extend this broken limb from both ends, whether it is an arm or a leg; or with your hand if the limb is small; or with two ropes or one rope and your hand.
And you should position the limb in such a way that it is held according to its natural shape while the broken parts are being stretched, so that you can effectively return those additions with skill and in whichever manner you can to their proper places.
And be careful according to your strength that you do not cause pain or injury to the patient through your operation; and strive according to your ability to align one bone with its companion in their best possible forms.
And it is necessary that at that moment you skillfully touch with your hand the affected area, and if there is any other cause present, correct it and adjust it according to the extent of your ability.
And there is a strong extension and compression, just as some foolish doctors do who at times cause an abscess to occur due to their operation, or cause a contraction in the limb just as we have seen this happen through their operations many times.
And the quality of the restriction of the tranquil limb is what I recommend; so that you know that broken limbs vary in their smallness and greatness and in the form of them.
And for those that are small, such as the arm and the foot and the finger and similar ones, then the wrapping should be of very fine cloth.
And for those that are large, such as the thigh or the hip, then a thick and hard wrapping should be used, because a thick binding connects the large and strong limb firmly on all sides with equal restriction, in such a way that no flaw enters it.
And then begin, before your evacuation of the dislocation, to place a suitable bandage on the area of that fracture with three or four layers according to what the limb requires; and hold your hand slightly over the bandage.
And then place your hand at the highest part of the fracture site, and hold it firmly so that your bandage does not loosen where you have secured the area of the fracture. And then lengthen the area of the fracture slightly with wrapping, and gradually loosen the bandage little by little until you have straightened a large part of the area.
And then take another bandage and wrap it again over the broken area, and place the wraps toward the lower part of the fracture; and perform your operation in tightening the wrapping and gradually loosening it as we have said for the first wrapping above.
And then place between the layers of linen or cloth something that matches the curvature of the fracture if there is any curvature; and if not, do not place anything in it for any reason.
And then place another bandage over it, and then apply properly made plasters to these coverings immediately if there is no inflammation or abscess in the area. And if there is an abscess present, place that which reduces the abscess and the swelling; leave this for several days; and then strengthen the area with the plasters.
And let the plasters be made of half a cane reed, carefully formed; or they can be made of pine wood; or of palm branches; and let the width of each plaster be according to this form and this figure:
However, the splint that is placed over the fracture should be slightly thicker and wider than the other splints, and the length of the splint according to what suits the limb in size; then secure the splints with another bandage according to your initial tightness; then cover it with pitch properly as we have said about tightening, which means that your tightening should be tighter at the site of the fracture, and as you move further away from the fracture, the tightness should decrease.
And it is necessary that the threads be moderate in thickness and fineness, and they should be made of linen; and if the threads are thick, as I have seen some unskilled practitioners do by using ropes instead of fine threads for binding, it is a great error, for it disrupts the equality of the tension.
And fine threads are not suitable, because you will not be able to accomplish what you want due to the tightness with those, and there should not be less than a finger's width between stitch and stitch.
And if the patient is troubled by the extremities of the stars near the constriction in those areas, then place there wool or felted wool between so that it does not cause injury to them.
Here is the translation of the provided medieval medical text line by line:
And know that not every broken limb is immediately set with splints on the first day; the reason being that when the limb is large, it should not be placed on the splints right away but rather after five or six days, or more, according to your assurance of the development of an abscess.
And this is the method of plasters with which the Ancients would treat fractures, dislocations, and sprains.
Method of a plaster for the restoration of fractures, suitable for various complications and especially for women and children, as it does not generate heat or irritation: take flour dust, which is the fine powder that settles on the mill walls due to the movement of the millstone.
And prepare it thus: sieve it with egg white, and make the mixture neither too thick nor too thin; then apply it accordingly.
Another method of plaster for treating fractures, dislocations, and sprains: take assafetida, ladanum, acacia, enula, and migrach, which is the resin of wild millet, all one drachm each; myrrh and aloe, one drachm each; alochil, two drachms. All should be crushed, sieved, and mixed with either almond oil or egg white if the patient’s condition is inflamed; then apply this plaster, which has a good composition and easily restores broken bones, and you can share it with many people.
Here is the translation of the provided line:
All shall be ground in a mortar with fine grinding, and they shall be sifted, and they shall be mixed with water or egg white and administered.
Method of plaster for joints and bones separated from their places, and which causes pain in accidents to those and fractures and breaks: take wool soaked and immerse it in sweet wine and cooked oil and place it over the area.
But in this plaster there is no virtue of restoration, it burns and expels pain properly.
Another method of plaster that restores broken bones: take leaves from the fig tree and leaves from wild poppy; grind everything together and make a plaster out of them.
Method of a compact plaster administered for the restoration of bone fractures and when you want to resolve the remaining abscess: take roots of elder, camomile flowers, and violet flowers, flour of iris, all in equal parts; grind them all together and mix them with wine if the limb is not inflamed.
If it is inflamed, then soothe it with coriander water or with water and oil of it.
Another method of a more potent plaster for resolving a hard abscess and restoring the limb: take roots of elder and its seeds, pomegranate bark, sweet clover, marjoram, violet flowers, camomile flowers, all in equal parts; grind them all together and mix them with sage water or sweet water or wine, according to the nature of the limb and the condition of its color.
But Hippocrates did not say in his book that the restoration of a broken limb should be paused, but rather something made of wax and oil; and he recommends that it be balanced between thickness and subtlety.
But in Gaul, it is observed that they pause the restoration of a broken limb and use causes which are drying with a little heat, such as myrrh, incense, and similar to those causes we have mentioned.
Method for a poultice that alleviates injury and pain: take myrtle, cypress, human placenta or dove droppings, and fern, and salt, in equal parts; grind them and sieve them, then mix them, and make a poultice.
But the duration for which the binding should remain and then be loosened is such that you consider whether there is no accidental pain or severe injury, and if the bone is not broken nor displaced from its position, then you should not loosen it for several days. And if you encounter severe pain, injury, or swelling at the site, then you should be cautious or loosen it immediately, and remove the poultice from it.
And take a cloth and a damp sea sponge, and submerge that in warm water, and with that wash the area until the pricking ceases and the pain is soothed; then let the limb rest for an hour; then place over it wool soaked in sweet wine and oil or ointment, and apply that to it overnight until you are sure of a safe abscess, and the swelling of the limb subsides, and the pain is alleviated from it.
Then repeat that subtle binding and apply a small plaster without tightening it as in your first constriction, and do so gently until it is healed.
And if you find that the abscess, the hardness, the pain, the swelling, and all the symptoms have been completely alleviated, and you no longer need a plaster or binding, then repeat the process as you did at the beginning in the same manner.
And if no cause of those we have mentioned affects the limb, then do not loosen it until three or four or five or seven days later; and sometimes this is left for twenty days according to what appears to you regarding the loosening of the limb, as we have said, until the fracture adheres, and approaches the coagulation of the flesh over it.
And now adjust more in the constriction than in your initial constriction entirely, and adjust according to the swelling of the patient's food vessel, as is preceded by the recollection of it.
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And what those foolish restorers of a fractured limb do again when it is not restored properly at the beginning, according to how it should be, and is restored crookedly, is an error in their operation, causing great fear; if this were corrected, the Ancients would have expanded on this in their books and acted accordingly.
And I have not seen any of them do this, which is why it is more reasonable that this should not be done.
Chapter two: On fractures when they occur in the head.
The types of fractures are many, and their forms are diverse, and the causes are distinct. Some fractures are caused by the blow of an ax, where the blow removes all the bone inside the skull, which is left without its bones, just as this happens to a tree trunk; therefore, this type is named "ascial." Or the ax cuts into some part of the bone, cutting through the flesh but not penetrating deeply into the rear of it. This kind of fracture is called an absolute levation.
And the severity of these two types of fractures is either great or slight, and this applies to a fracture that is comminuted or crushed. The cause of such a fracture is a blow with a heavy object or falling onto stone, and their characteristics are similar.
And this fracture either penetrates and approaches the periosteum which is next to the bone; or it is on the surface of the bone, and the severity of these two types of fractures is either great or slight.
And regarding fractures, it is said that they occur in the bone, in the subtlety of tiny hair-like structures, and for this reason, this type of fracture is named capillary.
And it is a fracture that is caused either by falling or by the impact of a stone and similar objects, which causes some fragments of the bone to enter the internal parts, and it occurs in the concave area just as it happens to tiles on roofs when they are struck and pieces break off and enter their inner parts.
And this is particularly done in bodies with moist bones, such as infants' heads.
And thus to all these types of fractures, they apply weights such as separate stones. And I will return to recall all of this in its place.
And know all these types of fractures by detecting them and by examining their attempts to move and the corruption of flesh that is on them.
And the capillary type is known because what is revealed on the bone is cleaned and rubbed with thread, for the fracture appears black.
But in the treatment of fractures, consider at the beginning the symptoms of the patient, and if you see by the symptoms that they indicate manifestly about fear, such as vomiting from anger, and stretching, and loss of understanding, and loss of voice, and fainting, and acute fever, and discharge from the ears and inflammation of those, and similarities to their symptoms in the most severe conditions, then it is not curable.
And if you encounter uncommon accidents and hope for healing, then you begin the treatment of him.
Which means that if the injured person comes to you at the beginning of winter while they are still injured, then you must study the setting of the bone before the fourteenth day according to all dispositions.
And if it is during the days of summer, then you must take care to set the bone before the seventh day, because what is left near the bone may be corrupted by putrefaction, and to prevent the accidents we have mentioned.
And if the fracture has already progressed to the brain covering and is in small fragmented and gritty pieces, then you must incise the fragmented and gritty parts, as I will recommend to you.
And you should shave the head of the injured patient, and expose the bone according to your customary method and skill based on the nature of the injury, being gentle with the patient.
And if you encounter difficulties in detecting the bone, blood flow, or an abscess requiring cautery, then you should oppose it with what is necessary, which is to fill the area with cloths soaked in wine and oiled rushes, and allow the wound to rest until the abscess is calmed and ensure there is no further bleeding; then proceed with the reduction of the bone and the surgery.
And this should be done in one of two ways of operation.
And one way is that you cut the bone with a straight incisor, and this is its form: And then apply another incisor like this one, slightly more to the side than the previous one; and this is its form.
And then apply another incisor further to the side than the second one.
And it is necessary that you have various incisors of different kinds, some of which are more to the side than others; and some of them are shorter than the others and are sharp at their ends, and they should be made of iron or steel.
And use them easily in percussion on the incisors so that the tip does not become blunt and damage it.
And if the bone is strong and hard, then you must perforate around it before applying the incisors with the punches, which are called non-deepening punches.
And they are called this way because these punches do not stop the bone's surface from reaching it, so that the punch has a rounded end or edge over which the sharp point of it resembles a margin or small circle, which prevents it from being submerged and passing through the thickness of the bone.
And it is convenient that you take many of these probes, each of which should be suited to the sharpness needed for each bone, among which you must have present all kinds of needles for every part of the brain, the tip of which should be sharp, the length and brevity of which should be according to the required sharpness of this needle.
And this is the form of three types of splints: The quality of piercing through the fracture site is to place the splint over the bone and rotate it with your fingers until you know that the bone has been penetrated; then move the splint to another location, placing it so that across all places, the thickness equals that of a rib or something similar.
Then cut with the scalpel between each fragment of the bone, and make that pus as fine as you can on top of it at the end of the process, just as we have said, until you clear out the bone, either by hand or with some other instrument you have prepared for this purpose, such as forceps and delicate tweezers.
And you must be cautious that the scalpel does not touch any part of the spine.
And thus, after you have pierced through the bone, and it will be separated from the spine if it is connected to it, and you will extract it, you must scrape and smooth it on its roughness with an instrument similar to a scalpel, but it should be thinner and finer than other scalpels.
And if any small and stubborn parts of the bones remain, then take those with ease using the tools you should have at your disposal; then treat the wound with lint and ointments as we have mentioned.
And another method of operation is lighter and farther from danger, which we call Gaulia and perform through great heat; this is the description: at the beginning, you must start to uncover the part of the bone in the place where the fracture is most violent and obvious. Once you have uncovered that part, place the extremity of this smooth and pleasant instrument, whose form is as follows:
And here is the translation of the given sentence:
And then strike on the incision point of a part with a small hammer so that you cut through the entire bone as it is rotated, and be sure to avoid any accident in such a manner that you are certain no harm comes to the soft tissue around it; even if the medicating person was the most foolish of all men and the least knowledgeable among them, certainly, and even if they were asleep.
And if a fragment of bone is attached to the soft tissue at certain points on the bone, cut it off using the pointed end of the lancet-like instrument and remove it easily, for it is removed without harm and without fear.
And if the fracture of the bone does not penetrate into the soft tissue, and what is cut off or remains of the bone is its surface, and roughness and subtle splinters remain in it, then you must scrape away that roughness and remove those splinters with fine razors which you have prepared in various quantities so that you can apply them to the most suitable places and use the right ones according to where you need to refine your operation on that broken bone and its shape.
And you must administer with your razors at the beginning to cut away the thick pus from those razors, and then use what is beneath that thin pus, and do not cease doing this continuously until you have administered all of the thick pus and the thin pus from all of those.
But in each of the other small capillary fractures and subtle fractures, you must administer treatment according to what is needed for the correction.
And it is a reason that not everyone who has studied in that field is equally skilled or trusted. And we have demonstrated this on large fractures in what we have written above.
And if the panniculus is attached when you extract the bone, then you must take cloth according to the size of the wound, and submerge it in ointment oil, and place it over the opening of the wound; then take another folded or tripled cloth and submerge it in wine and ointment oil, and place it over the first cloth and do this as gently as possible so that you do not harm the tissue; then apply a linen bandage over it, and do not tighten it beyond what is necessary for the size of the wound.
And leave it with this treatment for one or two days until you are sure that there is no danger of an abscess forming; then remove the bandage and apply medicines that have a drying effect, such as flaxseed and barley flour, and powders of roots and bark, and similar substances.
And it is that you make these medicines into a powder which should be sprinkled over the wound, just as they are dried; and generally, administer all medicine of such property that it cleanses and does not irritate.
And be mindful according to your skill that the wound in your treatment is clean; and there should not be deafness of ointment or other impurities; nor should you allow virulence to accumulate in it; for when it is applied on the pia mater of the brain, it corrupts that and poisons that, and you cause a malignant malice upon the patient thereby.
And you affect the skull, altering its bone structure, especially when the care of it is neglected, and there is blackening on its surface; therefore, consider now if you cause the patient the accidents we have mentioned, know that it is pernicious in every way.
And if there is no blackening except from the medicine that is applied to it, and it is due to the power of that medicine causing the blackening, then you should take one part of honey and three parts of rose oil, and with those anoint a cloth, and then apply that over the skull; and then treat it with the healing herbs that are appropriate until it is healed.
Chapter III.
On the restoration of the nose when it is fractured.
Know that the nose is not broken in any part but rather in two specific parts that are more prominent, or one of those alar regions, because within it there are two bones, and the division between them is cartilaginous, and it does not break easily; instead, you encounter friction, twisting, and sinuosity.
If one of the two specific parts of the nose is broken, then you must insert your little finger into the patient's nostril and align that fracture inside with your index finger, while using your thumb on the outside to guide it, until the nose returns to its natural shape. And this should be done easily by you, and be careful not to cause additional pain to the patient through your procedure.
And if the fracture is in the most prominent part of the nose, and your finger cannot reach it, then it should be treated with the tip of a probe that has a small thickness.
And if the fracture is in two parts, then you should treat it similarly.
And attend to the restoration of it on the first day of the fracture if possible; and if not, then around the seventh or tenth day, you should cauterize the swelling to reduce inflammation.
And then insert into the end of the nose a strip of linen cloth if the fracture is in one piece, or put two splints if the fracture is in two pieces, and let the thickness of the splint be such that it fills the space of the nose.
And some of the ancient restorers say that the splints should be inserted into leather and changed throughout the day, but I do not see this as necessary; rather, it is better for the strip to be soaked in egg white mixed with powdered meal; then leave the splint inside until the bone is set and the cartilage has hardened.
And sometimes, instead of a splint, a piece of wax wrapped in linen cloth is inserted into the nose; this is used when the nasal fracture is severe and to ensure that the patient's breathing is not obstructed.
And this method is not necessary for you; if you wish, do this, and if you wish, use splints.
And if swelling occurs again, apply a poultice to the nose with wax or fat mixed with sweet wine and rose oil, or use diachylon (a type of plaster).
And if the abscess does not come to maturity through cauterization, then you must cover it externally with flour of sesame and with powder of crushed violets mixed with egg white; then place a lion's foot over it, and do not unseal its nose for any reason.
If the bones of the nose are fractured or comminuted, then you must incise over them and extract them with instruments appropriate for that; then close the incision, treat it with something that promotes healing and consolidation, and use plasters suitable for that purpose.
And if there is inflammation inside the nose, then you must treat it with cauterization and administer lead tubes until it is entirely healed.
Chapter IV.
On the restoration of the jaw when it is fractured.
When the jaw is broken and the fracture is not inflamed, then check if the fracture is only on the outer side and has not been split into two pieces and bent inward; in this case, the treatment is simple.
And therefore, if the fracture is on the right side, you should insert your left index finger into the patient's mouth; and similarly, if the fracture is on the left jaw, then insert the right index finger; and push the swelling of the fracture inward easily to the outer parts with your other hand on the outer part of the bone; in this way, it can be properly aligned.
And if the fracture of the jaw is already separated into two parts, then you must administer extension from both sides according to straightness until it is possible to align it.
And if you encounter the displacement of teeth due to dislocation, then secure those that you hope will remain with a thread of gold or silver or silk; and then place wax over the broken jaw, and then place a doubled cloth over it, and place over the cloth a well-made pad or a piece of sole leather equal in length to the jaw; and then bind it according to how your bandage is prepared for application until it is not destroyed.
And command the patient to use rest and tranquility, and place their food in sipped broth or soup.
And if you suspect that the shape has already been altered in some way, then on the third day, you should be cautious and unbind it; then correct what has already been altered and apply a poultice with powdered myrtle, egg white, or carrot flour, after you have removed the wax from it, and place wool over the poultice.
And then when that plaster is applied and positioned properly on him, and the alignment of the bone is not altered, leave it like that, do not remove it until he is healed and the fracture is strong; because often this fracture takes three weeks to tighten.
And if an abscess occurs again, then administer what we have said often in the treatment of him until he is healed, and let that abscess be drained.
And if the fracture is accompanied by a wound, then consider whether it is a fragment of bone that has separated or splinters, and you must carefully remove those splinters with what is appropriate for their removal from the wound.
And if the opening of the wound is narrow, then you should enlarge it with an incision according to your necessary extent.
And then when you have removed those splinters, and nothing remains to be drained from them, sew the opening of the wound if it is wide; and if not, apply one of the plasters suitable for this purpose over it and promote healing until it is healed.
Capitol .v.
For the restoration of the collarbone when it is broken.
When the collarbone is fractured in front of the muscle, this fracture occurs in one of three ways.
For it is either broken, separated, or separated into two parts without touching the cartilage; and its restoration is easy. Or it is such that it touches the cartilage, and its restoration is difficult. Or it is such that the fracture is accompanied by a plate [of bone].
And in the case where the fracture is accompanied by a plate, the operation requires two assistants: one to hold and follow the broken collarbone, and the other to extend the neck to that part.
Then align the fracture with your hands so that it takes the proper shape, ensuring there are no small protrusions or concavities.
And if more extension is needed, then you must place a small roll under the patient's neck made of cloth or wool, and its size should be according to your need; extend and elevate the collarbone and compress the roll with your hand until you align the fracture as required.
And if you cannot pull the tip of the furcula to the parts outside, because it has reached the bone, then the patient must be placed on their back, and a cushion larger in size should be placed over the muscle area.
And the minister presses the muscle of the patient in the areas between which the clavicle bone is raised, which is above it, and then you correct the fracture and align it with the said ties.
And if you feel abscesses in the armpit and they are painful, then you must incise over them and remove those abscesses with ease.
And if it is retained in the bone, then you devise an incision with one of the incisors which you have prepared for this, since you had placed under it the forked instrument that serves as a lever; and this instrument is made of wood or iron and has the following form:
And it is similar to a spoon, of which this is the concavity; and its width should be according to what you need from it, according to the size or smallness of the bone.
And let the length of it be as much as is possible for you during the operation; that it have two ends just as you need, and one end be wide and the other narrow.
And if the disruption of the wound that you have incised when you extracted the splinter from the bone is wide, and there is a risk of an abscess forming, then you should approximate the two edges of the wound with sutures.
And if the disruption is small, or you fear an abscess may form, then you should fill the wound with cloths and poultices according to the extent of the tear in the wound.
And if an abscess does form, then soak a cloth in sweet wine and rose oil and wine, and place it over the area.
And altogether, the splint above the broken bone should not be loose; and therefore you must see the patient every day, so that when the bandage is softened or you notice the splint is already loose, then you correct this and tighten the binding.
Then place the patient's arm under their neck, and put a small cushion under the elbow so that when they sleep at night, that side is elevated; thus, the shoulder support on that side is raised, and therefore the clavicle fracture is lifted by the elevation of the muscle; or tie the arm to that side of the neck.
And do not loosen the bandage unless pus or an abscess occurs at the site within twelve days.
Then renew the plaster if you have seen that its surface has come to this state, and adjust it to the constriction, restore it, and leave it until the clavicle fracture is restored and coagulated.
And it is strengthened and healed according to the same in twenty-eight days, and sometimes in some men, it happens in less time.
Capitol .vi.
For the restoration of a shoulder fracture.
A spatula is broken in the lateral area of it, and not from it but from its edges.
And thus when the area of him — and it is broken in the middle part of him — and it is not known except by touch, then according to the shape of the fracture force it into preparation and reduce it according to its natural figure in every manner of skill that is within your ability.
And then apply powder of ground alum and hen's egg white to the area, and stop with lion's wax; then apply a layer of doubled cloth; then apply on top a thin strip of linen according to the amount of the entire or a little more than the spatula.
But if the strip of linen leaves a concavity in some parts of the spatula, then fill that concavity with lion's wax, and then raise the strip according to equality.
And then strengthen it with a long bandage wrapped appropriately and secure the strip in such a way that it does not move from its place.
And examine the bandage every day; and whenever it becomes loosened, bind it again and strengthen it, and reposition the strip if it has moved from its place.
And lay the patient on his side.
And the spatula is restored in twenty days or in twenty-five.
And thus when this number is completed, then you dissolve the binding, and you must be certain that it is of those bones whose beginning is not feared nor their dissolution.
And if you process the area of the broken bone and place the splint there, then you cut over it, remove it, and proceed as we have said in the fracture of the clavicle; cauterize if an abscess occurs here.
Capitol .vii.
For the restoration of the fracture of the foot.
The foot sometimes breaks in the middle and this healing takes time; however, the ends of it move and become rough and fragmented.
And of the consequences when it is broken in the middle is that it inclines towards the inner parts and causes great pain, difficulty in walking, coughing, strong fever, and vomiting blood; and it is evident in the cavity of the broken bone and not hidden to the senses.
And the restoration of it is that the patient should be laid on their back, and a cushion should be placed between their shoulders; then press on the muscles, align the bone ends with your hands from both sides, and delicately perform the operation and adjustment in every possible way that is suitable for this, until the bone returns to its proper shape.
Then place a plaster and tow over it, and cover that with a thin cloth bandage of rushes or caligae or something similar in lightness, as you wrap it in cloth; then delicately bind that over the broken bone so that it is not twisted; and go around binding according to the roundness of the back sometimes, and secure that with a proper tightening; then consider the binding at all times, and when it loosens, tighten it.
And if necessity prompts the removal of that which causes corrosion or irritation, or pain, or inflammation that may occur in the area, then you cut and remove that and eliminate the poultice and correct what has happened by means of treatment; and then replace the poultice, if it is necessary to do so for its application; and adjust the binding until it is healed.
The text appears to be in an old form of a Romance language, likely from a medieval context. It seems to mix elements similar to Latin, Italian, Spanish, and French. Given that this is a title or heading, here’s my interpretation:
For the restoration of the ribs when they are broken.
Know that a fracture of the ribs only occurs in thick places along the back; and from the ends of them, in front, it does not happen to those areas except because they are cartilaginous. And knowledge of it is not hidden from the senses; you should investigate it with the said methods.
And the restoration is such that you equalize the fracture with the mentioned methods as possible, so that it fits according to what is needed, and then plaster and strengthen the broken bone with a splint, if you need that.
And if the fracture of the ribs is penetrating inward, then the patient will experience severe pain and puncturing sensations, much like those that occur in pleurisy, and because of this, the bone affects the lining; it also leads to difficulty breathing, coughing, and vomiting blood; and this condition is difficult to cure.
And the ants are generated in that place with many other living things.
And of these things I say: one must restrain the patient's diet that causes swelling and gas, so that the belly is not swollen or stretched, and the fracture does not push outward.
But let us prevent this so that it is not a trivial cause to generate an abscess through cautery, if it does not happen; and if it does happen, then it helps with this.
And some of them said that a cupping glass should be placed on it and then suctioned strongly; this seems like sound reasoning, but nevertheless it is feared that the cupping glass may draw the excesses to the place due to weakness.
And some of them said: the area must be covered with wool that has already been soaked in cauterizing oil, and cushions should be placed between the ribs until it is filled, so that the binding is like when you wrap around that second round part; then the patient should be treated with a diet and medicine for pneumonia.
And if the forceful constriction of the patient is too much to bear and the bone pierces the covering with a puncture wound, fear for the patient, then it is necessary to incise over that area, uncover the broken rib, and then place an instrument above it to maintain the alignment, which should be remembered beforehand, and to cut the bone easily and extract it.
And then we bring together the two lips of the wound, if it is large, with sutures, and treat that with plasters until it is healed.
And if you find an abscess inside, then you should apply and press pillows soaked in oiled wool over the area, and treat the patient with what is appropriate for an internal abscess.
And let him lie on his side on which he sleeps until he is healed.
Chapter IX.
On the restoration of fractures of the spine and neck.
Sometimes fractures occur in the bones of the neck, and also in their joints, and similarly in the vertebrae of the back. And when this happens to someone and you want to know if they will be healed or not, then consider: if their hands are already softened, stunned, and numb, and cannot move them or extend them or grasp with them, and when you press them with your fingers or prick them with a needle and they feel no pain in them, then you know that they will not be healed, and in the months of such conditions, it is mortal.
And if you see and feel a constriction with the aforementioned methods and punctures, then know that the bone's marrow is safe and that you will heal the patient with treatment.
And if you see something similar in the vertebrae of the neck and want to know whether it will heal or not, then examine their feet.
And if you see that they are already softened, apply to them what is applied to the muscles, and then when he lies on his back, he will have flatulence and defecation against his will, and sometimes he turns over on his back and wants to urinate but cannot, now you know it is mortal, and then do not labor in his treatment.
But if none of those causes apply, the cause is better and less serious.
And the treatment is to perform the sedation of the abscess by placing olive oil or rose oil, or a poultice of boiled eggs, over the affected vertebra; place this on it several times a day until the abscess is sedated.
And now apply one of the comforting and stimulating plasters, and bind it tightly with a bandage; and command the patient to use rest and tranquility and not to sleep on the painful area until he is healed.
And if you come across the grinding of the bone or any cause that has already separated from it, then you must cauterize around the wound and remove that bone; then bring together the two edges of the wound, sewing them if they are large; then treat it with some flesh-growing ointment until it is healed.
And if the posterior part of the bone is fractured, which is the end of the thigh bone, then you must insert the thumb of your left hand into the buttock and align the broken bone as much as possible with your other hand according to the principle of equilibrium; then apply a plaster and splint, if they are needed, and secure it firmly.
And if you find shattered bones in it, then you must incise over that area, remove them, and treat the wound with the previously described treatment until it is healed.
Chapter 10.
On the restoration of the ankle.
The bones of the ankles are often fractured, and when they fracture, the break is usually at the ends of these bones, running longitudinally and inclining towards the inner parts; the patient experiences pain in the area and puncture-like sensations, and the leg becomes numb when it is fractured.
And the restoration of it is that you extend your hand over that area which is above the fracture, which is the shape of it.
And if the fracture is only at the end of it [the limb], then you align that according to how you are equipped for alignment, ensuring that it resembles its natural form.
And if the fracture is in the spine or declines towards the lower parts, then you make the patient lie on their stomach while you prepare to restore that fracture. And once you have aligned that [the fracture], place a plaster over it, then place a splint of wood or a bandage over that, and secure it tightly so that there is no concern of puncture from the fracture nor displacement of the splint.
And align the concavity with something that fills it so that it takes on a tight position according to equality, and command the patient to sleep on their back or on their side.
And if an inflammatory swelling occurs, then you cease the extension and restoration of it [the limb] until the inflammatory swelling is reduced, and apply something to reduce it as previously indicated; then return to restoring it and secure it accordingly.
And if you find that the bones are splintered or crushed, then you treat them.
Chapter XI.
For the restoration of the fracture of the auxiliary [bone].
Helpers are those who are between the buttock and the top of the shoulder.
And if it is broken, then the restoration of it is in one of two ways, of which one is that you take flat wood of medium thickness according to this form:
And let there be two ligaments at the two ends, and then let it be suspended from an elevated place.
And place the patient on a seat; then extend their broken arm over the wood until it reaches the tip of it at the middle point where the curvature of the wood is attached.
And then suspend something heavy over that, or the servant should extend that to the sides of it; and then the doctor should hold the fracture with their hands together until the fracture returns as it should.
And the other method is that the patient should lie on their back and suspend the arm of the collar with ligaments; then command two servants, one of whom holds what is above the fracture with their hands, and the other holds the part below it; and each of them extends to their respective side.
And if you want the extension to be stronger, then you pull on the fracture with one bandage and on that (area) with another bandage, and each of the two assistants extend from their respective sides.
And therefore, if the fracture is close to the end of the muscle, then it is necessary that half of the ligament be placed on the tendon and the other half should remain over the fracture at the knee.
And similarly, if the fracture is near the hip, then it must be that the bandage is placed over that area and over that hip.
Apply that with ease and do the work, and then when it is properly adjusted as needed and applied correctly, strengthen that if an abscess does not occur.
But if an abscess does occur, then release the tight bandage by the seventh day, and place on it wool soaked in a vinegar and rose oil mixture until the abscess heals, and then strengthen that area.
And the method to strengthen that is to place a plaster over the fracture, and then put a wrapping of clean cloth over the plaster; and then adjust the arm with those supports, and place your open hand on their muscle.
And place the cloth and strengthen over the supports the arm so that the arm is in a stable position, unless there is any cause from the broken bone prohibiting this.
And now use splints.
And it is that you place on the fracture that splint which is more oblique and stronger than the other splints; and place between each splint the width of a finger, and let the length of the splints be according to the break with an addition of three fingers from all sides.
Then tighten over the splints with the binding that I mentioned at the beginning of the chapter.
And it is that your binding over the site of the fracture should be tighter. And when the fracture is more extended, the binding should be looser.
And thus you should change the position of the splints and the binding as we have said at the time when you restore the limb to its proper position.
And if you fear an abscess may form, then you should loosen the binding and the splints until the seventh day as we have said.
Then examine the limb in all parts for three days so that no pus or inflammation may occur in the area; and it is prohibited for food to reach the limb due to the excess of binding; therefore, correct everything according to what we have said.
But if you are in doubt that there is no cause for this, then do not loosen the ligature until three days or more.
And let the patient's body lie on its back, and their hands be placed upon their stomach.
And place over the splint a pad filled with wool evenly, and consider at any time of night or day that the shape of the broken limb is not loose or dissolved, or that the bandage is loosened; therefore, correct this entirely with your skill.
And place the food of the patient according to the order which we have mentioned before, ensuring that the food is light at the beginning until it starts to strengthen; and then you must make the food more substantial for them.
For it is customary for the splint and the bandage to be tight for forty days; and then they must be loosened, and a bath should be administered and treated with ointments that correct that condition.
And if the fracture is severe and grinding, then you should not loosen the bandage and the splints for ten days or up to two months.
Chapter XII.
For the restoration of a fractured arm.
The arm is composed of two bones which are called the humerus; of these, one is small, and it is that which forms the said elbow, and the other is large and is the one placed below the small one mentioned, from the part more downward.
And often only the larger ligament is broken, or the smaller one, and sometimes both are broken together.
And when the smaller ligament above is broken, then its restoration is easy, and its healing is even easier.
And when the ligament below is broken, the fracture is severe, and its healing is difficult.
And worse than that is when two bones are broken together.
Therefore, if the broken bone is the smaller ligament above, then it is appropriate for the doctor to restore it with slight extension easily until it is aligned.
But if the larger ligament is the one that is broken, then it is necessary to apply more forceful extension.
And if both ligaments are broken together, then you must apply even stronger traction.
And you must place your hand in a position for its restoration with the extension stretched over a cushion, and let the wrist of the hand be on the upper parts more than all the other fingers, and the little finger should be lower than the others, and the patient should sit on a lowered seat.
And place a cushion in front of him at his height or straight in front of him, so that the patient does not move around.
Then the minister extends the arm of the affected side with his hand or with a bandage, and another minister extends it similarly.
Then the doctor should realign the bone as he returns it to its proper position in the best possible configuration.
And if in the setting of the bone you have doubts, then you must reduce every piece to its proper place with your skill.
And if it appears separated and the joint is dislocated beyond your hope of restoration, then you should operate on it and set it according to the method we have described above.
But if the fracture is infected, I have already devoted a separate chapter to this, so follow the treatment outlined there.
And if an abscess occurs at the beginning of your restoration, then you should line a cloth with a salve made from rubbed oil and white wax, which should be of medium consistency between thick and thin, and place a strong cloth over it with a fine bandage until the abscess is drained; then remove the salve and apply a plaster prepared with ground meal and egg whites, and then bind it tightly; and let the bandage that is placed over this fracture be wider and stronger.
And know that the number of bones in the arm is seen in major dispositions, or it is a fracture in one part or in two parts together.
And then place your bandage firmly and strongly on the fracture site, and when the bandage extends beyond the fractured area upwards or downwards, adjust the bandage a bit more loosely according to how the description of it begins at the start of the chapter.
And the cloths that are wrapped around the fracture should be soft and moist, and not hard or rough, and the thread with which it is bound should be of the appropriate thickness between fine and thick, as we have recommended.
And consider the limb and the joint for a few days. And if any cause occurs for which correction is necessary, such as swelling that happens to the limb, and now it is needed to soak the limb in warm water until that swelling subsides.
And leave the limb unconstrained until it rests, and then reapply the bandage.
And if the bandage is already softened and the bone is well aligned and appears correct, then adjust everything with your skill.
And consider if nourishment is prohibited from reaching the member due to excessive constriction, for then it is necessary that you soften that area slightly and leave it for some days so that nourishment may flow back into it, and then strengthen that area.
If no cause of those that we have mentioned befalls the patient, then it is not necessary to loosen anything within about twenty days or thereabouts.
Then the arm of the patient should be suspended by its ability to move vigorously, and make the patient sleep on their back.
And know that this fracture is restored in thirty days or thirty-two days, or it is often restored in twenty-eight days, and all of this depends on the condition of the humors and the state of the body's abilities.
Chapter XIII.
On the restoration of fractures of the wrist and fingers.
Know that the wrist of the hand and the joints of the fingers can easily fracture, and they are not injured except by sudden blows.
And when the hand is fractured or injured by blows, then it is necessary for the patient to follow a diet and place linen bandages on it according to equality, and then place the hand of the patient extended on top of it.
And then the minister extends the broken bones, and the doctor aligns those that are dislocated with proper alignment.
And now it is necessary to apply a plaster and tow, if you do not want an abscess to form from the cauterization; then place a cloth over it according to the size of the area, and you have already wrapped that in a linen cloth.
And if the break is inside the palm of the abdomen, then make a ball out of cloth, and command the patient to hold that ball with their broken palm; then bind it with long cloth.
And let there be a cloth under the body on which it is lifted, so that the body is applied to the palm; and press it according to what is needed.
And if the fracture is on the outer parts, then you must place a splint over it and another splint under the fractured part in the palm, so that the hand is open and straight; then apply the bandage, just as the hand is turned to the wrist between the fingers with ligaments.
And if a fracture occurs in one of the phalanges of the fingers, then the said finger should be aligned properly and then strengthened with the palm, and if you wish, place a small straight splint to elevate the fracture and prevent it from sinking.
And if the fracture is in other fingers, such as in the middle finger, or the index finger, or the ring finger, or the little finger, then it should be aligned and bound with the adjacent finger; or all of them should be bound continuously, which is better; or place a small splint on it, just as we have said for the thumb.
And consider, in your treatment, and also for that purpose, the disposition of hot abscesses and their opposites—through your operation—with what is necessary when any cause of these occurs, as is repeatedly narrated.
Chapter XIV.
On the treatment of fractures of the thigh bone.
The thigh bone is often fractured and can be detected by sensation, as it causes the part to turn outward and results in the most severe pain.
And the restoration of him is done thus: that the bandage is tightened over the fracture and another bandage is placed under the fracture, and the patient is laid face down on their stomach.
And then the minister extends the entire limb to its original position according to its nature, when the fracture is in the middle of the bone.
And if it is dislocated at the root of the thigh, then the limb should be lowered towards the foot from the hip joint, so that the extension can fall into place, and the other limb leaves the fracture.
And similarly, if the fracture is close to the joint, then the bandage should be placed near the joint, and the extension should be made towards the parts below it.
Then the doctor equalizes the bone with both of his hands so that he can reduce it according to its natural shape and the bone is joined by a good union; then it is necessary to apply a plaster and tight bandaging, unless you want an abscess to form in the limb. And if an abscess does form, then you should leave it for several days until the abscess naturally bursts and drains, and then return to your treatment.
The bandaging should be done as follows: you must wrap a hard bandage around the fracture, fold it two or three times, and remove any excess; then wrap the limb until you reach the ankle and the root of the thigh.
And insert a long strip of cloth between the thigh and the limb near the joint towards the lower parts; ensure that the ends of the strip come from the higher part of the two sides, and then wrap around the limb and the thigh any excess from the bandage.
And then place over the thigh in the location of that fracture some splints, and place one splint over the bone of the leg.
And then fill the spaces between the leg and the thigh with soft cloths, so that the constriction is alleviated.
And then begin with a strong binding in the middle over the location of the fracture with three or four layers, and as you move away from the area of the fracture, make your binding less tight and lighter and softer.
And then extend the two ends of the bandage to the areas between where it reaches the ankle of the foot, and tighten both ends of the splints on the other side so that the binding does not move from its place.
And then apply the binding in such a way that it does not cause corrosion, heat boils, or swelling to the member nor anything similar; and if any of those conditions occur, then loosen the binding from it, and correct whatever has occurred as soon as possible, according to what we have said many times.
If there is a piece of bone that protrudes within the bone, then you must smooth it out as much as possible; and if not, cut into it and remove that part, and treat it with what will promote healing until it is healed.
And sometimes this thigh fracture is strengthened by binding it with splints, just as we have said in the case of the shoulder and the arm.
However, in the restoration of it in such a manner, do not cause the patient to limp; and if it is restored alone, without the other side being applied to it, then it is necessary that the affected limb causes the person to limp constantly.
And know that the thigh is strengthened in forty days or a little more or a little less, and all of this depends on the diversity of the constitutions and other conditions.
Chapter XV.
On the restoration of the fracture of the kneecap.
Know that a fracture of the kneecap can often heal well, but it may result in stiffness on several occasions.
And if you encounter a fracture, then it is not just a crack or break in its parts, and this is called a wound or several wounds, and on this whole thing has been said with the opinion.
And the restoration of it is such that what is broken of its parts should be aligned with those within which it should be added and joined as much as possible by equalization, facilitation, and construction.
And then apply a plaster and place it on that round spot, if you need to do so; and bind it tightly with an appropriate bandage.
And then consider all the treatments that we have recommended for other fractures, such as applying a cautery to an abscess and similar measures to address any complication with what is appropriate until it is healed.
Chapter XVI.
On the restoration of a fracture in the thigh.
Know that in the thigh there are two bones, one of which is thick and is named for the thigh itself; the other is slender and is called the fibula.
And it happens in some types of fractures that both bones of the thigh are affected, and therefore the restoration is done similarly to the restoration of an arm, and the operation for both is the same.
And if both bones are broken together, the thigh is displaced in all directions.
And if the bone is fractured more finely, the chest is turned toward the parts in front.
And if the largest bone is broken, you will find that in this case, it is one of those causes that are not within your control.
And then administer extension and reduction and fixation of the splints according to that alignment.
However, if the thigh fracture is slight with small fragments, the extension should be less and more gentle, and alleviate it with your skill.
And in the thigh, there is sometimes a reason for an operation on the arm, which involves aligning the splints and completing your entire procedure. At that time, you will take pieces of pine wood, which are placed under the causes that are positioned on supports, and are made somewhat like palm branches; choose those with small thickness, not too large, and let their length correspond to the length of the thigh, and from the knee inward toward the foot.
And then wrap each piece of cloth in two layers according to its length, and place one layer on the part of the thigh from one side and the other from the other side, and let them extend from the knee toward the foot area.
And then bind the two splints at three points of both ends and in the middle point, because with this structure, the thigh is prevented from tilting to the right or left side, and remains in proper position.
And already a piece of wood according to the length of the chest has been administered; and it is placed on the patient's chest to prevent any movement.
And it is especially important that you do this in the case of a fracture, and when it is properly treated in that manner.
And then, every day, examine the chest and study it with the previous studies, and you guard it from abscesses and inflammation or other similar causes; and if any of those causes occur, then apply what is necessary to it until it is healed.
Chapter XVII.
On the fracture of the ankle and the bones of the foot and the toes.
A complete fracture does not occur in the ankle; however, fractures do occasionally occur in the bones of the foot; and fractures rarely occur in the toes, and they only happen to them during periods of predisposition.
And if the bones of the foot do fracture and sometimes those bones become elevated above each other, then the patient should place their foot on the prepared ground in such a way as mentioned.
And then place a hand over that which is raised from those bones, and then press on them, and rub them within the area where they are elevated.
And then apply a plaster and lint over it, and place a small board with two rounded ends on the foot's belly.
And then strengthen that area with the foot using a proper structure, since you have wrapped it with cloths and other materials as needed.
And after three or four days have passed, then you untie the bandage, for you will find the bones rubbed together, whether they are fractured or dislocated, and the operation on them is thus as you know.
But if some fingers are fractured, then restore them, and align them as I have taught you in the restoration of the fingers of the hand. And then place a splint on the fractured finger according to the length of the finger, and slightly to one side; then place this board under the foot as I have taught you, and secure it with a proper binding.
If what is cut from the bones are two or three or more pieces, then you place on each finger a bandage of its amount wrapped in linen cloth, and secure the table at the lowest part of the foot, and stand over one end of the table, piercing the sole of the foot so that it has good retention.
And it is important for you not to forget that you should not consider all the causes which have been mentioned to you in other fractures and accidents we have discussed; and prepare yourself for any accident with what is necessary.
Capitol .xviii.
Of the fracture of the chin of the woman and of the bone of the pelvis and of the penis of the man.
When the chin of the woman is fractured, then let her sit in a reclining position, and then slightly tilt her towards one side, and keep her held from behind.
And then the midwife fills the chin with cloth, and it is done in the chin of the patient just like a splint; and then the woman should be shaken gently, and her back should be raised little by little, for all this is forgotten until the front part of the chin aligns properly and the fractured bone returns to its place.
And then place pillows under his back, and when he wishes to urinate, lower the cloth easily and let him urinate, and reduce [the position] and return it in the manner in which you initially placed it, and then return him to his original pillow.
And do this for seven days or around that time, for it is restored.
And if you wish, take a sheep's bladder and attach a reed tube to the wound; insert the entire bladder into the rectum, and then blow into the tube with force until the bladder is inflated inside the rectum, for the fracture will return to its proper place.
And then it should be filled with cloth and kept for several days as we have recommended, until it is healed.
And when the bone of the pelvis of a man or woman is broken, then administer in its restoration and setting what we have recommended for the hip bone.
And what is right is not hidden in these rare and nearby fractures, especially for one who has some study and practice and understands my book well; for that fracture signifies to you the greatest rectitude in its restoration and binding, and thus understand well.
When it comes to the man's penis when it is frostbitten, take goose fat and place the penis in it; then wrap it with cloth, make sure it is well wrapped up, and leave it like that for three days or so, and it will be healed.
Chapter XIX.
For the restoration of fractures of the bones when it is from an injury.
It is convenient for those to whom a fracture with inflammation occurs, and especially if the bone is large like the femur or the thigh bone, or similar to that, that you take care of it and perform trepanation on it immediately if the conditions for trepanation are evident to you or testify as we have said above.
And if the inflammation causes bleeding, then you must take care to stop it by sprinkling powdered and crushed sage over it, unless there is another reason not to do so.
Then begin to restore the fracture on the next day, and do not delay this, unless an abscess occurs.
But if an abscess occurs, then you should delay the restoration until the ninth day, until the abscess has diminished, and do not approach it on the third and fourth days, for you may cause further complications.
But if the broken bone protrudes above the skin, then you must carefully reduce and align it using your hands with ease and minimal extension.
More or if extension is not prepared by you and the reduction of it with your hands, then you will reduce that with your hands using this instrument; and the instrument which is made of iron, the length of which is seven inches or eight and the width of which according to the amount of the injury; and therefore it is necessary for the doctor to take three or four of these according to the quantity needed for this in the treatment in all kinds of fractures.
And it should be round, and slightly thin at the end so that it is not bent when you apply pressure on it during the operation.
And it should have a sharp end with its edges on the ends; and the top of it should be thick throughout, and from the middle towards the ends it should taper.
And this is its form:
And it is named in Greek “labre volentz atelarem,” which means a slightly thin spatula.
Therefore, it is necessary to raise the end of the instrument above the prominent part of the bone end.
And push that back into place while you return the bone, and keep it aligned with some kind of fixation.
And thus you must force the ends of the fracture together, and if the broken end is delicate and does not hold well with the instrument by good exception, then you must incise the end of that bone where the instrument can have power over it.
And if you cannot reduce the bone completely as we have recommended, then cut it with whichever incisor is suitable for it from those we have mentioned; or saw through it with one of the saws in whatever manner is possible for you.
Then smooth out any roughness and small shards that remain on the bone.
And when the bone is reduced, and the patient experiences intense pain at the site of reduction, then you should know that the bone has not been returned to its natural position; and thus do whatever will greatly benefit the patient.
Once your restoration of the bone is complete, then soak a cloth in black styptic wine, and especially if it is summer, do not place cerot or any other ointment containing oil on the wound, so that it does not cause putrefaction and corruption.
And then administer poultices at the time of the completion of the bone's restoration, and leave the wound uncovered so that you can cut away the scab with scissors and use bandages according to the extent of the wound.
And be cautious to not strain the wound with the fracture, for many times foolish doctors have done this, causing their patients to suffer death or a corrosive or putrid illness, which is gangrene. And if your fracture is light, soft, different from the other fractures.
And if the wound is large or it is a bad wound, and you fear that those harmful accidents we have mentioned may occur, and you find pain in the area, then do not place bandages over it, but rather create a wrapping of hard cloths instead of bandages and bind it with those.
And when after one or two days the wound begins to fester and pus is generated in it, then you should remove the cloth that was placed over it, and administer salves, ointments with which it is customary for us to treat wounds, such as tetrafarmacon ointment and similar ones.
And it is necessary for you to loosen the bandage and examine the wound each morning and evening until it is healed and stable, and it must be that the limb is prepared in such a way that the pus runs out of it easily towards its parts.
If many days pass for the wound and it is not healed nor has the pus separated from it, then you should know that there are signs of small issues, and you must examine the wound with a probe. And of those signs, those that are separated should be removed and extracted. Those that do not separate and affect the limb and cause pain, you must incise them according to what is possible for you to do.
And if the wound is affected by gangrene or ulcers, which are forms of corruption and putrefaction, then you must treat it with one of those methods appropriate for it, as previously described in its respective chapter.
And with this in which it is necessary that my speech stands and you pay attention: when the large bone is broken, elevate the limb as if it were the thigh bone or of the helper bones and similar to those of the large limbs, and do not presume attraction towards it nor its extraction because many times it causes death; leave that inside so that it rots, for by itself it will fall out after 20 or 30 days; and then treat the wound if you see it, and if not, leave it as is.
It seems like you've provided a section heading that looks like ".xx." from what could be an old document or text, possibly related to some kind of legal, historical, or literary work. Without more context or content following this header, it's not possible to provide a translation or explanation. Could you please provide more details or the text that follows this section heading?
Here is the translation of the provided line:
Here is the translation of the given sentence:
Then consider if the swelling is recent and administer those medicines that have astringent properties such as alum, and ashes, and myrtle, and cicuta, and acrasia, and similar ones; in such a way that you take some or all of these, and mix them with wine that has an astringent quality, or with egg white, or with sweet wine, and place that on the swelling with tow, and bind those to it tightly with good constriction.
And leave the binding in place for several days without loosening it; then loosen it and repeat another round until the swelling is reduced; or bind a piece of lead over it loosely, because lead has the property to reduce anything that is inflated in the limbs.
But if the swelling has already turned into a hard stone and is tight, and it is necessary to carefully remove it, then cut through the most prominent part of it, and incise the excess and protruding parts, or treat it with appropriate remedies until it is reduced; and care for it until it is healed.
Chapter XXI.
For the restoration of a fracture when it is restored and then the limb remains thin and weak not according to its natural state.
When a bone fracture is restored, and the limb remains thin and weak afterward, this does not happen except for several reasons: one of which is an excess of dissolution in the ligament and incorrect bandaging; or due to excessive tightness of the ligaments preventing nutrition from reaching the limb; or by unnecessary application of too much rubbing; or by excessive movement at the wrong time; or by a lack of blood in the patient's body and their overall weakness.
And the treatment for this is to give the patient food to eat and make their heart tender until blood is multiplied in them; administer baths; and introduce joy and happiness to them.
Then place a poultice on the limb, so that the poultice attracts the necessary nutrients, or continue to rub it with warm water until the nourishment flows and returns to its natural state.
Chapter XXII.
On the treatment of broken bones when they are restored crookedly and prohibiting the proper operation for their correction.
When you encounter a limb already restored near the healing of its curvature and prominence at the broken bone and knotting, and it is because of this that the shape of the limb has changed, yet the limb is not prevented from its natural function, therefore you do not need to believe the words of those who think that the limb is newly broken.
But there are foolish doctors and restorers who have done this in our land; and this operation is highly reproachable, leading to great fear, the sign of which is mortal.
But if the limp and knotting are recent, then they should be treated with tepid water in which soothing herbs have been boiled, such as the leaves of elder and its roots, and melilot, and similar ones; and an ointment should be made with a mollifying plaster like well-made diachylon; or take the mucilage from the root of the elder and mix it with ground green vitriol or oil of ceramium, and apply it as a plaster; or take fatty figs and crush them with pigeon droppings, and similar medicines named for consolidation.
And sometimes it is dissolved with constant light friction using moistened hands, and the limb should be moved in all directions at all times.
Here is the translation of the provided medieval medical text into English:
Capitol .xxiii.
From the sentence provided:
Dislocacio es eyssiment de alcuna de las juncturas del sieu loc, per que es prohibida de movement, e es orrezada la figura del membre, e favenir sobre le malaute dolors e lesios grans.
Therefore, when a dislocation occurs, it is necessary to immediately perforate and reduce it, and do not delay this reduction, for if it is delayed, the area becomes inflamed and it becomes difficult to perform the reduction of the dislocation.
And for this reason, it should not be massaged or stretched during the time of inflammation, because doing so can bring about spasms and pain.
However, when this occurs, you must prepare for the incision of the patient, and then leave it so that the inflammation can rest; afterwards, the limb should be anointed with warm water and oil, and then it can be reduced easily.
And every limb should be treated so that the memory of its proper place returns to it.
And I have already ordered the chapters on dislocation as they precede in fractures; from the part of the body most superior to the one that is lower.
Capitol .xxiiii.
For the translation of the given sentence:
So dislocated the two jaws if not treated; and the dislocation of both is done according to one of two ways: that either they are moved slightly from their places and softened a little; or they are dislocated by complete dislocation and fully, during which they are softened at the joint where saliva flows from the patient and cannot be held there nor can he close his mouth, and the tongue of him is wrapped in his words.
When the dislocation is slight, it often returns by itself with little cause in major cases.
And if the dislocation is complete and entire, then it must be treated with a gentle reduction, and should not be delayed at all.
And it is that the minister holds the head of the patient, and the doctor inserts one finger of his hand into the area of the dislocation of the jaw inside the mouth of the patient if the dislocation is on one side; or he inserts both fingers together, if the dislocation is on both sides, and the other fingers of his hand are outside with which he balances; and he commands the patient to stop moving their jaws and let them go from each side; and the doctor balances the jaw and pushes the jaw until it returns to its place.
And if the reduction is difficult, and especially if both jaws are dislocated, then administer an evaporation with hot water and oil until a slight reduction of both is made, and do not delay the full reduction of both, as we have said.
And then when they are returned and balanced, and the mouth of the patient is closed and not softened, place over them a cloth poultice with cerot, which is made of wax and oil mixed together; and then bind it easily with soft bandages.
And let the patient lie on their back, with their head resting between two bolsters, so that it does not turn to the right or left; and do not force them to chew anything forcefully; rather, let their food be minced meat until such time as the pains have diminished and the jaws are unhindered, at which point they may eat what they wish.
And this should be administered easily, and do not exert pressure around the mouth area regarding eating, drinking, and speaking, until the jaw is unhindered and healed.
And if it is difficult to reduce two dislocated jaws when they are displaced at any time and do not return to their proper places, then often fevers and frequent sweating occur, and the patient's belly is greatly distended, and they vomit pure bile.
And when you see this, then you know that it is a sign of deterioration; and often the one to whom this happens dies within ten days.
Chapter XXV.
On the reduction of the dislocation of the clavicle and the extremity of the muscle.
Furcula no es dislocada del latz dedintz per la sua continuacio am le pietz; e alcunas veguadas es dislocada a la partida defora, e aquo es declarat al sentiment.
And the restoration is that the patient lies on their back and extends their arms. And then compress the area with your palm using strong pressure, because it will return.
And then place an ointment and poultice on that area and strengthen it.
May the extremity of that which is sick and continues to be affected not be displaced at any time; therefore, it must be reduced and aligned as we have said and according to what you are prepared to do.
And then place over that a plaster, and pillows, and bandages, and command the patient to adhere to tranquility and rest until they are healed.
And with this method of treatment, the extremity of the muscle is reduced when it is separated from its place.
Chapter XXVI.
On the reduction of muscle dislocation.
Know that the muscle is dislocated in only three ways, one of which is when it is dislocated at the part near the tendon.
And the second is when it is dislocated at the upper part of the muscle, and this happens slowly; it is not dislocated behind by the shoulder; nor is it dislocated in front by the nerves.
And it is more frequently dislocated and protrudes at the lower parts of the tendon, especially in those whose flesh is thin, where it dislocates easily; but in those with more flesh, it protrudes with difficulty.
And forcefully impact or fall happens to some people, and the muscle of theirs becomes inflamed with a hot abscess, and it is considered that it has already been dislocated.
Therefore, it is necessary that you proceed with this while you are properly positioned over them, and then continue with the treatment of them.
And it is known that dislocation occurs when there are differences in the parts where you feel tremors; so that you can distinguish between a dislocated muscle and a normal muscle, because you find clear differences between them; and at the head of the dislocated muscle, you find a concavity, and at the place where you feel tremors, the touch of the head of the muscle is like an egg, and the patient cannot bring their hand to their ear or move it in any way.
If the foot or its parts are dislocated and you now find a clear touch, and it is not hidden.
And of this dislocation, easy reduction is performed when it is fresh and the patient is a child.
And the reduction is that the minister lifts the patient's hand to parts above; and then places their own hands under the dislocated part, and raises the joint forcefully back into its place, and the minister lifts the patient's limb, extends it outwards; and then holds it so that it returns gently.
And if what we have said does not bring it back to its original position where the dislocation occurred within a few days, then the patient should be bathed in warm water and given a decoction that softens and loosens as if it were cooked with rye, fenugreek, and honey in water, which should be administered.
And then the patient should be laid on their back and something soft yet firm, like wool, should be placed under the dislocated area. Then the doctor places their foot on the sphere (likely referring to a tool or method used in realignment), and raises the head of the muscle with force, while pulling the patient's limb so that it does not remain twisted at the joint; another assistant holds the patient’s head so that it is not strained at the joints, because it will soon return to its proper place.
And if you wish, return that hernia in this manner: and it is that you have present a man who is taller than the patient, and he stands on the side of that area, and interposes his muscle under the swelling of the patient and lifts the swelling up between which the patient is suspended in air, and another minister pulls the hand of the patient from the areas below his belly. But if the patient is light, then it is necessary to have them suspended by another cause, so that they are lowered, for the dislocation returns quickly.
And it is reduced according to another method: and that is that a long stick should be fixed in the ground with its head rounded in shape, like a mortar pestle, neither too thick nor too thin, and then the patient should be placed upon it; once positioned on top of the stick's head, lioncloths (or strong linen) are laid down, and the patient stands along the length of the stick, and then their arm is extended to one side; and their body is stretched out firmly from the other side because the joint returns to its place quickly.
And if it is difficult to reduce it due to all the causes we have mentioned, then use this treatment: and that is that you take a stick whose length should be two arms' spans, its width should be four fingers, and its thickness should be light at the tip following this form:
And then on the rounded head, place strong linen cloths so that the stick does not hurt the patient.
And then the patient's limb should be placed on top of the tip, and their arm or hand should be extended along the stick towards the opposite side, and the stick should be bound around the helper, the arm, and the extremity of the hand.
And place the arm on a step of a ladder according to its latitude, and the hand should be extended towards the parts below it, and the other body part should be suspended from the other side, for the joint will soon enter into place.
And when the treatment of him is completed according to whichever way that is possible for you, and then it is necessary to place a strip of wool of equal thickness; and then apply a plaster prepared from ground alum with needles and egg white over all the muscle, so that it covers above, and then secure the strip with proper binding; and the bandage should be wrapped around the plaster, and his hand should be attached to his neck, and it should be left alone, and his hand should not be moved for seven days.
And it is necessary to reduce the food of the patient for a while, until the limb is strengthened, because it is easier for the recovery of him.
And then increase the food significantly after seven or five days and exercise some movement; and if it is stabilized and not softened, then he is healed.
But if the joint is dislocated multiple times due to humidity that affects him or for other reasons, then it is necessary to apply a cautery with three punctures, as was previously stated in the chapter on cauterization.
And if all this is done and after seven days the bandage is removed and the joint is not stabilized, and the plaster and the binding are reapplied several times but it does not stabilize and the arm cannot be raised above the parts below, then you know that the nerves of him, which are at the head of the muscle, have already been cut or stretched or weakened, and know that the joint will never return to its proper place.
Regarding the dislocation that occurs between the feet and the ankle or the parts behind it, the reduction is made with impulse and extension using the hands until it returns to its proper position.
And another binding should be applied there, and care for it until it is healed.
And if during the healing process you notice heaviness in the limb and slowness in its movement, then the patient should use baths several times until that heaviness is alleviated and it returns to its original natural state.
Chapter XXVII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the knee.
Know that the joint of the knee is dislocated with difficulty and similarly returns with difficulty; and it is dislocated in all directions, more so towards the front than behind. The dislocation is not hidden from you when you place your gaze or touch upon it according to its displaced shape. And when you adjust the dislocated knee with your hand, this becomes clearly evident to you because the joint is concaved and cannot bend the leg nor touch its muscle with that part.
And it is necessary to treat and reduce the dislocation as soon as possible before an inflammatory swelling occurs, because if an inflammatory swelling does occur, reducing it becomes difficult, and even after treatment, it may not be fully healed; especially when it is behind, for it is worse than all other types of dislocations, causing more pain, and often leading to death with that.
And the restoration of it, when it is one that can be reduced, is to extend the limb with two hands, and expand the arm, placing the doctor's hands on the knee and below it, and push the joint with the heels of their hands together, or with the edge of their palm until it returns to its place.
And if the dislocation is in the anterior parts, then return it by bending the hand with his hand, so that he strikes the knee with the edge of his palm.
And if the dislocation does not obey to the reduction, then administer strong extension and forceful movement.
And it is that two ministers should stretch the arm, and those two ministers should hold it firmly so that the extension is not hindered.
Then the arm should be rotated in all directions, since it is wrapped with a long folded cloth over his hand or joint.
And when the doctor touches the joint with his hand, anoint it with some oil so that those causes which help in the lubrication of the joint are facilitated; then forcefully push the joint until it returns to its place.
And after the reduction of the dislocation, it should be placed on a bandage that has astringency and exsiccation with egg white, and it should be tightened with a downward pull, and the arm should be suspended from the neck, and left like this for several days.
Then it should be loosened; and if the joint is returned to its proper place, then you should loosen the binding from it and leave it that way.
And if you see the joint not well joined, then repeat the plaster and binding, and leave that for several days until it is properly healed; then remove the binding.
Here is the translation of the given sentence: And then remove that [object], and place this one in the bath; when it is hot, now you should rub the joint with a mild friction, and then continue to alternate on that side, which is motion of rubbing, once, and the second time, and the third time, Here is the translation of the provided line:
And if you wish, place over that moist and scraped wound some ointment and press on it; and do this several times, for it is moist and return it to its proper condition.
Capitol .xxviii.
For the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder, which is the joint between the arm and the hand.
When the hand or sometimes another joint is dislocated, and the reduction of its dislocation is easy, whereas the opposite is true for other joints; however, it must be done quickly in reducing it at the moment when it becomes dislocated, before the area becomes inflamed or an abscess forms there.
And the reduction of its dislocation is that you place the joint of the patient's hand on a table and the assistant stretches the hand, while the doctor places their hand or palm on the prominence of the joint and pushes until it returns to its proper place.
However, it must be considered that if the palm is already dislocated towards the front of the hand, then the patient should place the back of their hand on a table for extension and reduction; and if the dislocation occurs on the back side of the hand, then the position of the hand should be naturally on the table so that the doctor's hand can press on the prominence of the joint.
And if it returns immediately, that is good; and if not, then strengthen that area with a soft bandage to prevent inflammation and leave it alone; do not repeat this, because if you do, it will not tolerate or allow the pus to be reduced over the coming days.
But however the joint remains according to its tortuousness; and you do not notice in the patient any cause, except that the hand is softened and cannot grasp anything; therefore know that the nerves are broken or crushed, and now there is no remedy for it except that it be strengthened with a cautery near the injury, and thus confer some improvement.
When the dislocation has been returned, then place on it the bandage we have recommended, and let it be left and strengthened for five days; then untie it and leave it, and exercise the hand of the patient.
But if the movement of it is restricted and you notice some severity in it, then relieve it with warm water and friction several times until it is alleviated.
Chapter XXIX.
On the treatment of dislocation of the fingers.
Sometimes the fingers are dislocated completely out of place.
And when any of those fingers is dislocated on the back or palm side, then hold the finger and push the dislocation with your thumbs until it returns.
And then support the head of the finger, and suspend that part which is dislocated, and leave it like this for two days.
And then suspend it and extend it until it is straightened out on that same day.
And when it is raised, bandage it according to that method, and do not stop unbinding it during the day and exercising with movement, and bind it at night; do this for several days until it is straight.
And do the same if it is dislocated at the wrist, and bind it in that area; perform this as your first procedure until it heals.
And similarly do the same when it is dislocated in other parts.
Chapter XXX.
On the treatment of dislocation of the vertebrae of the back.
When a complete dislocation occurs in any of the vertebrae of the back or neck, and multiple vertebrae are displaced from their positions, there is no treatment in such a case, for death is expected in the patient.
And the sign of this is that the excretion of the patient is expelled without their will, and they cannot retain it; and often some parts of their body are softened or both sides of their chest or both arms, or one of them; or a vertebra is dislocated from its place, for often it is dislocated or often the displacement occurs in four directions.
Therefore, that area is already treated behind and is called yellowing.
And here is the translation of the given sentence:
And in those cases where it comes from injury or by impact or similar to those, the Ancients have spoken at length about the methods of cure with long discourse, most of which returns with benefit; but I have already summarized that from which a little excuse for too much is needed due to my proximity to my own understanding exposition, with which I have explained and formed this from different instruments than those with which they would show and explain it.
And of those, it is only cured when it descends properly on the back with what I recommend.
And it is that the patient should be laid face down on a smooth surface near the wall, and a moist poultice should be placed under them so that their feet are not harmed.
Then a straight pole should be placed, fixed in the ground at one end of the bed near their head, and another pole on the opposite side near their feet at the other end of the bed.
And the minister should hold one pole, and it should not be fixed in a hole; another minister should hold the other pole in the same manner.
Then wrap around the head of the patient and place a thin cloth loosely over it; extend one end of the cloth to the pole that is opposite their head, and secure it there; then tighten another cloth over their hips, below their thighs, towards their chest; finally adjust all the bindings and secure them to the other pole which is opposite their feet.
And then the minister extends the ligament to the part of the bone, and let not both bones and the ligaments be removed from their places where they are fixed, but rather not be fastened as we have said.
And the doctor places his palms on the spine with strength until it returns, or he places them on a table, and then positions his feet on the table until it returns.
But if it does not return by this method, then take a table whose width or length is about three cubits, and carve into the wall next to the patient a place in which the end of the table can fit. And then place the middle of the table on the spine, and the doctor places his feet on the other end, and presses well so that the spine is straightened and returns to its proper position.
And if you wish, use a wrench that is turned with the hand; and it should be such that you place on the ground, putting the patient's head at the rear end of two beams, the length of which should be one arm's length, and place the patient’s head at the rear end again using two beams; and the distance between each beam should be a palm’s width, and already there should be a hole drilled in each beam through which the wrench turns, and each end should be firmly fixed to the ground so that it does not move.
And let there be a round beam in which the wrench is placed, and let it rotate in the two holes of the two beams.
And at the end of it there is a hole in which the beam is inserted, the length of which is one palm including what rotates; and in the other two beams, it is similar to that.
And then tighten the bindings that you have placed on the patient’s feet in the hole where the patient's head is positioned, and the bindings that you have placed on the patient’s thighs in the wrench where the patient's feet are positioned.
And then each turn should be held by a minister who turns the handle with their hand, and the doctor applies the splint as we have said.
And then when the vertebra has been returned to its place and the area is levelled, it is necessary to apply a drying poultice with egg white, and also use tow; then place on top of the poultice a strip of wood whose width is about three fingers or so, and the length of which should be enough to cover the area of the dislocation, and over the part of the vertebra.
And then bind it with the bandage we have mentioned, and give the patient subtle nutrients until they are healed.
And if any prominence remains in the area at the end of the healing process, then it is necessary to administer medicines that soften and dissolve, using the application of the board for a long time, which we have recommended; and a plate of lead is already applied to that area.
And sometimes prominence occurs at the back of the spinal vertebrae, and it is painful due to that dislocation; and that bone protrudes so much that one should not apply compression with this medicine, for it could cause you serious harm or even death.
Capitol .xxxi.
For the translation of the given line from this medieval medical treatise:
Know that the joint of the bone and the joint of the muscle can only suffer dislocation and nothing else, and do not apply to those what you apply to other joints with slight movement and concavity.
And the joint of the ankle is dislocated in four ways, for it is dislocated towards the inside, or towards the outside, or towards the front, or towards the back.
And it is most often dislocated towards the inside, and rarely towards the front or towards the back.
And the sign of its dislocation towards the inside is that when you align the healthy leg with the affected one, the affected leg appears longer and the heel more prominent compared to the healthy one, and the patient cannot bend their foot towards the little toe, and it is at this location that a hot swelling might form under the little toe, so that the head of the thigh bone has already reached here.
And the sign of dislocation towards the outside is that the symptoms are contrary to those described for the previous condition.
And the sign of dislocation towards the front is that the leg extends fully, but it cannot bend at the painful area in the heel; and if one attempts to walk, they cannot do so forwards; and the urine of the patient is retained, and there is swelling around it, making movement over the ankle difficult.
And the sign of one to whom a dislocation occurs in the posterior parts is that they cannot extend their leg, nor can they bend the front part before bending the knee, and the thigh on that side appears shorter than the other, and the knee is softened, and the head of the femur is displaced from its normal position.
And the reduction of this type of dislocation is what you consider: at that time, if the dislocation is old and ancient, which has already become established, bring it close to you as you administer the reduction and leave it according to its condition; however, this is not a complete cure; therefore, no expectation should be placed on it.
And for the one in whom the dislocation is recent and is one of the four species of dislocation, then you must pay attention to this: return the joint and extend it towards the inner parts and the outer parts, and move it to the right and left, because strong movement returns it and no other cure is needed.
However, if it does not return in this manner, then you must prepare a strong assistant and extend the arm of the patient from the part below, or by his hands, or by binding which is laid over the arm above the elbow; and another assistant extends the hand of the patient upwards so that he places his hands under the armpits; and then bind tightly with a bandage around the thigh, and have another assistant hold the end of the bandage.
And the extension of it or of the inner part to the angle of the shoulder blade, or of the part behind to the back part.
And place all of these together at once so that the patient is lifted with their body off the ground and remains suspended.
And this kind of extension is common to all four.
And so if the dislocation returns with what we have said, it will be good; and if not, then in every special case, it is necessary to speak of the proper treatment.
In the reduction of a dislocation, when it is displaced inwardly, the patient should be laid on their side; then place the ligaments over the ridge of the thigh at that spot between the head of the thigh and where the kneecap is situated; then extend the ligament upward from the knee area to the higher part of the fork (the upper part of the leg near the hip).
And then another minister should take the arms of the patient, grasp the thick part of the diseased thigh firmly, and extend outward with strong force, for this will return it to its proper place.
And this method is a lighter cure compared to the others in which this member is reduced.
But if it is necessary for you and you do not obey the treatment with this type of cure entirely, then it is required to bind both feet of the patient together with a strong, light ligature, over both ankles and both toes.
And the length of each side should be the quantity of four fingers, and the diseased leg should be extended two fingers more than the other.
And then the patient should be suspended over the head of the post, and it should be in the house; and the length from the ground should be two arms' lengths.
And then command a strong young man to grasp the thigh of the patient, and let another young man suspend the patient, while the other young man forcefully pushes the thigh, for the joint returns to its place quickly.
And in the proper reduction, when there is a dislocation outside the part, the patient must lie on a bed according to what we have recommended in having coldness; and the limb of the sick person should be strongly placed over their chest properly and over their feet.
And then two sticks should be placed, one under the feet of the patient and the other under the head; and then sticks should be adjusted in the middle of the thigh with damp cloths wrapped around them so that the patient is not harmed by the stick being between their thighs, because you must ensure that the extension to the parts below is not pulled.
And then each minister extends to their part, and the doctor with his hand equalizes the reduction according to the art.
And when the dislocation is in the anterior parts, then it is necessary that the chest be extended slightly, and it is according to this same method described for thighs; and the doctor places the palm of his right hand on the dislocated area, and then compresses that area with the other hand, and with that compression extends the part below towards the knee.
And if the dislocation is at the parts behind, then it is not necessary for the patient to be stretched out on those parts, and they are raised above the ground; rather, they must lie on a hard surface, just as it is necessary when treating them if their shoulder is dislocated outwardly, according to what we have said about placing them between two planks; and [they] are face down with the ligaments stretched out, as we have said, there is no delay.
And it must be that compression with a board is administered to the place where you have the joint.
Thus, when the reduction is completed as it should be — and the sign of the reduction is not hidden from you, which is that you stretch out both arms of the patient, and when you see those equal and the patient extends their arm and you expand that with its extension, then you know that the limb has returned as it should — and now you align both sides and place a splint and extend with a bandage so that the joint is not moved in any part; and keep the patient at rest for three days or four.
And then loosen the bandage and the dressing, and compare one leg with the other.
When you see those signs on the patient, then know that the dislocation has been properly set, and then allow the patient to go.
And if you see any cause for softening, then return and plaster that area, and extend it according to your initial structure, and leave it for three days.
Then loosen that area, and have the patient walk around for several days until it is strengthened and healed.
Chapter XXXII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the shoulder.
The shoulder can be dislocated in three ways: it can be dislocated outward, inward, and more to the back; it is not dislocated toward the front.
And the sign of its dislocation is that you ask the patient to place their leg against their armpit; then you will know that the shoulder is dislocated.
And the restoration of all positions of him is that you make the patient sit upright, so that he stretches his back, if possible; place your chest to his face, and hold his foot between your feet; then press his chin with your palms, and keep those between your fingers on his chin with strength, and another minister extends his leg while the chin returns to its place.
And a sign of recovery is that the patient's chest adheres to the thigh without effort.
Then apply a plaster to that and make the chest adhere to the thigh, then bind those areas with a bandage for three or four days, and then unbind them.
And do not let the patient walk for several days until they are healed and strengthened.
But if the reduction for you is necessary, then administer strong extension with the ligaments, as previously described in the treatment of the hip.
Chapter XXXIII.
On the treatment of dislocation of the talus.
The talus is sometimes injured by slight movement and sometimes dislocated completely. The dislocation occurs either inward or outward.
And the sign of its dislocation is that sometimes the talus swells at the side to which it is dislocated.
And the treatment for moving it is generally easy, and that it should be extended with ease using the hands and smoothed out before returning.
And in the treatment when it is dislocated according to circumstances, you must make the patient stand straight, and have a strong and brave assistant from behind the back of that person in the middle part of them.
And then you hold the foot with your right hand on the higher side of it, and with your left hand on the lower side of the foot near the ankle.
And then pull the foot towards you with your right hand, and then with your left hand for two times, and then extend with your left hand; and push the toes of the foot with your right hand away from the chest.
And do this two times as we have counted.
And then push the toes of the foot towards the chest for the third time, and you should be at the ankle.
Thus, return it in one or two attempts following this method, and if you can bend the foot, it is good; and if not, then repeat the operation on it, for it will eventually return to its place.
But if it is forbidden for you to reduce it by the method we have recommended, then make the patient lie face down on the ground, and place a small pillow or something firm under them, so that it fits between their thighs, and you should cover them with a cloth so that the patient does not feel cold.
And then the minister holds their thighs, and another minister extends the foot with his hands or with a band that lies over the ankle; and then each minister extends against the extension of their partner, and the penis is extended between the patient's thighs retaining it so that the body of the patient does not pull back from its extension.
And then the doctor aligns the dislocation with his hands, and another minister holds the healthy thigh on that side, because the dislocation returns easily.
And thus when the dislocation returns and the health of the reduction is clear to you, then apply a plaster and tightly bandage it with strong bands, and bind the foot with a band to the chest.
And you must be careful of the nerves that are behind the ankle, so that the bandage over it is not too tight and does not compress them strongly.
And then leave it for two days or three; and if the bandage is loosened, tighten it again.
And then remove the bandage on the third or fourth day, and prohibit the patient from walking for forty days. Here is the translation of the given sentence:
And if you happen to cauterize the abscess, then you must administer during its drainage what was previously mentioned in our narrative, at another site for treatment and application, until it is healed.
Capitol .xxxiiii.
For the translation of the given sentence:
Cover that which is dislocated with slight extension of its joint; and this is not difficult, first it should be gentle.
But if the dislocation is in any of the toes of the foot, then it is necessary to make the patient put his foot on the ground or on a table, and have him standing as if he were walking.
Then you stand with weight, and place your foot on the area near the joints that need attention, and then press it firmly with your foot until it returns to its proper position, ensuring that it is flattened and no swelling appears in that spot.
Then place his foot on a board that covers the entire foot, which has two ends, and then tighten it firmly with a suitable binding for three days; then loosen it and let him rest by walking for several days, until it is strengthened and recovery is ensured.
Chapter XXXV.
On the types of dislocations caused by blows or fractures or any combination thereof.
When any of those causes occur, and you proceed with the treatment and restoration, death may often result.
And by this it is not necessary that anyone presumes over the cure of him, but only he who is wise in the art, experienced for a long time, merciful and pious; one who begins treatment with medicines that reduce inflammations without merely cauterizing them, and leaves the patient to divine judgment, unless it is someone from whom you hope for salvation from destruction, relief from illness, and in whom there appears some hope. And then strive to promptly reduce the cause in him at the beginning, before it becomes a cauterized inflammation.
And then if the limb returns as we want, administer treatment that reduces inflammation without merely cauterizing it and cure the wound with one of the drier ointments suitable for it.
And if the dislocation is accompanied by a fracture and occurs in separated bones, then you should pierce their joint, and do as we have said in the simple ailments concerning what precedes in the areas of those [bones].
And guard and avoid, according to your ability, those in the realm of fear's paths, as my teaching precedes you; for this is better for you to serve your Creator, more lasting for your glory, and you will find greater health for your body in doing so during your time. Ayssi fineysso las paraulas de Albucasim perfieytament de las quals Dieus ne sia benezeyt. Amen.
